Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of opthalmology at Stamford School of opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is James Ston. Medicine. My guest today is James Ston. Medicine. My guest today is James Ston. James Ston is a renowned attorney with James Ston is a renowned attorney with James Ston is a renowned attorney with over 25 years of experience in family over 25 years of experience in family over 25 years of experience in family law, specializing in prenuptual law, specializing in prenuptual law, specializing in prenuptual agreements and divorces. He is known as agreements and divorces. He is known as agreements and divorces. He is known as what many call the voice of reason what many call the voice of reason what many call the voice of reason between love and legal. Today we discuss between love and legal. Today we discuss between love and legal. Today we discuss something that might seem something that might seem something that might seem counterintuitive, which is how the legal counterintuitive, which is how the legal counterintuitive, which is how the legal frameworks and contracts surrounding frameworks and contracts surrounding frameworks and contracts surrounding relationships, particularly prenuptual relationships, particularly prenuptual relationships, particularly prenuptual agreements, can actually deepen agreements, can actually deepen agreements, can actually deepen emotional connection and build trust emotional connection and build trust emotional connection and build trust between partners. As James points out, between partners. As James points out, between partners. As James points out, intimacy and trust are fundamentally intimacy and trust are fundamentally intimacy and trust are fundamentally about the ability to be your true self about the ability to be your true self about the ability to be your true self with your partner and them with you. with your partner and them with you. with your partner and them with you. It's about allowing ourselves to be It's about allowing ourselves to be It's about allowing ourselves to be vulnerable. It's also about having a vulnerable. It's also about having a vulnerable. It's also about having a same team spirit, of course, respect for same team spirit, of course, respect for same team spirit, of course, respect for one another, and admiration for each one another, and admiration for each one another, and admiration for each other's unique qualities. Today we other's unique qualities. Today we other's unique qualities. Today we explore how prenuptual agreements, which explore how prenuptual agreements, which explore how prenuptual agreements, which most often are viewed as being most often are viewed as being most often are viewed as being unromantic or pessimistic, can actually unromantic or pessimistic, can actually unromantic or pessimistic, can actually serve as ways to establish a sense of serve as ways to establish a sense of serve as ways to establish a sense of safety for both people and prevent many safety for both people and prevent many safety for both people and prevent many common conflicts and misunderstandings. common conflicts and misunderstandings. common conflicts and misunderstandings. As James puts it, everyone has a prenup. As James puts it, everyone has a prenup. As James puts it, everyone has a prenup. You either have one that was created by You either have one that was created by You either have one that was created by the state legislature or you can tailor the state legislature or you can tailor the state legislature or you can tailor one to you and your partner's unique one to you and your partner's unique one to you and your partner's unique needs. He also points out something that needs. He also points out something that needs. He also points out something that many people will find surprising, which many people will find surprising, which many people will find surprising, which is that the vast majority of people who is that the vast majority of people who is that the vast majority of people who do prenups stay married. and yet most do prenups stay married. and yet most do prenups stay married. and yet most people opt not to do them. We also people opt not to do them. We also people opt not to do them. We also discuss love itself and the key discuss love itself and the key discuss love itself and the key questions that we all need to ask to questions that we all need to ask to questions that we all need to ask to find the right partner and if you have find the right partner and if you have find the right partner and if you have one to build the strongest possible one to build the strongest possible one to build the strongest possible bonds with them. The information in bonds with them. The information in bonds with them. The information in today's episode is going to be extremely today's episode is going to be extremely today's episode is going to be extremely important for anyone looking for or important for anyone looking for or important for anyone looking for or currently in a relationship. Whether currently in a relationship. Whether currently in a relationship. Whether you're single, dating, engaged, or you're single, dating, engaged, or you're single, dating, engaged, or married, understanding how the legal and married, understanding how the legal and married, understanding how the legal and emotional frameworks that support emotional frameworks that support emotional frameworks that support lasting relationships intersect can help lasting relationships intersect can help lasting relationships intersect can help you navigate one of life's most you navigate one of life's most you navigate one of life's most rewarding but challenging journeys with rewarding but challenging journeys with rewarding but challenging journeys with much greater awareness and intention and much greater awareness and intention and much greater awareness and intention and probability of success. Before we begin, probability of success. Before we begin, probability of success. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast I'd like to emphasize that this podcast I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and is separate from my teaching and is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools about science and science related tools about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include that theme, this episode does include that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with James Ston. Jim Ston, welcome. Thank James Ston. Jim Ston, welcome. Thank James Ston. Jim Ston, welcome. Thank you. It's good to be here. Been wanting you. It's good to be here. Been wanting you. It's good to be here. Been wanting to do this for a while. I know it's a to do this for a while. I know it's a to do this for a while. I know it's a long time in the making. Yeah. I think long time in the making. Yeah. I think long time in the making. Yeah. I think if two guys sit down, one of them a if two guys sit down, one of them a if two guys sit down, one of them a lawyer who's known as a divorce lawyer who's known as a divorce lawyer who's known as a divorce lawyer and they're talking about divorce and they're talking about divorce and they're talking about divorce and love and money and contracts and the love and money and contracts and the love and money and contracts and the ending of things. I think there's a ending of things. I think there's a ending of things. I think there's a understandable default mindset where the understandable default mindset where the understandable default mindset where the female half of our audience are probably female half of our audience are probably female half of our audience are probably gonna think like here a couple guys gonna think like here a couple guys gonna think like here a couple guys talking about relationships and divorce talking about relationships and divorce talking about relationships and divorce through the lens of their Y chromosomes through the lens of their Y chromosomes through the lens of their Y chromosomes which of course it's impossible to avoid which of course it's impossible to avoid which of course it's impossible to avoid completely because I haven't done the completely because I haven't done the completely because I haven't done the karaotyping but you have a Y chromosome karaotyping but you have a Y chromosome karaotyping but you have a Y chromosome and I do as well. and I do as well. and I do as well. I would like to know in your experience I would like to know in your experience I would like to know in your experience working with male clients and female working with male clients and female working with male clients and female clients, is there something unique to clients, is there something unique to clients, is there something unique to the female experience of the female experience of the female experience of divorce or the female experience of divorce or the female experience of divorce or the female experience of realizing, wow, this contract that I realizing, wow, this contract that I realizing, wow, this contract that I thought was for life may not or is it thought was for life may not or is it thought was for life may not or is it not for life that sort of drives a kind not for life that sort of drives a kind not for life that sort of drives a kind of uh female specific um set of uh of uh female specific um set of uh of uh female specific um set of uh psychological responses. Here I'm psychological responses. Here I'm psychological responses. Here I'm basically asking for a generalization. basically asking for a generalization. basically asking for a generalization. Yeah. And I want to be clear, I'm not Yeah. And I want to be clear, I'm not Yeah. And I want to be clear, I'm not asking this for politically correct asking this for politically correct asking this for politically correct reasons. I'm asking this because, like I reasons. I'm asking this because, like I reasons. I'm asking this because, like I said, two guys sitting down to talk said, two guys sitting down to talk said, two guys sitting down to talk about relationships, love, and divorce. about relationships, love, and divorce. about relationships, love, and divorce. It's kind of where the mind goes. Yeah. It's kind of where the mind goes. Yeah. It's kind of where the mind goes. Yeah. And and I mean before I would And and I mean before I would And and I mean before I would get, you know, before I would get get, you know, before I would get get, you know, before I would get cancelled in the comments for being cancelled in the comments for being cancelled in the comments for being misandressed or misogynist, I always misandressed or misogynist, I always misandressed or misogynist, I always try to say that, you know, the things try to say that, you know, the things try to say that, you know, the things I'm observing are a function of having observing are a function of having observing are a function of having divorced thousands of people, you know, divorced thousands of people, you know, divorced thousands of people, you know, men and women. Like for 25 years, I've men and women. Like for 25 years, I've men and women. Like for 25 years, I've done nothing but divorce law on a done nothing but divorce law on a done nothing but divorce law on a full-time basis. And I mean on a truly full-time basis. And I mean on a truly full-time basis. And I mean on a truly full-time basis. So I wake up in the full-time basis. So I wake up in the full-time basis. So I wake up in the morning thinking about this stuff. I go morning thinking about this stuff. I go morning thinking about this stuff. I go to bed thinking about this stuff. I work to bed thinking about this stuff. I work to bed thinking about this stuff. I work six, seven days a week. That's why I'm six, seven days a week. That's why I'm six, seven days a week. That's why I'm divorced. I really love the divorced. I really love the divorced. I really love the work. And so all the things I'm saying work. And so all the things I'm saying work. And so all the things I'm saying are really just my observation. So, are really just my observation. So, are really just my observation. So, you know, in response to that question, you know, in response to that question, you know, in response to that question, I think I think the world relates to I think I think the world relates to I think I think the world relates to divorced men and divorced women divorced men and divorced women divorced men and divorced women differently. And I think people's differently. And I think people's differently. And I think people's self-conception, right, is very self-conception, right, is very self-conception, right, is very different. So I often tell my male different. So I often tell my male different. So I often tell my male clients when we're dealing with, you clients when we're dealing with, you clients when we're dealing with, you know, a custody case, for example, which know, a custody case, for example, which know, a custody case, for example, which is, you know, arguments over when a is, you know, arguments over when a is, you know, arguments over when a child's going to live with whom and when child's going to live with whom and when child's going to live with whom and when they're going to spend time with whom. they're going to spend time with whom. they're going to spend time with whom. And there was this concept called the And there was this concept called the And there was this concept called the maternal presumption, which was around maternal presumption, which was around maternal presumption, which was around legally for years, or something called legally for years, or something called legally for years, or something called the tender years doctrine. It's called the tender years doctrine. It's called the tender years doctrine. It's called different things in different states, different things in different states, different things in different states, but it was around until probably the but it was around until probably the but it was around until probably the 1980s, and that was that a child was 1980s, and that was that a child was 1980s, and that was that a child was assumed to stay in the custody of the assumed to stay in the custody of the assumed to stay in the custody of the mother unless you could prove she was an mother unless you could prove she was an mother unless you could prove she was an unfit mother. So men were automatically unfit mother. So men were automatically unfit mother. So men were automatically secondass when it came to being a secondass when it came to being a secondass when it came to being a parent. So it was automatic. It was the parent. So it was automatic. It was the parent. So it was automatic. It was the default. Now of course in the 80s there default. Now of course in the 80s there default. Now of course in the 80s there was a different makeup of the workforce. was a different makeup of the workforce. was a different makeup of the workforce. There was a different in gender roles There was a different in gender roles There was a different in gender roles obviously in terms of assignment of obviously in terms of assignment of obviously in terms of assignment of child care responsibilities. It was a child care responsibilities. It was a child care responsibilities. It was a different world to some degree. But that different world to some degree. But that different world to some degree. But that was eradicated in the 1980s and the was eradicated in the 1980s and the was eradicated in the 1980s and the bench even the judges have changed bench even the judges have changed bench even the judges have changed dramatically. When I started practicing dramatically. When I started practicing dramatically. When I started practicing 25 years ago 90% of the judges I 25 years ago 90% of the judges I 25 years ago 90% of the judges I appeared in front of were old white men. appeared in front of were old white men. appeared in front of were old white men. Period. Like that was it was old white Period. Like that was it was old white Period. Like that was it was old white men. And so I got in the habit of like men. And so I got in the habit of like men. And so I got in the habit of like have a short haircut, hide the tattoos, have a short haircut, hide the tattoos, have a short haircut, hide the tattoos, like look like you're coming out of the like look like you're coming out of the like look like you're coming out of the set of Inherit the Wind, like look like set of Inherit the Wind, like look like set of Inherit the Wind, like look like you are what you because you got a you are what you because you got a you are what you because you got a conservative old man as your judge. That conservative old man as your judge. That conservative old man as your judge. That is not the makeup of the bench anymore. is not the makeup of the bench anymore. is not the makeup of the bench anymore. The bench now is as diverse as the The bench now is as diverse as the The bench now is as diverse as the people that it serves. So one of the people that it serves. So one of the people that it serves. So one of the things though that I tell my male things though that I tell my male things though that I tell my male clients is even though that maternal clients is even though that maternal clients is even though that maternal presumption is presumption is presumption is gone, women fight harder for custody gone, women fight harder for custody gone, women fight harder for custody than men do. Really, I'd love to say to than men do. Really, I'd love to say to than men do. Really, I'd love to say to you that it's because the maternal you that it's because the maternal you that it's because the maternal instinct and bond is so strong that instinct and bond is so strong that instinct and bond is so strong that women just care about their kids and women just care about their kids and women just care about their kids and they want custody. I don't really they want custody. I don't really they want custody. I don't really believe it's that. I think it's the believe it's that. I think it's the believe it's that. I think it's the following. If you and I just met in following. If you and I just met in following. If you and I just met in normal life, right? Like we're just out normal life, right? Like we're just out normal life, right? Like we're just out at a bar and I sit up night and you say, at a bar and I sit up night and you say, at a bar and I sit up night and you say, "So, so said so Jim, tell me about "So, so said so Jim, tell me about "So, so said so Jim, tell me about yourself." And I say, "Well, I'm yourself." And I say, "Well, I'm yourself." And I say, "Well, I'm divorced. Uh my kids live with their divorced. Uh my kids live with their divorced. Uh my kids live with their mom. I see them every other weekend and mom. I see them every other weekend and mom. I see them every other weekend and once a week for dinner." He would go, once a week for dinner." He would go, once a week for dinner." He would go, "Okay, cool. Jim's divorced guy, you "Okay, cool. Jim's divorced guy, you "Okay, cool. Jim's divorced guy, you know, he's working. He's does his thing. know, he's working. He's does his thing. know, he's working. He's does his thing. I'm a woman and I say, "I have two kids. I'm a woman and I say, "I have two kids. I'm a woman and I say, "I have two kids. They live with their father. I see them They live with their father. I see them They live with their father. I see them every other weekend." You go, "What is every other weekend." You go, "What is every other weekend." You go, "What is wrong with this woman? Is she on wrong with this woman? Is she on wrong with this woman? Is she on substance use issues, mental health substance use issues, mental health substance use issues, mental health issues? Like, why does he have custody issues? Like, why does he have custody issues? Like, why does he have custody of the kids? Why doesn't she have of the kids? Why doesn't she have of the kids? Why doesn't she have custody of her kids?" So there is a custody of her kids?" So there is a custody of her kids?" So there is a there is an there is an there is an element of element of element of how motherhood is perceived as an how motherhood is perceived as an how motherhood is perceived as an identity even for a working woman that identity even for a working woman that identity even for a working woman that it's like if you don't have your kids on it's like if you don't have your kids on it's like if you don't have your kids on a full-time or close to full-time basis a full-time or close to full-time basis a full-time or close to full-time basis there's this percept so that infuses there's this percept so that infuses there's this percept so that infuses that changes the way that women are in that changes the way that women are in that changes the way that women are in custody litigation. That's a huge piece custody litigation. That's a huge piece custody litigation. That's a huge piece of it. On the other side of it. On the other side of it. On the other side of things, you know, the gender stuff things, you know, the gender stuff things, you know, the gender stuff in divorce and in breakups is really in divorce and in breakups is really in divorce and in breakups is really interesting and complicated in this interesting and complicated in this interesting and complicated in this sense that, for example, if a man cheats sense that, for example, if a man cheats sense that, for example, if a man cheats on his wife, he's a piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] can't on his wife, he's a piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] can't on his wife, he's a piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] can't keep it in his pants, he's a child. Why keep it in his pants, he's a child. Why keep it in his pants, he's a child. Why couldn't he be honest? A woman cheats on couldn't he be honest? A woman cheats on couldn't he be honest? A woman cheats on her husband, she was driven into the her husband, she was driven into the her husband, she was driven into the arms of another man. She couldn't get, arms of another man. She couldn't get, arms of another man. She couldn't get, he wasn't meeting her needs. This was he wasn't meeting her needs. This was he wasn't meeting her needs. This was her journey of self-discovery. Like you her journey of self-discovery. Like you her journey of self-discovery. Like you see in popular media like watch any film see in popular media like watch any film see in popular media like watch any film any TV show when the man cheats it's any TV show when the man cheats it's any TV show when the man cheats it's like he's a leerous guy you just get the like he's a leerous guy you just get the like he's a leerous guy you just get the woman cheats it's like oh this poor woman cheats it's like oh this poor woman cheats it's like oh this poor woman like she needed to find woman like she needed to find woman like she needed to find herself she needed like her eat prey herself she needed like her eat prey herself she needed like her eat prey love moment and so that's again like the love moment and so that's again like the love moment and so that's again like the way the world interacts with people the way the world interacts with people the way the world interacts with people in breakups and in the clay that builds in breakups and in the clay that builds in breakups and in the clay that builds to the breakup is very different. So how to the breakup is very different. So how to the breakup is very different. So how people react to it is very different. people react to it is very different. people react to it is very different. men in my experience as men in my experience as men in my experience as clients there's a lot of anger that clients there's a lot of anger that clients there's a lot of anger that you know manifests in very honest ways you know manifests in very honest ways you know manifests in very honest ways like very blunt ways like very kind you like very blunt ways like very kind you like very blunt ways like very kind you know because men are you know men are know because men are you know men are know because men are you know men are Bill Burr recently in one of his recent Bill Burr recently in one of his recent Bill Burr recently in one of his recent special has this thing about men are special has this thing about men are special has this thing about men are allowed to be two things angry or fine allowed to be two things angry or fine allowed to be two things angry or fine that's it like angry or fine and that's it like angry or fine and that's it like angry or fine and that's and I used to always say that growing up and I used to always say that growing up and I used to always say that growing up you know I'm 52 like growing up I had you know I'm 52 like growing up I had you know I'm 52 like growing up I had two choices you're either Clint Eastwood two choices you're either Clint Eastwood two choices you're either Clint Eastwood or Richard Simmons. Those were your two or Richard Simmons. Those were your two or Richard Simmons. Those were your two choices as a man. You were either like choices as a man. You were either like choices as a man. You were either like stoic, you know, stony, no emotion or stoic, you know, stony, no emotion or stoic, you know, stony, no emotion or gay. That was it. Those were like your gay. That was it. Those were like your gay. That was it. Those were like your two choices. And of course, it's totally two choices. And of course, it's totally two choices. And of course, it's totally dishonest. Of course, the reality is dishonest. Of course, the reality is dishonest. Of course, the reality is men have a different, you know, we have men have a different, you know, we have men have a different, you know, we have an emotional vocabulary. It just an emotional vocabulary. It just an emotional vocabulary. It just expresses in different ways. But anger expresses in different ways. But anger expresses in different ways. But anger is something men are allowed to have. So is something men are allowed to have. So is something men are allowed to have. So when men are sad, they seem angry. When when men are sad, they seem angry. When when men are sad, they seem angry. When men are angry, they seem angry. men are angry, they seem angry. men are angry, they seem angry. women. My experience of women in divorce women. My experience of women in divorce women. My experience of women in divorce is they're much more is they're much more is they're much more forgiving in unhappy marriages. They're forgiving in unhappy marriages. They're forgiving in unhappy marriages. They're much more willing to stay in relatively much more willing to stay in relatively much more willing to stay in relatively unhappy marriages and sort of unhappy marriages and sort of unhappy marriages and sort of torture their partner. And then when torture their partner. And then when torture their partner. And then when they've decided, okay, I'm out, there is they've decided, okay, I'm out, there is they've decided, okay, I'm out, there is a level of like, yeah, whatever we got a level of like, yeah, whatever we got a level of like, yeah, whatever we got to do, we got to do. Like that sometimes to do, we got to do. Like that sometimes to do, we got to do. Like that sometimes to me as someone who does this for a to me as someone who does this for a to me as someone who does this for a living is like, oh, okay. like living is like, oh, okay. like living is like, oh, okay. like you're just willing to you're just willing to you're just willing to you're just willing to go there, you know, like just willing to go there, you know, like just willing to go there, you know, like mercenary. Yeah. Just there's, you know, mercenary. Yeah. Just there's, you know, mercenary. Yeah. Just there's, you know, like when and you look at the history of like when and you look at the history of like when and you look at the history of the marriage and you go, "Wow, when they the marriage and you go, "Wow, when they the marriage and you go, "Wow, when they were together, like there's nothing she were together, like there's nothing she were together, like there's nothing she wouldn't do for him." And now it's wouldn't do for him." And now it's wouldn't do for him." And now it's ending and man, there's nothing she ending and man, there's nothing she ending and man, there's nothing she won't do to him. Like she is just won't do to him. Like she is just won't do to him. Like she is just weaponized on him. And it's um it's weaponized on him. And it's um it's weaponized on him. And it's um it's kind of it used to be surprising to me. kind of it used to be surprising to me. kind of it used to be surprising to me. It's not really surprising to me It's not really surprising to me It's not really surprising to me anymore. I think I have a friend who anymore. I think I have a friend who anymore. I think I have a friend who was a criminal lawyer for many years, was a criminal lawyer for many years, was a criminal lawyer for many years, criminal defense attorney, really good criminal defense attorney, really good criminal defense attorney, really good one in the city. And we used to laugh one in the city. And we used to laugh one in the city. And we used to laugh because he used to say, "As a criminal because he used to say, "As a criminal because he used to say, "As a criminal lawyer, he sees bad people at their lawyer, he sees bad people at their lawyer, he sees bad people at their best. And as a divorce lawyer, I see best. And as a divorce lawyer, I see best. And as a divorce lawyer, I see good people at their worst." And I it's good people at their worst." And I it's good people at their worst." And I it's always astounding to me because I've always astounding to me because I've always astounding to me because I've reached a level in my career, reached a level in my career, reached a level in my career, thankfully, where I represent elite thankfully, where I represent elite thankfully, where I represent elite athletes. I represent, you know, people athletes. I represent, you know, people athletes. I represent, you know, people in the financial markets who in the financial markets who in the financial markets who literally move markets with their literally move markets with their literally move markets with their trades, people in entertainment trades, people in entertainment trades, people in entertainment industry, and they are as bad at this as industry, and they are as bad at this as industry, and they are as bad at this as any of us. Like they're as bad at any of us. Like they're as bad at any of us. Like they're as bad at relationships, they're as bad at relationships, they're as bad at relationships, they're as bad at heartbreak as anybody. So, you know, heartbreak as anybody. So, you know, heartbreak as anybody. So, you know, there were differences in the gender there were differences in the gender there were differences in the gender piece. There are differences in the piece. There are differences in the piece. There are differences in the socioeconomic piece, but at the end of socioeconomic piece, but at the end of socioeconomic piece, but at the end of the day, it's like it's hurt people the day, it's like it's hurt people the day, it's like it's hurt people hurting people, and it kind of looks hurting people, and it kind of looks hurting people, and it kind of looks roughly the same. It's very interesting, roughly the same. It's very interesting, roughly the same. It's very interesting, and there's a lot in there. I want to and there's a lot in there. I want to and there's a lot in there. I want to return to this um sort of divergent return to this um sort of divergent return to this um sort of divergent response to men cheating versus women response to men cheating versus women response to men cheating versus women cheating a little bit later. Super cheating a little bit later. Super cheating a little bit later. Super interesting area for exploration. Well, interesting area for exploration. Well, interesting area for exploration. Well, I feel like I have a PhD in infidelity I feel like I have a PhD in infidelity I feel like I have a PhD in infidelity because it's just it's part of like 90 because it's just it's part of like 90 because it's just it's part of like 90 plus% of divorces in some form. Yeah. plus% of divorces in some form. Yeah. plus% of divorces in some form. Yeah. Really? Well, it's why people, I Really? Well, it's why people, I Really? Well, it's why people, I think, you know, mistake correlation for think, you know, mistake correlation for think, you know, mistake correlation for causation. I mean, people all the time causation. I mean, people all the time causation. I mean, people all the time are like, you know, why are you getting are like, you know, why are you getting are like, you know, why are you getting divorced? Because he's sleeping with his divorced? Because he's sleeping with his divorced? Because he's sleeping with his secretary. And it's like, oh, that's a secretary. And it's like, oh, that's a secretary. And it's like, oh, that's a pretty good reason to get divorced. But, pretty good reason to get divorced. But, pretty good reason to get divorced. But, you know, then when you scratch the you know, then when you scratch the you know, then when you scratch the surface, you're like, okay, but why is surface, you're like, okay, but why is surface, you're like, okay, but why is he sleeping with his secretary? And he sleeping with his secretary? And he sleeping with his secretary? And there's almost always this very deep there's almost always this very deep there's almost always this very deep backstory of like, well, we stopped backstory of like, well, we stopped backstory of like, well, we stopped sleeping together. Why do we stop? Well, sleeping together. Why do we stop? Well, sleeping together. Why do we stop? Well, because he's unkind to me. Well, why is because he's unkind to me. Well, why is because he's unkind to me. Well, why is he unkind to you? Well, because you're he unkind to you? Well, because you're he unkind to you? Well, because you're totally indifferent to me. And and you totally indifferent to me. And and you totally indifferent to me. And and you start to go, okay, the truth's at the start to go, okay, the truth's at the start to go, okay, the truth's at the bottom of a bottomless pit, and we're bottom of a bottomless pit, and we're bottom of a bottomless pit, and we're never going to get there. Like, and all never going to get there. Like, and all never going to get there. Like, and all of those facts come with a point of those facts come with a point of those facts come with a point of view. So when you do what I do for a view. So when you do what I do for a view. So when you do what I do for a living, which is, you know, full contact living, which is, you know, full contact living, which is, you know, full contact storytelling basically in a in a storytelling basically in a in a storytelling basically in a in a courtroom against someone who's trying courtroom against someone who's trying courtroom against someone who's trying to tell the opposite story, you find to tell the opposite story, you find to tell the opposite story, you find a lot of what you're doing is just a lot of what you're doing is just a lot of what you're doing is just figuring out how to present the most figuring out how to present the most figuring out how to present the most persuasive version of this person's persuasive version of this person's persuasive version of this person's subjective experience of their own subjective experience of their own subjective experience of their own life. I would like to take a quick break life. I would like to take a quick break life. I would like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, and acknowledge one of our sponsors, and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront for my savings and for my investing for my savings and for my investing for my savings and for my investing for nearly a decade, and I absolutely love nearly a decade, and I absolutely love nearly a decade, and I absolutely love it. At the start of every year, I set it. At the start of every year, I set it. At the start of every year, I set new goals. And one of my goals for 2025 new goals. And one of my goals for 2025 new goals. And one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on saving money. Since I is to focus on saving money. Since I is to focus on saving money. Since I have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings in my Wealthfront cash account, where in my Wealthfront cash account, where in my Wealthfront cash account, where I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage yield on my deposits, and you can as yield on my deposits, and you can as yield on my deposits, and you can as well. With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% well. With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% well. With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on your cash from partner banks APY on your cash from partner banks APY on your cash from partner banks until you're ready to either spend that until you're ready to either spend that until you're ready to either spend that money or invest it. With Wealthfront, money or invest it. With Wealthfront, money or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also get free instant withdrawals to you also get free instant withdrawals to you also get free instant withdrawals to eligible accounts every day, even on eligible accounts every day, even on eligible accounts every day, even on weekends and holidays. The 4% APY is not weekends and holidays. The 4% APY is not weekends and holidays. The 4% APY is not a promotional rate, and there's no limit a promotional rate, and there's no limit a promotional rate, and there's no limit to what you can deposit and earn. And to what you can deposit and earn. And to what you can deposit and earn. And you can even get protection for up to $8 you can even get protection for up to $8 you can even get protection for up to $8 million through FDIC insurance provided million through FDIC insurance provided million through FDIC insurance provided through Wealthfront's partner banks. through Wealthfront's partner banks. through Wealthfront's partner banks. Wealthfront gives you free instant Wealthfront gives you free instant Wealthfront gives you free instant withdrawals where it takes just minutes withdrawals where it takes just minutes withdrawals where it takes just minutes to transfer your money to eligible to transfer your money to eligible to transfer your money to eligible external accounts. It also takes just external accounts. It also takes just external accounts. It also takes just minutes to transfer your cash from the minutes to transfer your cash from the minutes to transfer your cash from the cash account to any of Wealthfront's cash account to any of Wealthfront's cash account to any of Wealthfront's automated investment accounts. When automated investment accounts. When automated investment accounts. When you're ready to invest, there are you're ready to invest, there are you're ready to invest, there are already a million people using already a million people using already a million people using Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on your cash today. If you'd like to try your cash today. If you'd like to try your cash today. If you'd like to try Wealthfront, go to Wealthfront, go to Wealthfront, go to wealthfront.com/huberman to receive a wealthfront.com/huberman to receive a wealthfront.com/huberman to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into your first cash account. That's your first cash account. That's your first cash account. That's wealthfront.com/huberman to get started wealthfront.com/huberman to get started wealthfront.com/huberman to get started now. This has been a paid testimonial of now. This has been a paid testimonial of now. This has been a paid testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront brokerage isn't Wealthfront. Wealthfront brokerage isn't Wealthfront. Wealthfront brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is subject to change. a bank. The APY is subject to change. a bank. The APY is subject to change. For more information, see the episode For more information, see the episode For more information, see the episode description. Today's episode is also description. Today's episode is also description. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I've been doing weekly therapy online. I've been doing weekly therapy online. I've been doing weekly therapy for well over 30 years. There are for well over 30 years. There are for well over 30 years. There are essentially three things that great essentially three things that great essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it provides good rapport with somebody that provides good rapport with somebody that provides good rapport with somebody that you can really trust and talk to about you can really trust and talk to about you can really trust and talk to about any issues you want. Second of all, it any issues you want. Second of all, it any issues you want. Second of all, it can provide support in the form of can provide support in the form of can provide support in the form of emotional support and directed guidance. emotional support and directed guidance. emotional support and directed guidance. And third, expert therapy provides And third, expert therapy provides And third, expert therapy provides useful insights. Insights that allow you useful insights. Insights that allow you useful insights. Insights that allow you to better not just your emotional life to better not just your emotional life to better not just your emotional life and your relationships, but of course and your relationships, but of course and your relationships, but of course also the relationship to yourself and to also the relationship to yourself and to also the relationship to yourself and to your professional life into all sorts of your professional life into all sorts of your professional life into all sorts of life and career goals. With BetterHelp, life and career goals. With BetterHelp, life and career goals. With BetterHelp, they make it extremely easy to find an they make it extremely easy to find an they make it extremely easy to find an expert therapist who you can really expert therapist who you can really expert therapist who you can really resonate with and that can help provide resonate with and that can help provide resonate with and that can help provide these benefits that come through these benefits that come through these benefits that come through effective therapy. And because effective therapy. And because effective therapy. And because BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done entirely online, it's very timeefficient entirely online, it's very timeefficient entirely online, it's very timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. and easy to fit into a busy schedule. and easy to fit into a busy schedule. There's no commuting to a therapist's There's no commuting to a therapist's There's no commuting to a therapist's office, finding parking, or sitting in a office, finding parking, or sitting in a office, finding parking, or sitting in a waiting room. If you'd like to try waiting room. If you'd like to try waiting room. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. We're talking betterhelp.com/huberman. We're talking betterhelp.com/huberman. We're talking about breaking one contract, the about breaking one contract, the about breaking one contract, the contract of marriage, and creating a new contract of marriage, and creating a new contract of marriage, and creating a new contract, the contract of divorce. I'm contract, the contract of divorce. I'm contract, the contract of divorce. I'm fascinated by contracts in the world of fascinated by contracts in the world of fascinated by contracts in the world of business. um my business partner and I business. um my business partner and I business. um my business partner and I that started this podcast um I insisted that started this podcast um I insisted that started this podcast um I insisted that uh we take an even split. That was that uh we take an even split. That was that uh we take an even split. That was important to me. It's absolutely important to me. It's absolutely important to me. It's absolutely critical um because this podcast critical um because this podcast critical um because this podcast wouldn't be what it is without him um wouldn't be what it is without him um wouldn't be what it is without him um and his incredible expertise. He is the and his incredible expertise. He is the and his incredible expertise. He is the uh the genius behind it all. Our our uh the genius behind it all. Our our uh the genius behind it all. Our our initial contract was on a piece of paper initial contract was on a piece of paper initial contract was on a piece of paper in a little coffee shop in Manhattan in a little coffee shop in Manhattan in a little coffee shop in Manhattan where I said, "How about this? How about where I said, "How about this? How about where I said, "How about this? How about this?" And we discussed it. people this?" And we discussed it. people this?" And we discussed it. people like you give lawyers like we get hives like you give lawyers like we get hives like you give lawyers like we get hives like you say that and I instantly like you say that and I instantly like you say that and I instantly start like you know six months later uh start like you know six months later uh start like you know six months later uh or so a lawyer told us we had to get a or so a lawyer told us we had to get a or so a lawyer told us we had to get a real contract and we did it um and I real contract and we did it um and I real contract and we did it um and I have to say it was fine and I'm glad we have to say it was fine and I'm glad we have to say it was fine and I'm glad we have contracts but to me all contracts have contracts but to me all contracts have contracts but to me all contracts whether or not it's a scribble on a whether or not it's a scribble on a whether or not it's a scribble on a piece of paper or it's a formal contract piece of paper or it's a formal contract piece of paper or it's a formal contract um contracts make me feel safe. They um contracts make me feel safe. They um contracts make me feel safe. They make me feel good. I like rules and make me feel good. I like rules and make me feel good. I like rules and guidelines. Um, I like knowing what's guidelines. Um, I like knowing what's guidelines. Um, I like knowing what's going to happen if for a scientist, um, going to happen if for a scientist, um, going to happen if for a scientist, um, this doesn't really exist. You you like this doesn't really exist. You you like this doesn't really exist. You you like to think you can control outcomes, but to think you can control outcomes, but to think you can control outcomes, but you can't, and you acknowledge that, and you can't, and you acknowledge that, and you can't, and you acknowledge that, and you go into the unknown. So, you go into the unknown. So, you go into the unknown. So, contracts are very reassuring to me. contracts are very reassuring to me. contracts are very reassuring to me. Yeah. I want to talk about the contract Yeah. I want to talk about the contract Yeah. I want to talk about the contract of marriage first. Yeah. And what you of marriage first. Yeah. And what you of marriage first. Yeah. And what you think is going through people's mind think is going through people's mind think is going through people's mind when they decide to get married? There's when they decide to get married? There's when they decide to get married? There's the engagement. There's a lot of love. the engagement. There's a lot of love. the engagement. There's a lot of love. Hopefully, there's a lot of love. Hopefully, there's a lot of love. Hopefully, there's a lot of love. Hopefully, um, there's a lot of Hopefully, um, there's a lot of Hopefully, um, there's a lot of dopamine. That's a wonderful thing. Um, dopamine. That's a wonderful thing. Um, dopamine. That's a wonderful thing. Um, presumably there's a lot of pherommones. presumably there's a lot of pherommones. presumably there's a lot of pherommones. There's a lot of emotional and There's a lot of emotional and There's a lot of emotional and biological stuff happening. Sure. biological stuff happening. Sure. biological stuff happening. Sure. There's the recognition from others. There's the recognition from others. There's the recognition from others. There's the party. There's the bachelor There's the party. There's the bachelor There's the party. There's the bachelor party, the bachelorette party, the party, the bachelorette party, the party, the bachelorette party, the shower, the wedding. I mean, there's shower, the wedding. I mean, there's shower, the wedding. I mean, there's so many things reinforcing this bond. so many things reinforcing this bond. so many things reinforcing this bond. And every one of the things you just And every one of the things you just And every one of the things you just named are awesome. Mhm. They're great. named are awesome. Mhm. They're great. named are awesome. Mhm. They're great. Like, those are all positive things. Like, those are all positive things. Like, those are all positive things. like the from the cake to the bachelor like the from the cake to the bachelor like the from the cake to the bachelor party, bachelorette party to the dress party, bachelorette party to the dress party, bachelorette party to the dress to the way we're going to have photos to the way we're going to have photos to the way we're going to have photos taken to commemorate the moment and sort taken to commemorate the moment and sort taken to commemorate the moment and sort of have this snapshot in time of who we of have this snapshot in time of who we of have this snapshot in time of who we were and who our families were. Like all were and who our families were. Like all were and who our families were. Like all of that, how could you not cheer for of that, how could you not cheer for of that, how could you not cheer for that? Like it's phenomenal. All of that that? Like it's phenomenal. All of that that? Like it's phenomenal. All of that sounds great. It's like, you know, like, sounds great. It's like, you know, like, sounds great. It's like, you know, like, oh, I like this ice cream. What's not to oh, I like this ice cream. What's not to oh, I like this ice cream. What's not to like? It's ice cream. Of course you like like? It's ice cream. Of course you like like? It's ice cream. Of course you like ice cream. Yeah. To me, it's celebration ice cream. Yeah. To me, it's celebration ice cream. Yeah. To me, it's celebration of life. Yeah. You know, it's very of life. Yeah. You know, it's very of life. Yeah. You know, it's very different than the birth of a child, but different than the birth of a child, but different than the birth of a child, but it's this each one of those is a it's this each one of those is a it's this each one of those is a celebration of the life spirit. celebration of the life spirit. celebration of the life spirit. Yeah. And your place in the timeline and Yeah. And your place in the timeline and Yeah. And your place in the timeline and the history and the merging of families, the history and the merging of families, the history and the merging of families, the merging of clans like the and the merging of clans like the and the merging of clans like the and sort of this we're going to merge and sort of this we're going to merge and sort of this we're going to merge now and maybe new life comes of that and now and maybe new life comes of that and now and maybe new life comes of that and then that life merges with more life and then that life merges with more life and then that life merges with more life and we become part of this chain like this we become part of this chain like this we become part of this chain like this is gorgeous stuff and this is the is gorgeous stuff and this is the is gorgeous stuff and this is the fundamental building blocks of human fundamental building blocks of human fundamental building blocks of human civilization. So, it is perfectly civilization. So, it is perfectly civilization. So, it is perfectly understandable that we get absolutely understandable that we get absolutely understandable that we get absolutely intoxicated by the thought of it and intoxicated by the thought of it and intoxicated by the thought of it and that we get so hopped up. But, but that we get so hopped up. But, but that we get so hopped up. But, but here's what people don't think about. here's what people don't think about. here's what people don't think about. The term contract never gets into that The term contract never gets into that The term contract never gets into that discussion. I'm telling you right now, discussion. I'm telling you right now, discussion. I'm telling you right now, right now, someone's getting married right now, someone's getting married right now, someone's getting married somewhere and they've never The word somewhere and they've never The word somewhere and they've never The word contracts never come out of there, but contracts never come out of there, but contracts never come out of there, but they don't view marriage as a contract. they don't view marriage as a contract. they don't view marriage as a contract. the two things that I as a divorce the two things that I as a divorce the two things that I as a divorce lawyer I'm constantly thinking about is lawyer I'm constantly thinking about is lawyer I'm constantly thinking about is marriage as an economy and marriage as a marriage as an economy and marriage as a marriage as an economy and marriage as a contract and those are two the minute contract and those are two the minute contract and those are two the minute you say that people assume you don't you say that people assume you don't you say that people assume you don't believe in or experience emotionally any believe in or experience emotionally any believe in or experience emotionally any of those other beautiful things you just of those other beautiful things you just of those other beautiful things you just said and I think said and I think said and I think 90% of the appeal of my media work in 90% of the appeal of my media work in 90% of the appeal of my media work in this chapter of my life has been that this chapter of my life has been that this chapter of my life has been that people go oh a divorce lawyer or this is people go oh a divorce lawyer or this is people go oh a divorce lawyer or this is just going to be a guy talking about how just going to be a guy talking about how just going to be a guy talking about how like marriage is the worst thing ever. like marriage is the worst thing ever. like marriage is the worst thing ever. And in reality, I think what I'm And in reality, I think what I'm And in reality, I think what I'm saying is, look, this is amazing. This saying is, look, this is amazing. This saying is, look, this is amazing. This is wonderful. Why wouldn't you fall in is wonderful. Why wouldn't you fall in is wonderful. Why wouldn't you fall in love? Why wouldn't you have pair bonds? love? Why wouldn't you have pair bonds? love? Why wouldn't you have pair bonds? Why wouldn't you consider locking in Why wouldn't you consider locking in Why wouldn't you consider locking in with another person and say, but my god, with another person and say, but my god, with another person and say, but my god, be honest with yourself about the risks be honest with yourself about the risks be honest with yourself about the risks involved. be honest with yourself about involved. be honest with yourself about involved. be honest with yourself about the ways you can hedge that risk and be the ways you can hedge that risk and be the ways you can hedge that risk and be honest with yourself about the honest with yourself about the honest with yourself about the contract and the economy because those contract and the economy because those contract and the economy because those are two things that I do not think that are two things that I do not think that are two things that I do not think that there is anything unromantic. I don't there is anything unromantic. I don't there is anything unromantic. I don't think it takes away from the romance or think it takes away from the romance or think it takes away from the romance or the beauty of a thing. You know, I the beauty of a thing. You know, I the beauty of a thing. You know, I often say you my favorite poem is a poem often say you my favorite poem is a poem often say you my favorite poem is a poem by Joseph Broaddsky called The Song. And by Joseph Broaddsky called The Song. And by Joseph Broaddsky called The Song. And he wrote it when his wife passed away. he wrote it when his wife passed away. he wrote it when his wife passed away. And it's a it's a beautiful poem about And it's a it's a beautiful poem about And it's a it's a beautiful poem about love and loss. And the sort of love and loss. And the sort of love and loss. And the sort of refrain of the poem is I wish you were refrain of the poem is I wish you were refrain of the poem is I wish you were here, dear. Like, I wish you were here, dear. Like, I wish you were here, dear. Like, I wish you were here, dear. I wish you were here. I wish we dear. I wish you were here. I wish we dear. I wish you were here. I wish we sat in the car and you sat near. It's sat in the car and you sat near. It's sat in the car and you sat near. It's this beautiful poem. And one of the this beautiful poem. And one of the this beautiful poem. And one of the lines is I wish you were here, dear. I lines is I wish you were here, dear. I lines is I wish you were here, dear. I wish you were here. I wish I knew no wish you were here. I wish I knew no wish you were here. I wish I knew no astronomy when stars appear. And I astronomy when stars appear. And I astronomy when stars appear. And I remember the first time I read that line remember the first time I read that line remember the first time I read that line thinking like, "Oh, that's so thinking like, "Oh, that's so thinking like, "Oh, that's so beautiful." Because once you know beautiful." Because once you know beautiful." Because once you know astronomy, like there's something less astronomy, like there's something less astronomy, like there's something less magical about the stars, you know? I magical about the stars, you know? I magical about the stars, you know? I mean, I don't know. See, I don't mean, I don't know. See, I don't mean, I don't know. See, I don't believe it has to be that way. Yeah. I believe it has to be that way. Yeah. I believe it has to be that way. Yeah. I don't either. Uh the great Richard don't either. Uh the great Richard don't either. Uh the great Richard Fineman, Nobel Prize winning physicist Fineman, Nobel Prize winning physicist Fineman, Nobel Prize winning physicist of uh surely you're joking, Mr. Fineman of uh surely you're joking, Mr. Fineman of uh surely you're joking, Mr. Fineman fame, said that uh understanding things fame, said that uh understanding things fame, said that uh understanding things at a reductionist level added to his at a reductionist level added to his at a reductionist level added to his sense of beauty with the with the sense of beauty with the with the sense of beauty with the with the physical world. And I think it can. I physical world. And I think it can. I physical world. And I think it can. I mean that's my sense of biology and mean that's my sense of biology and mean that's my sense of biology and physiology and what I know of physiology and what I know of physiology and what I know of psychology. Understanding the deeper psychology. Understanding the deeper psychology. Understanding the deeper layers adds to my sense of wonder. But I layers adds to my sense of wonder. But I layers adds to my sense of wonder. But I acknowledge and agree with you acknowledge and agree with you acknowledge and agree with you completely that for most people when we completely that for most people when we completely that for most people when we think about all those um things around think about all those um things around think about all those um things around marriage, the engagement, the marriage, the engagement, the marriage, the engagement, the wedding, the party, they all imply a ton wedding, the party, they all imply a ton wedding, the party, they all imply a ton of trust. I believe in you. I have of trust. I believe in you. I have of trust. I believe in you. I have faith in you. I'm going to merge lives faith in you. I'm going to merge lives faith in you. I'm going to merge lives with you. Yeah, the word contract with you. Yeah, the word contract with you. Yeah, the word contract implies somewhere in there a lack of implies somewhere in there a lack of implies somewhere in there a lack of trust. I gave this little anecdote about trust. I gave this little anecdote about trust. I gave this little anecdote about something very different than marriage, something very different than marriage, something very different than marriage, right? A business contract with my right? A business contract with my right? A business contract with my business partner where when they said, business partner where when they said, business partner where when they said, "Oh, you need to have a formal "Oh, you need to have a formal "Oh, you need to have a formal contract." Yeah. It there is something contract." Yeah. It there is something contract." Yeah. It there is something about that implies that things about that implies that things about that implies that things could go wrong or that there will be could go wrong or that there will be could go wrong or that there will be unforeseen circumstances that our verbal unforeseen circumstances that our verbal unforeseen circumstances that our verbal contract Yeah. can't anticipate and contract Yeah. can't anticipate and contract Yeah. can't anticipate and won't allow us to navigate as business won't allow us to navigate as business won't allow us to navigate as business partners. And this is again far and away partners. And this is again far and away partners. And this is again far and away different arguably lesser example than a different arguably lesser example than a different arguably lesser example than a marriage contract which is a much bigger marriage contract which is a much bigger marriage contract which is a much bigger life milestone. But I think what you're life milestone. But I think what you're life milestone. But I think what you're a point you're making that I think I a point you're making that I think I a point you're making that I think I would slightly reframe is the would slightly reframe is the would slightly reframe is the following. There is a contract that following. There is a contract that following. There is a contract that binds you and your business partner. It binds you and your business partner. It binds you and your business partner. It was written by the legislature of the was written by the legislature of the was written by the legislature of the state in which you reside. Okay. So, do state in which you reside. Okay. So, do state in which you reside. Okay. So, do you want your relationship with this you want your relationship with this you want your relationship with this person governed by a contract you didn't person governed by a contract you didn't person governed by a contract you didn't write? You had no input in. And the write? You had no input in. And the write? You had no input in. And the government can change without your government can change without your government can change without your consent or knowledge. And by the way, consent or knowledge. And by the way, consent or knowledge. And by the way, once they've changed it, you can't say, once they've changed it, you can't say, once they've changed it, you can't say, "Oh, I don't I don't like that new "Oh, I don't I don't like that new "Oh, I don't I don't like that new rules, so I don't want those to apply." rules, so I don't want those to apply." rules, so I don't want those to apply." Yeah. Too late. Too late. So, I tell Yeah. Too late. Too late. So, I tell Yeah. Too late. Too late. So, I tell everyone, you have a prenup. Every everyone, you have a prenup. Every everyone, you have a prenup. Every married person has a prenup. It was married person has a prenup. It was married person has a prenup. It was either written by the government or either written by the government or either written by the government or written by the two people who allegedly written by the two people who allegedly written by the two people who allegedly love each other more than the other 8 love each other more than the other 8 love each other more than the other 8 billion other options in the world. Now, billion other options in the world. Now, billion other options in the world. Now, if you ask me who is going to write a if you ask me who is going to write a if you ask me who is going to write a better contract, unnamed politicians who better contract, unnamed politicians who better contract, unnamed politicians who are subject to being elected and are subject to being elected and are subject to being elected and unelected or two people who have an unelected or two people who have an unelected or two people who have an abundance of optimism towards each other abundance of optimism towards each other abundance of optimism towards each other who get like there's a rule set. There's who get like there's a rule set. There's who get like there's a rule set. There's a rule set and if you're signing up for a rule set and if you're signing up for a rule set and if you're signing up for a rule set you wrote or co-authored with a rule set you wrote or co-authored with a rule set you wrote or co-authored with your partner, I think you're in a better your partner, I think you're in a better your partner, I think you're in a better place than saying let's trust it to the place than saying let's trust it to the place than saying let's trust it to the government. I have to tell you, I've government. I have to tell you, I've government. I have to tell you, I've been to the DMV. I've never walked into been to the DMV. I've never walked into been to the DMV. I've never walked into the DMV and thought these people should the DMV and thought these people should the DMV and thought these people should be in charge of everything. This is be in charge of everything. This is be in charge of everything. This is great. They they have got it down. Like great. They they have got it down. Like great. They they have got it down. Like this is they should be in charge of my this is they should be in charge of my this is they should be in charge of my marriage. They should be in charge of marriage. They should be in charge of marriage. They should be in charge of everything. My business dealings, they everything. My business dealings, they everything. My business dealings, they should be the ones who make the rules should be the ones who make the rules should be the ones who make the rules because they're clearly so together in because they're clearly so together in because they're clearly so together in their thinking. I don't feel that way. I their thinking. I don't feel that way. I their thinking. I don't feel that way. I feel like there is tremendous value in feel like there is tremendous value in feel like there is tremendous value in the level of trust and optimism that two the level of trust and optimism that two the level of trust and optimism that two people at the beginning of a venture, people at the beginning of a venture, people at the beginning of a venture, whether that venture is a marriage or whether that venture is a marriage or whether that venture is a marriage or whether that venture is a business whether that venture is a business whether that venture is a business venture. While we're in this heady space venture. While we're in this heady space venture. While we're in this heady space of optimism, excitement, trust in each of optimism, excitement, trust in each of optimism, excitement, trust in each other, that's the time to say, "Hey, other, that's the time to say, "Hey, other, that's the time to say, "Hey, we're going to disagree about something we're going to disagree about something we're going to disagree about something at some point." It happens. It'll be my at some point." It happens. It'll be my at some point." It happens. It'll be my fault. I say dumb [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I say dumb [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fault. I say dumb [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I say dumb [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fault. I say dumb [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I say dumb [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] all the time. So, I'll probably say all the time. So, I'll probably say all the time. So, I'll probably say something that's going to upset you. So, something that's going to upset you. So, something that's going to upset you. So, why would you learn how to fight while why would you learn how to fight while why would you learn how to fight while you're in a fight? Like, learn how to you're in a fight? Like, learn how to you're in a fight? Like, learn how to fight before you get in a fight. Learn fight before you get in a fight. Learn fight before you get in a fight. Learn the rule set. Have a discussion about, the rule set. Have a discussion about, the rule set. Have a discussion about, hey, if we disagree, what's the best hey, if we disagree, what's the best hey, if we disagree, what's the best way? Do you need a minute? Do you need way? Do you need a minute? Do you need way? Do you need a minute? Do you need some time to yourself to like kind of some time to yourself to like kind of some time to yourself to like kind of cool off? Or are you the kind of person cool off? Or are you the kind of person cool off? Or are you the kind of person that's like, no, we got to sort this out that's like, no, we got to sort this out that's like, no, we got to sort this out right now. I can't go to bed angry. I'll right now. I can't go to bed angry. I'll right now. I can't go to bed angry. I'll fester. So, that to me, the right fester. So, that to me, the right fester. So, that to me, the right mindset is not faith and trust or mindset is not faith and trust or mindset is not faith and trust or contracts. I think that's the totally contracts. I think that's the totally contracts. I think that's the totally wrong way to frame it. I think the right wrong way to frame it. I think the right wrong way to frame it. I think the right way to frame it is there's a contract. way to frame it is there's a contract. way to frame it is there's a contract. There's a whether you want to call it a There's a whether you want to call it a There's a whether you want to call it a contract or not, just like there's an contract or not, just like there's an contract or not, just like there's an economy. An economy is an exchange of economy. An economy is an exchange of economy. An economy is an exchange of value. You know, this many bananas is value. You know, this many bananas is value. You know, this many bananas is worth this many coconuts cuz if it was worth this many coconuts cuz if it was worth this many coconuts cuz if it was what how many bananas will you trade me what how many bananas will you trade me what how many bananas will you trade me for bananas? That's not an economy. Like for bananas? That's not an economy. Like for bananas? That's not an economy. Like we're not bringing the same thing to the we're not bringing the same thing to the we're not bringing the same thing to the table. So, it's the same thing. Why is table. So, it's the same thing. Why is table. So, it's the same thing. Why is it a dirty word to say, "Hey, I'm it a dirty word to say, "Hey, I'm it a dirty word to say, "Hey, I'm marrying you. Why? What do I bring to marrying you. Why? What do I bring to marrying you. Why? What do I bring to your life? What do I mean to you? what your life? What do I mean to you? what your life? What do I mean to you? what value do I present to you and what value do I present to you and what value do I present to you and what value do you present to me so I know what to do you present to me so I know what to do you present to me so I know what to protect and preserve you know so I know protect and preserve you know so I know protect and preserve you know so I know like when that slips to start talking to like when that slips to start talking to like when that slips to start talking to you about it and by the way you can you about it and by the way you can you about it and by the way you can tell me and remind me when hey this tell me and remind me when hey this tell me and remind me when hey this thing I loved about you has changed so thing I loved about you has changed so thing I loved about you has changed so like you talked about all these good like you talked about all these good like you talked about all these good things about your business partner like things about your business partner like things about your business partner like oh he has this vision or he has this oh he has this vision or he has this oh he has this vision or he has this patience or he has this organizational patience or he has this organizational patience or he has this organizational skill and he makes up for some things skill and he makes up for some things skill and he makes up for some things that I don't have like if you just said that I don't have like if you just said that I don't have like if you just said oh yeah he has the exact same oh yeah he has the exact same oh yeah he has the exact same characteristics as me it's like Well, characteristics as me it's like Well, characteristics as me it's like Well, what do you need him then? You know, what do you need him then? You know, what do you need him then? You know, it's many hands like work maybe, but it's many hands like work maybe, but it's many hands like work maybe, but ideally you have the Steve Jobs and the ideally you have the Steve Jobs and the ideally you have the Steve Jobs and the Steve Waznjak. You know, either of whom Steve Waznjak. You know, either of whom Steve Waznjak. You know, either of whom without the other would have been kind without the other would have been kind without the other would have been kind of eh, but together it's like lightning of eh, but together it's like lightning of eh, but together it's like lightning in a bottle. So, I just genuinely think in a bottle. So, I just genuinely think in a bottle. So, I just genuinely think framing this slightly differently and framing this slightly differently and framing this slightly differently and saying there's going to be a rule set. saying there's going to be a rule set. saying there's going to be a rule set. So, we are the best people to write that So, we are the best people to write that So, we are the best people to write that rule set. That's the way to look at it. rule set. That's the way to look at it. rule set. That's the way to look at it. Yeah. The way you're framing the Yeah. The way you're framing the Yeah. The way you're framing the contract of marriage and contract of marriage and contract of marriage and prenups, I love it. Um because you're prenups, I love it. Um because you're prenups, I love it. Um because you're putting a positive emotional lens on it, putting a positive emotional lens on it, putting a positive emotional lens on it, right? Sure. Two people who love each right? Sure. Two people who love each right? Sure. Two people who love each other. Therefore, let's discuss the other. Therefore, let's discuss the other. Therefore, let's discuss the contract of love and marriage. Two contract of love and marriage. Two contract of love and marriage. Two people that are committed to creating people that are committed to creating people that are committed to creating perhaps children together and a whole perhaps children together and a whole perhaps children together and a whole life together, raiding together life together, raiding together life together, raiding together lineages. Let's get a contract to really lineages. Let's get a contract to really lineages. Let's get a contract to really solidify this. And what do we owe each solidify this. And what do we owe each solidify this. And what do we owe each other? You know, what do we owe each other? You know, what do we owe each other? You know, what do we owe each other? That's a huge piece for me. It's other? That's a huge piece for me. It's other? That's a huge piece for me. It's like, why are we doing this? you know, like, why are we doing this? you know, like, why are we doing this? you know, what is the problem we seek to solve or what is the problem we seek to solve or what is the problem we seek to solve or what is the value we add to each other's what is the value we add to each other's what is the value we add to each other's lives? That's such a beautiful question. lives? That's such a beautiful question. lives? That's such a beautiful question. Like, and by the way, it's an invitation Like, and by the way, it's an invitation Like, and by the way, it's an invitation to such an intimate discussion like to such an intimate discussion like to such an intimate discussion like this. These are the things that you make this. These are the things that you make this. These are the things that you make me feel like these are the things you do me feel like these are the things you do me feel like these are the things you do that make me feel that way. like they that make me feel that way. like they that make me feel that way. like they you make me feel loved really when you make me feel loved really when you make me feel loved really when you uh remember that tea that I like you uh remember that tea that I like you uh remember that tea that I like and you make sure that it's here, you and you make sure that it's here, you and you make sure that it's here, you know, or oh when you know uh know, or oh when you know uh know, or oh when you know uh remembered it was my sister's birthday remembered it was my sister's birthday remembered it was my sister's birthday and sent her a text and then sent me a and sent her a text and then sent me a and sent her a text and then sent me a screenshot. Like these are this dumb screenshot. Like these are this dumb screenshot. Like these are this dumb little things that make us feel so loved little things that make us feel so loved little things that make us feel so loved and seen. So why wouldn't we embrace an and seen. So why wouldn't we embrace an and seen. So why wouldn't we embrace an opportunity to say to this person, by opportunity to say to this person, by opportunity to say to this person, by the way, like do you know what I love the way, like do you know what I love the way, like do you know what I love about you? Do you know what you do that about you? Do you know what you do that about you? Do you know what you do that makes me feel so loved and makes me feel makes me feel so loved and makes me feel makes me feel so loved and makes me feel so in love with you? Because that's a so in love with you? Because that's a so in love with you? Because that's a worthy conversation. worthy conversation. worthy conversation. The way you're framing this, I think, is The way you're framing this, I think, is The way you're framing this, I think, is entirely different than how most people entirely different than how most people entirely different than how most people would envision a discussion about a would envision a discussion about a would envision a discussion about a prenup, which I think that's true. Which prenup, which I think that's true. Which prenup, which I think that's true. Which I really appreciate, and I know the I really appreciate, and I know the I really appreciate, and I know the audience appreciates, too, because audience appreciates, too, because audience appreciates, too, because you're putting a different lens on you're putting a different lens on you're putting a different lens on things. I'm going to just put on my hat things. I'm going to just put on my hat things. I'm going to just put on my hat as a neuroscientist and biologist for a as a neuroscientist and biologist for a as a neuroscientist and biologist for a moment. I think there are certain words moment. I think there are certain words moment. I think there are certain words that people for whatever reason consider that people for whatever reason consider that people for whatever reason consider kind of a buzzkill. Like we're talking kind of a buzzkill. Like we're talking kind of a buzzkill. Like we're talking about pherommones and love and children about pherommones and love and children about pherommones and love and children and romance and sex and vacations and romance and sex and vacations and romance and sex and vacations and honeymoons and parties and then someone honeymoons and parties and then someone honeymoons and parties and then someone says contract. Yeah. And someone and says contract. Yeah. And someone and says contract. Yeah. And someone and somebody says um you know we finances somebody says um you know we finances somebody says um you know we finances which you know maybe that turns certain which you know maybe that turns certain which you know maybe that turns certain people on. I guess people in the finance people on. I guess people in the finance people on. I guess people in the finance world it probably turns them on. But do world it probably turns them on. But do world it probably turns them on. But do you get where I'm coming from? I have you get where I'm coming from? I have you get where I'm coming from? I have to assume it's a different brain circuit to assume it's a different brain circuit to assume it's a different brain circuit for most people. Whereas what you're for most people. Whereas what you're for most people. Whereas what you're doing is you're coming at this from a doing is you're coming at this from a doing is you're coming at this from a different perspective, which is part of different perspective, which is part of different perspective, which is part of the reason why you're here, is that the reason why you're here, is that the reason why you're here, is that you're saying this discussion you're saying this discussion you're saying this discussion around a prenup around a prenup around a prenup contract can potentially shed more light contract can potentially shed more light contract can potentially shed more light into the nature of the bond and maybe into the nature of the bond and maybe into the nature of the bond and maybe even deepen the connection. Of course. even deepen the connection. Of course. even deepen the connection. Of course. And and I will tell you I've been And and I will tell you I've been And and I will tell you I've been doing prenuptual agreements for 25 years doing prenuptual agreements for 25 years doing prenuptual agreements for 25 years for clients and I usually end up having for clients and I usually end up having for clients and I usually end up having a very good relationship with the person a very good relationship with the person a very good relationship with the person I do a prenup with because you're I do a prenup with because you're I do a prenup with because you're talking a lot about their fears, their talking a lot about their fears, their talking a lot about their fears, their hopes. Is it one person or both? I hopes. Is it one person or both? I hopes. Is it one person or both? I wanted to ask this one at a time. So wanted to ask this one at a time. So wanted to ask this one at a time. So each of you has your own lawyer. Each of each of you has your own lawyer. Each of each of you has your own lawyer. Each of you has your own attorney. You cannot as you has your own attorney. You cannot as you has your own attorney. You cannot as a lawyer represent both people because a lawyer represent both people because a lawyer represent both people because they have what's called potentially they have what's called potentially they have what's called potentially adverse interests. And what if one adverse interests. And what if one adverse interests. And what if one person has substantially more income to person has substantially more income to person has substantially more income to hire a better lawyer um assuming that hire a better lawyer um assuming that hire a better lawyer um assuming that more money gets you a better lawyer? I more money gets you a better lawyer? I more money gets you a better lawyer? I have to assume on average it does um have to assume on average it does um have to assume on average it does um than the other. Yeah, it's unfortunate. than the other. Yeah, it's unfortunate. than the other. Yeah, it's unfortunate. It's an unfortunate thing. I mean, one It's an unfortunate thing. I mean, one It's an unfortunate thing. I mean, one of the projects I' I've been involved in of the projects I' I've been involved in of the projects I' I've been involved in the last couple of months is a in the last couple of months is a in the last couple of months is a website trusted prenup.com. I worked website trusted prenup.com. I worked website trusted prenup.com. I worked with a couple of tech people to put with a couple of tech people to put with a couple of tech people to put together something that's going to together something that's going to together something that's going to democratize prenups. Because up until democratize prenups. Because up until democratize prenups. Because up until now, prenups have been something that now, prenups have been something that now, prenups have been something that you spend 510 $15,000 for a traditional you spend 510 $15,000 for a traditional you spend 510 $15,000 for a traditional lawyer to draft for you and then your lawyer to draft for you and then your lawyer to draft for you and then your fiance brings it to an attorney to fiance brings it to an attorney to fiance brings it to an attorney to review and then they want to make review and then they want to make review and then they want to make revisions and it sort of walks into this revisions and it sort of walks into this revisions and it sort of walks into this adversarial process as opposed to sort adversarial process as opposed to sort adversarial process as opposed to sort of democratizing prenups. So what we are of democratizing prenups. So what we are of democratizing prenups. So what we are trying to do is sort of leverage trying to do is sort of leverage trying to do is sort of leverage technological innovation, AI, my technological innovation, AI, my technological innovation, AI, my hundreds of prenups I've drafted, we hundreds of prenups I've drafted, we hundreds of prenups I've drafted, we sort of fed into this to create the sort of fed into this to create the sort of fed into this to create the ability for you to go online and to ability for you to go online and to ability for you to go online and to create a prenup for like in the realm of create a prenup for like in the realm of create a prenup for like in the realm of $600, $700. That would be a game $600, $700. That would be a game $600, $700. That would be a game changer. It's really an opportunity. But changer. It's really an opportunity. But changer. It's really an opportunity. But but the purpose of it as far as I'm but the purpose of it as far as I'm but the purpose of it as far as I'm concerned is not just to democratize concerned is not just to democratize concerned is not just to democratize prenups, which I think we have to do, prenups, which I think we have to do, prenups, which I think we have to do, but to really reframe the way we look at but to really reframe the way we look at but to really reframe the way we look at it because people come in all the time it because people come in all the time it because people come in all the time and they're like, "Well, I don't know and they're like, "Well, I don't know and they're like, "Well, I don't know if I need a prenup because I'm not if I need a prenup because I'm not if I need a prenup because I'm not wealthy." And you say, "Well, you're wealthy." And you say, "Well, you're wealthy." And you say, "Well, you're still going to have a rule set applied still going to have a rule set applied still going to have a rule set applied to your marriage." And actually, if to your marriage." And actually, if to your marriage." And actually, if you're super wealthy, like most of my you're super wealthy, like most of my you're super wealthy, like most of my clients, they can afford to buy six more clients, they can afford to buy six more clients, they can afford to buy six more houses. Like they you keep the house, houses. Like they you keep the house, houses. Like they you keep the house, I'll buy another house down the street, I'll buy another house down the street, I'll buy another house down the street, and then we'll buy another house for the and then we'll buy another house for the and then we'll buy another house for the kids, and then we'll visit with them in kids, and then we'll visit with them in kids, and then we'll visit with them in that house. Like that's actually called that house. Like that's actually called that house. Like that's actually called nesting. It's a thing. So that's nesting. It's a thing. So that's nesting. It's a thing. So that's nesting. Nesting is when I was coming nesting. Nesting is when I was coming nesting. Nesting is when I was coming up, nesting meant something very nesting up, nesting meant something very nesting up, nesting meant something very nesting now is when you each have your own home now is when you each have your own home now is when you each have your own home and then one home is just where the kids and then one home is just where the kids and then one home is just where the kids live and instead of doing a custodial live and instead of doing a custodial live and instead of doing a custodial rotation where the kids go back and rotation where the kids go back and rotation where the kids go back and forth between homes, the kids have a forth between homes, the kids have a forth between homes, the kids have a home and the parent who has parenting home and the parent who has parenting home and the parent who has parenting access during that time is in the nest access during that time is in the nest access during that time is in the nest with the kids. When I was in college, with the kids. When I was in college, with the kids. When I was in college, nesting was when you got a tablecloth. nesting was when you got a tablecloth. nesting was when you got a tablecloth. Nice. Yeah. It's a very it's a Nice. Yeah. It's a very it's a Nice. Yeah. It's a very it's a very you know the rich divorce in very you know the rich divorce in very you know the rich divorce in different ways than the normal different ways than the normal different ways than the normal general populace. And so that's why general populace. And so that's why general populace. And so that's why we're trying to say look bring this we're trying to say look bring this we're trying to say look bring this democratize this bring this to let democratize this bring this to let democratize this bring this to let people develop a rule set because people develop a rule set because people develop a rule set because especially too when you have scarcity especially too when you have scarcity especially too when you have scarcity like most people can't afford to give like most people can't afford to give like most people can't afford to give away one half of everything they have away one half of everything they have away one half of everything they have and still have enough to function. Most and still have enough to function. Most and still have enough to function. Most people are going paycheck to paycheck. people are going paycheck to paycheck. people are going paycheck to paycheck. Most people are a couple of paychecks Most people are a couple of paychecks Most people are a couple of paychecks off from being in bankruptcy if things off from being in bankruptcy if things off from being in bankruptcy if things don't go the right way. So when they don't go the right way. So when they don't go the right way. So when they divorce and now we have two electric divorce and now we have two electric divorce and now we have two electric bills and two internet bills and two bills and two internet bills and two bills and two internet bills and two that's something most people can't do. that's something most people can't do. that's something most people can't do. So all the more reason for people to So all the more reason for people to So all the more reason for people to have a rule set that the two of them have a rule set that the two of them have a rule set that the two of them created again when they were feeling created again when they were feeling created again when they were feeling positive and benevolent and optimistic positive and benevolent and optimistic positive and benevolent and optimistic towards each other and they were trying towards each other and they were trying towards each other and they were trying to protect you because to me personally to protect you because to me personally to protect you because to me personally I don't know how you can feel loved if I don't know how you can feel loved if I don't know how you can feel loved if you don't feel safe like I think you don't feel safe like I think you don't feel safe like I think you have to feel safe emotionally safe have to feel safe emotionally safe have to feel safe emotionally safe physically safe like if you're afraid of physically safe like if you're afraid of physically safe like if you're afraid of your partner emotionally physically how your partner emotionally physically how your partner emotionally physically how can you really feel loved. So to me, the can you really feel loved. So to me, the can you really feel loved. So to me, the prenup is an invitation to a can we talk prenup is an invitation to a can we talk prenup is an invitation to a can we talk about hard things? Because I'll tell you about hard things? Because I'll tell you about hard things? Because I'll tell you right now, when somebody says to me, right now, when somebody says to me, right now, when somebody says to me, "Well, I would do a prenup. I know it "Well, I would do a prenup. I know it "Well, I would do a prenup. I know it would be good, but I, you know, that's would be good, but I, you know, that's would be good, but I, you know, that's just going to be a hard conversation." just going to be a hard conversation." just going to be a hard conversation." Don't get married. If you can't have Don't get married. If you can't have Don't get married. If you can't have hard conversations with a person, you hard conversations with a person, you hard conversations with a person, you have absolutely no business marrying have absolutely no business marrying have absolutely no business marrying them. I mean, it's good for me as a them. I mean, it's good for me as a them. I mean, it's good for me as a future income stream, but I'm telling future income stream, but I'm telling future income stream, but I'm telling you, I don't think it's a good idea. you, I don't think it's a good idea. you, I don't think it's a good idea. like you're going to have to talk about like you're going to have to talk about like you're going to have to talk about hard things, you know, and you're going hard things, you know, and you're going hard things, you know, and you're going to have to have uncomfortable truths to have to have uncomfortable truths to have to have uncomfortable truths instead of comfortable lies to this instead of comfortable lies to this instead of comfortable lies to this person, you know. So, I'm a big fan of person, you know. So, I'm a big fan of person, you know. So, I'm a big fan of early on in the process having those early on in the process having those early on in the process having those conversations. And again, it doesn't all conversations. And again, it doesn't all conversations. And again, it doesn't all have to be like, you know, the convers have to be like, you know, the convers have to be like, you know, the convers like when you talk about your will, like when you talk about your will, like when you talk about your will, that's a hard conversation. Like there's that's a hard conversation. Like there's that's a hard conversation. Like there's no upside to being dead, you know, like no upside to being dead, you know, like no upside to being dead, you know, like other than being off social media, like other than being off social media, like other than being off social media, like there's no upside to it. So, I there's no upside to it. So, I there's no upside to it. So, I understand why people are like, "It's understand why people are like, "It's understand why people are like, "It's really hard to think about like if I die really hard to think about like if I die really hard to think about like if I die and if both of us die, what do we do and if both of us die, what do we do and if both of us die, what do we do with the kids?" Like, that's a hard with the kids?" Like, that's a hard with the kids?" Like, that's a hard conversation. But look, if we break up, conversation. But look, if we break up, conversation. But look, if we break up, what would you need to feel safe? Like, what would you need to feel safe? Like, what would you need to feel safe? Like, would you, you know, there's a line from would you, you know, there's a line from would you, you know, there's a line from a Prince song, um, if I was your a Prince song, um, if I was your a Prince song, um, if I was your girlfriend? Uh, and it is, would you run girlfriend? Uh, and it is, would you run girlfriend? Uh, and it is, would you run to me if somebody hurt you, even if that to me if somebody hurt you, even if that to me if somebody hurt you, even if that somebody was me? And I think there's somebody was me? And I think there's somebody was me? And I think there's something really sweet about saying to something really sweet about saying to something really sweet about saying to someone like, "Hey, if I hurt you, like, someone like, "Hey, if I hurt you, like, someone like, "Hey, if I hurt you, like, how can I still have you feel safe? like how can I still have you feel safe? like how can I still have you feel safe? like how can I have you still feel loved? how can I have you still feel loved? how can I have you still feel loved? Like I don't think Like I don't think Like I don't think that you know when I meet someone and that you know when I meet someone and that you know when I meet someone and their exes are like they just have their exes are like they just have their exes are like they just have painted them as a villain like with no painted them as a villain like with no painted them as a villain like with no redeeming qualities whatsoever. And redeeming qualities whatsoever. And redeeming qualities whatsoever. And that's frequent, you know, it's frequent that's frequent, you know, it's frequent that's frequent, you know, it's frequent people do that. And to me that says people do that. And to me that says people do that. And to me that says a lot about like the core values of both a lot about like the core values of both a lot about like the core values of both of these people. You know, I think of these people. You know, I think of these people. You know, I think there's real value in saying to someone there's real value in saying to someone there's real value in saying to someone early on like, "Hey, if I hurt you, what early on like, "Hey, if I hurt you, what early on like, "Hey, if I hurt you, what are you going to need from me?" Like, are you going to need from me?" Like, are you going to need from me?" Like, "What what do we need to be made whole? "What what do we need to be made whole? "What what do we need to be made whole? How can we both feel safe in this How can we both feel safe in this How can we both feel safe in this relationship?" That's what those relationship?" That's what those relationship?" That's what those discussions are about. Like throwing the discussions are about. Like throwing the discussions are about. Like throwing the words contracts, throwing the words contracts, throwing the words contracts, throwing the words economy in there. I understand. Like, I economy in there. I understand. Like, I economy in there. I understand. Like, I think you're totally right. There's think you're totally right. There's think you're totally right. There's something about those words. But I think something about those words. But I think something about those words. But I think reality can be beautiful. I don't I reality can be beautiful. I don't I reality can be beautiful. I don't I don't think like I don't think you have don't think like I don't think you have don't think like I don't think you have to CGI everything for it to be perfect. to CGI everything for it to be perfect. to CGI everything for it to be perfect. I think it's perfect. I think it's I think it's perfect. I think it's I think it's perfect. I think it's already perfect. I There's something already perfect. I There's something already perfect. I There's something very perfect about how imperfect and very perfect about how imperfect and very perfect about how imperfect and flawed and frightened we are. And I flawed and frightened we are. And I flawed and frightened we are. And I think there's something really beautiful think there's something really beautiful think there's something really beautiful about finding someone that you can be about finding someone that you can be about finding someone that you can be that with and I don't think I can learn that with and I don't think I can learn that with and I don't think I can learn everything I need to know about myself everything I need to know about myself everything I need to know about myself from myself. Like I think I need someone from myself. Like I think I need someone from myself. Like I think I need someone there. Ideally, someone who really loves there. Ideally, someone who really loves there. Ideally, someone who really loves me and is cheering for me and sees my me and is cheering for me and sees my me and is cheering for me and sees my blind spots. And and I think the blind spots. And and I think the blind spots. And and I think the conversation about a prenup is that's conversation about a prenup is that's conversation about a prenup is that's what that conversation should be. It's what that conversation should be. It's what that conversation should be. It's fantastic. I love the way you lean into fantastic. I love the way you lean into fantastic. I love the way you lean into life uh in all its um light and shadows life uh in all its um light and shadows life uh in all its um light and shadows and say, "Okay, let's accept all of that and say, "Okay, let's accept all of that and say, "Okay, let's accept all of that right off the bat and uh figure out right off the bat and uh figure out right off the bat and uh figure out what's going to give this the highest what's going to give this the highest what's going to give this the highest probability of working." Well, it's probability of working." Well, it's probability of working." Well, it's reality. I've never thought about reality. I've never thought about reality. I've never thought about prenups as a way to bolster the prenups as a way to bolster the prenups as a way to bolster the probability of the marriage working. probability of the marriage working. probability of the marriage working. Well, I'm telling you, I and I got Well, I'm telling you, I and I got Well, I'm telling you, I and I got sidetracked as I tend to do, but I've sidetracked as I tend to do, but I've sidetracked as I tend to do, but I've done probably hundreds if not thousands done probably hundreds if not thousands done probably hundreds if not thousands of prenups over 25 years. I think there of prenups over 25 years. I think there of prenups over 25 years. I think there maybe five people that I did their maybe five people that I did their maybe five people that I did their divorce after they had a prenup. Really? divorce after they had a prenup. Really? divorce after they had a prenup. Really? Yeah. I think I think people need to Yeah. I think I think people need to Yeah. I think I think people need to hear that again. I think that Yeah. So, hear that again. I think that Yeah. So, hear that again. I think that Yeah. So, so I've so I've so I've done hundreds if not at least a thousand done hundreds if not at least a thousand done hundreds if not at least a thousand prenups in 25 years. I probably do two prenups in 25 years. I probably do two prenups in 25 years. I probably do two or three prenups a week. So, I do a lot or three prenups a week. So, I do a lot or three prenups a week. So, I do a lot of prenups. Most of my colleagues do a of prenups. Most of my colleagues do a of prenups. Most of my colleagues do a lot of prenups and I've never asked my lot of prenups and I've never asked my lot of prenups and I've never asked my colleagues this, but you know, usually colleagues this, but you know, usually colleagues this, but you know, usually when you do a prenup, you have a good when you do a prenup, you have a good when you do a prenup, you have a good relationship with the person by the time relationship with the person by the time relationship with the person by the time it's finished. It's a transaction people it's finished. It's a transaction people it's finished. It's a transaction people feel good about. It's a divorce. feel good about. It's a divorce. feel good about. It's a divorce. Sometimes you finish a divorce and the Sometimes you finish a divorce and the Sometimes you finish a divorce and the person is like, "Oh my god, I never want person is like, "Oh my god, I never want person is like, "Oh my god, I never want to see you again because you remind me to see you again because you remind me to see you again because you remind me of this really dark chapter." But of this really dark chapter." But of this really dark chapter." But prenups, it's usually very friendly prenups, it's usually very friendly prenups, it's usually very friendly transaction. It's positive. This is transaction. It's positive. This is transaction. It's positive. This is surprising to me. So people who prenup surprising to me. So people who prenup surprising to me. So people who prenup tend not to break up. Yes, that rhyme. tend not to break up. Yes, that rhyme. tend not to break up. Yes, that rhyme. Yes. Um I think many people will be very Yes. Um I think many people will be very Yes. Um I think many people will be very surprised to hear that. I think it's surprised to hear that. I think it's surprised to hear that. I think it's self- selecting. I think the kind of self- selecting. I think the kind of self- selecting. I think the kind of people who can have a conversation that people who can have a conversation that people who can have a conversation that you need to have in order to discuss and you need to have in order to discuss and you need to have in order to discuss and negotiate and again there's another term negotiate and again there's another term negotiate and again there's another term I don't think it's the right term I don't think it's the right term I don't think it's the right term negotiate a prenup. Negotiate gives the negotiate a prenup. Negotiate gives the negotiate a prenup. Negotiate gives the impression it's like you're buying a car impression it's like you're buying a car impression it's like you're buying a car you know like the kind of people who can you know like the kind of people who can you know like the kind of people who can have the conversations you need to have the conversations you need to have the conversations you need to have in order to have a prenuptual agreement in order to have a prenuptual agreement in order to have a prenuptual agreement I think are the kind of people that are I think are the kind of people that are I think are the kind of people that are going to be successfully married period. going to be successfully married period. going to be successfully married period. Like there's something about there that Like there's something about there that Like there's something about there that I'm not going to talk about a that I'm not going to talk about a that I'm not going to talk about a prenup because I don't want to talk prenup because I don't want to talk prenup because I don't want to talk about the possibility that anything about the possibility that anything about the possibility that anything could ever go wrong with this thing. could ever go wrong with this thing. could ever go wrong with this thing. It's perfect. It's wonderful. It's cake. It's perfect. It's wonderful. It's cake. It's perfect. It's wonderful. It's cake. It's roses. It's nothing but romance and It's roses. It's nothing but romance and It's roses. It's nothing but romance and sex and it's wonderful. Okay, you got no sex and it's wonderful. Okay, you got no sex and it's wonderful. Okay, you got no Listen, falling feels like flying for a Listen, falling feels like flying for a Listen, falling feels like flying for a little while, you know, and then you hit the while, you know, and then you hit the while, you know, and then you hit the ground and it is waiting for you. And if ground and it is waiting for you. And if ground and it is waiting for you. And if the first time you ever think about what the first time you ever think about what the first time you ever think about what legal rights and obligations do I have legal rights and obligations do I have legal rights and obligations do I have is when you're in my office like you've is when you're in my office like you've is when you're in my office like you've you're already screwed. You're already you're already screwed. You're already you're already screwed. You're already screwed. You did nothing to prepare screwed. You did nothing to prepare screwed. You did nothing to prepare emotionally, financially, you know, emotionally, financially, you know, emotionally, financially, you know, nothing. So there's something about the nothing. So there's something about the nothing. So there's something about the imagination, right, that people if you imagination, right, that people if you imagination, right, that people if you if you're just the kind of person who's if you're just the kind of person who's if you're just the kind of person who's like, I don't even want to talk. I like, I don't even want to talk. I like, I don't even want to talk. I actually met I had a they'll remain actually met I had a they'll remain actually met I had a they'll remain nameless, but it was a neighbor and I nameless, but it was a neighbor and I nameless, but it was a neighbor and I tried to every once in a while I get it tried to every once in a while I get it tried to every once in a while I get it in my head that I'm going to like try to in my head that I'm going to like try to in my head that I'm going to like try to be a more social person. So, I'm like, be a more social person. So, I'm like, be a more social person. So, I'm like, "Oh, I should like invite the neighbor "Oh, I should like invite the neighbor "Oh, I should like invite the neighbor over for a drink, you know, a couple." over for a drink, you know, a couple." over for a drink, you know, a couple." And uh they don't live near me anymore, And uh they don't live near me anymore, And uh they don't live near me anymore, so I can get away with it now. But I so I can get away with it now. But I so I can get away with it now. But I invited these people over for a drink. invited these people over for a drink. invited these people over for a drink. They came over, lovely people. But at They came over, lovely people. But at They came over, lovely people. But at some point, she said, "Oh, you know, I some point, she said, "Oh, you know, I some point, she said, "Oh, you know, I don't know how you do what you do. Like, don't know how you do what you do. Like, don't know how you do what you do. Like, we don't we don't allow the dword in our we don't we don't allow the dword in our we don't we don't allow the dword in our house." And I was like, "You you mean?" She's And I was like, "You you mean?" She's And I was like, "You you mean?" She's like, "No, no, we just you're not like, "No, no, we just you're not like, "No, no, we just you're not allowed to say the word divorce in our allowed to say the word divorce in our allowed to say the word divorce in our house." And she said it like divorce house." And she said it like divorce house." And she said it like divorce like she was saying Voldemort, you know. like she was saying Voldemort, you know. like she was saying Voldemort, you know. She was like, "We don't say the D word." She was like, "We don't say the D word." She was like, "We don't say the D word." And I was like, and I thought to myself, And I was like, and I thought to myself, And I was like, and I thought to myself, "If only it was that easy, you know." By "If only it was that easy, you know." By "If only it was that easy, you know." By the way, got divorced like three years the way, got divorced like three years the way, got divorced like three years later. Really? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. 100%. later. Really? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. 100%. later. Really? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. 100%. And like down, drag out, brutal. Both of And like down, drag out, brutal. Both of And like down, drag out, brutal. Both of them tried to call me and hire me, you them tried to call me and hire me, you them tried to call me and hire me, you know, and I will not represent people know, and I will not represent people know, and I will not represent people that I know in any capacity. And I just that I know in any capacity. And I just that I know in any capacity. And I just remember thinking like that did like remember thinking like that did like remember thinking like that did like that is such a what a delusion like that is such a what a delusion like that is such a what a delusion like that I'm never gonna say the word like what I'm never gonna say the word like what I'm never gonna say the word like what are you my great-g grandandmother like are you my great-g grandandmother like are you my great-g grandandmother like you have to say cancer like this cuz if you have to say cancer like this cuz if you have to say cancer like this cuz if you say cancer and like of speaking you say cancer and like of speaking you say cancer and like of speaking volume suddenly like tumors will develop volume suddenly like tumors will develop volume suddenly like tumors will develop like do are you that superstitious like do are you that superstitious like do are you that superstitious like do you believe you know do you believe do you believe you know do you believe do you believe you know do you believe in Chewbacca too like that's crazy I in Chewbacca too like that's crazy I in Chewbacca too like that's crazy I mean superstition is a form of paranoia mean superstition is a form of paranoia mean superstition is a form of paranoia it's a mild form of paranoia but it's a it's a mild form of paranoia but it's a it's a mild form of paranoia but it's a form of paranoia of course yeah but I form of paranoia of course yeah but I form of paranoia of course yeah but I think It's, you know, I say all the think It's, you know, I say all the think It's, you know, I say all the time that I think most of our attitudes time that I think most of our attitudes time that I think most of our attitudes about marriage have been just handed about marriage have been just handed about marriage have been just handed down. Like it's just it's this is down. Like it's just it's this is down. Like it's just it's this is something that like marriage, you could something that like marriage, you could something that like marriage, you could be the most like modern Bella Abzug be the most like modern Bella Abzug be the most like modern Bella Abzug feminist person and a lot of women are feminist person and a lot of women are feminist person and a lot of women are like, "Oh yeah, I still want my dad to like, "Oh yeah, I still want my dad to like, "Oh yeah, I still want my dad to walk me down the aisle and give me walk me down the aisle and give me walk me down the aisle and give me away." Give you away? Like seriously? away." Give you away? Like seriously? away." Give you away? Like seriously? Like you're a seuite executive at Like you're a seuite executive at Like you're a seuite executive at a software company and he's going to a software company and he's going to a software company and he's going to trade you for what? goats like this is trade you for what? goats like this is trade you for what? goats like this is going to be where he because you are going to be where he because you are going to be where he because you are your father's property and now you will your father's property and now you will your father's property and now you will be the property and he will give you be the property and he will give you be the property and he will give you away to your husband and you'll now be away to your husband and you'll now be away to your husband and you'll now be his property. That's where that his property. That's where that his property. That's where that tradition comes from. Gang, what do you tradition comes from. Gang, what do you tradition comes from. Gang, what do you think uh the psychological underpinnings think uh the psychological underpinnings think uh the psychological underpinnings of what you're describing are about? of what you're describing are about? of what you're describing are about? Is it some sort of internal validation Is it some sort of internal validation Is it some sort of internal validation of worth external validation of worth? I of worth external validation of worth? I of worth external validation of worth? I mean none of it computes for me when I mean none of it computes for me when I mean none of it computes for me when I look at you know like you said like a look at you know like you said like a look at you know like you said like a let's say these are extreme examples but let's say these are extreme examples but let's say these are extreme examples but seuite female executive let's make or a seuite female executive let's make or a seuite female executive let's make or a founder also these exist I'm from the founder also these exist I'm from the founder also these exist I'm from the bay area of them yeah and bay area of them yeah and bay area of them yeah and typically they will take their soon tobe typically they will take their soon tobe typically they will take their soon tobe husband's last name interesting not husband's last name interesting not husband's last name interesting not always% um that's far more common than always% um that's far more common than always% um that's far more common than men taking their wife's last name men taking their wife's last name men taking their wife's last name actually I can't even think of a single actually I can't even think of a single actually I can't even think of a single instance I've had a few that hyphenate instance I've had a few that hyphenate instance I've had a few that hyphenate that's a new that's a new that's a new evolutionary biologists do that. It used evolutionary biologists do that. It used evolutionary biologists do that. It used to be all the evolutionary biologist to be all the evolutionary biologist to be all the evolutionary biologist most give the kids the husband's name. most give the kids the husband's name. most give the kids the husband's name. Most give the kids the husband's name. Most give the kids the husband's name. Most give the kids the husband's name. And I again I don't know if that's a And I again I don't know if that's a And I again I don't know if that's a male thing that like men are like that's male thing that like men are like that's male thing that like men are like that's my kid, they're going to have my name. I my kid, they're going to have my name. I my kid, they're going to have my name. I really don't know. But yeah, there's I really don't know. But yeah, there's I really don't know. But yeah, there's the a lot of the feminism gets thrown the a lot of the feminism gets thrown the a lot of the feminism gets thrown out the window. Another one is that in out the window. Another one is that in out the window. Another one is that in divorces, I've observed this. I don't divorces, I've observed this. I don't divorces, I've observed this. I don't have statistics on this, but women will have statistics on this, but women will have statistics on this, but women will keep their ex-husband's last name. Yeah. keep their ex-husband's last name. Yeah. keep their ex-husband's last name. Yeah. Because what I was told is they want to Because what I was told is they want to Because what I was told is they want to have the same last name as their kids. have the same last name as their kids. have the same last name as their kids. That's pretty common. Um, which is That's pretty common. Um, which is That's pretty common. Um, which is understandable. Yeah. Of course, understandable. Yeah. Of course, understandable. Yeah. Of course, the kids could switch last name. It the kids could switch last name. It the kids could switch last name. It eliminates a certain level of confusion eliminates a certain level of confusion eliminates a certain level of confusion because at school like to say, you know, because at school like to say, you know, because at school like to say, you know, like this is my name and the kids name like this is my name and the kids name like this is my name and the kids name is different. Some of it's through the is different. Some of it's through the is different. Some of it's through the kids. That piece I get. I absolutely kids. That piece I get. I absolutely kids. That piece I get. I absolutely get, but I also, and by the way, I get, but I also, and by the way, I get, but I also, and by the way, I have clients cuz you don't have to have clients cuz you don't have to have clients cuz you don't have to change your name back, but you have the change your name back, but you have the change your name back, but you have the right to and I have male clients who right to and I have male clients who right to and I have male clients who like want their name back. Like I want like want their name back. Like I want like want their name back. Like I want her to no longer be allowed to use that her to no longer be allowed to use that her to no longer be allowed to use that name. And I have to explain to them name. And I have to explain to them name. And I have to explain to them that's kind of you can't force her to that's kind of you can't force her to that's kind of you can't force her to not have your name. He's like, "Well, not have your name. He's like, "Well, not have your name. He's like, "Well, that's my name." And I'm like, "You that's my name." And I'm like, "You that's my name." And I'm like, "You understand? I can change as long as understand? I can change as long as understand? I can change as long as you're not doing it for the intent of you're not doing it for the intent of you're not doing it for the intent of defrauding creditors. Anyone can I can defrauding creditors. Anyone can I can defrauding creditors. Anyone can I can change my name to Andrew Huberman change my name to Andrew Huberman change my name to Andrew Huberman tomorrow if I want to. As long as I'm tomorrow if I want to. As long as I'm tomorrow if I want to. As long as I'm not doing it to defraud my creditors, not doing it to defraud my creditors, not doing it to defraud my creditors, you'd get a lot more problems than be you'd get a lot more problems than be you'd get a lot more problems than be the lifeline. I'd be Mrs. Huberman. the lifeline. I'd be Mrs. Huberman. the lifeline. I'd be Mrs. Huberman. That's very fun. Very fun. Oh my That's very fun. Very fun. Oh my That's very fun. Very fun. Oh my goodness. Um, no. You'd be Andrew goodness. Um, no. You'd be Andrew goodness. Um, no. You'd be Andrew Huberman. And that comes with a certain Huberman. And that comes with a certain Huberman. And that comes with a certain number of liabilities. That sounds number of liabilities. That sounds number of liabilities. That sounds exhausting. I don't think I can handle exhausting. I don't think I can handle exhausting. I don't think I can handle it. I can't do that. I can't bench it. I can't do that. I can't bench it. I can't do that. I can't bench that much either. Full-time fun. No, that much either. Full-time fun. No, that much either. Full-time fun. No, just kidding. Um, in all just kidding. Um, in all just kidding. Um, in all seriousness, wow, people have asked for seriousness, wow, people have asked for seriousness, wow, people have asked for their name back. Yeah, they want her their name back. Yeah, they want her their name back. Yeah, they want her prohibited from having her name and prohibited from having her name and prohibited from having her name and even though the kids have that name, but even though the kids have that name, but even though the kids have that name, but again, that's that anger thing. Like again, that's that anger thing. Like again, that's that anger thing. Like that's just a pure expression of anger. that's just a pure expression of anger. that's just a pure expression of anger. And I get it. You know, a lot of what I And I get it. You know, a lot of what I And I get it. You know, a lot of what I do is sort of helping people get to the do is sort of helping people get to the do is sort of helping people get to the core of like what are they really upset core of like what are they really upset core of like what are they really upset about? And that's a lot of what my job about? And that's a lot of what my job about? And that's a lot of what my job is. Like I my undergraduate degree was is. Like I my undergraduate degree was is. Like I my undergraduate degree was in psychology. My master's was in psychology. My master's was in psychology. My master's was in cultural anthropology and specifically cultural anthropology and specifically cultural anthropology and specifically in the study of death and dying. And uh in the study of death and dying. And uh in the study of death and dying. And uh and then my law degree, I wanted to be a and then my law degree, I wanted to be a and then my law degree, I wanted to be a divorce lawyer as soon as I started law divorce lawyer as soon as I started law divorce lawyer as soon as I started law school. And I think I use the psych school. And I think I use the psych school. And I think I use the psych degree as much as I use the law degree as much as I use the law degree as much as I use the law degree because it's so much of what I do is because it's so much of what I do is because it's so much of what I do is just dealing with people when they're in just dealing with people when they're in just dealing with people when they're in this very heightened emotional state. this very heightened emotional state. this very heightened emotional state. Like I'm a fan of faith, but just not Like I'm a fan of faith, but just not Like I'm a fan of faith, but just not blind faith. Like I'm a fan of fairy blind faith. Like I'm a fan of fairy blind faith. Like I'm a fan of fairy tales. If the fairy tales inspire tales. If the fairy tales inspire tales. If the fairy tales inspire something in you, that's incredible. something in you, that's incredible. something in you, that's incredible. Like if you say to me, you know, Jim, Like if you say to me, you know, Jim, Like if you say to me, you know, Jim, I love Star Wars. Like the struggle of I love Star Wars. Like the struggle of I love Star Wars. Like the struggle of the Jedi against the Empire, like it the Jedi against the Empire, like it the Jedi against the Empire, like it inspires me to want to be a disciplined inspires me to want to be a disciplined inspires me to want to be a disciplined person and to fight for good and to, you person and to fight for good and to, you person and to fight for good and to, you know, not be afraid of evil and to know know, not be afraid of evil and to know know, not be afraid of evil and to know like that's a beautiful story. If you like that's a beautiful story. If you like that's a beautiful story. If you try to tell me Wookies are real though, try to tell me Wookies are real though, try to tell me Wookies are real though, like we've got a problem, man. You got like we've got a problem, man. You got like we've got a problem, man. You got to get checked out. Like that's not to get checked out. Like that's not to get checked out. Like that's not okay. That's not true. So the divorce okay. That's not true. So the divorce okay. That's not true. So the divorce rate's 56%. So 56% of the time this rate's 56%. So 56% of the time this rate's 56%. So 56% of the time this technology fails. 56. Yeah. It technology fails. 56. Yeah. It technology fails. 56. Yeah. It changes every year, but 56 is the changes every year, but 56 is the changes every year, but 56 is the divorce rate currently. Okay. So 56% of divorce rate currently. Okay. So 56% of divorce rate currently. Okay. So 56% of marriages and in divorce. Now is that marriages and in divorce. Now is that marriages and in divorce. Now is that true? Excuse me. In Europe as well and true? Excuse me. In Europe as well and true? Excuse me. In Europe as well and South America as well and Australia. South America as well and Australia. South America as well and Australia. Every country the statistics are Every country the statistics are Every country the statistics are different. There different. There different. There are states does not have you can are states does not have you can are states does not have you can actually look this up online. And actually look this up online. And actually look this up online. And there's a great there's like a running there's a great there's like a running there's a great there's like a running tally that's kept um but the highest uh tally that's kept um but the highest uh tally that's kept um but the highest uh divorce rates are in I believe Italy is divorce rates are in I believe Italy is divorce rates are in I believe Italy is currently winning that race. Ireland was currently winning that race. Ireland was currently winning that race. Ireland was at the bottom because basically divorce at the bottom because basically divorce at the bottom because basically divorce was not possible in Ireland for an was not possible in Ireland for an was not possible in Ireland for an extended period of time. Countries that extended period of time. Countries that extended period of time. Countries that have a very strong underlying religious have a very strong underlying religious have a very strong underlying religious narrative like Sharia law and things narrative like Sharia law and things narrative like Sharia law and things like that obviously have a very low like that obviously have a very low like that obviously have a very low divorce rate. Mhm. Um but it divorce rate. Mhm. Um but it divorce rate. Mhm. Um but it varies in terms of but countries varies in terms of but countries varies in terms of but countries that are um I don't want to say you know that are um I don't want to say you know that are um I don't want to say you know like very modern you know where there's like very modern you know where there's like very modern you know where there's been a proliferation of social media been a proliferation of social media been a proliferation of social media where there is a open information where there is a open information where there is a open information environment so people can compare environment so people can compare environment so people can compare themselves to other people constantly themselves to other people constantly themselves to other people constantly not North Korea not North Korea great not North Korea not North Korea great not North Korea not North Korea great example yes that there is a sense of um example yes that there is a sense of um example yes that there is a sense of um because I actually even North Korea like because I actually even North Korea like because I actually even North Korea like has an underlying religious narrative. has an underlying religious narrative. has an underlying religious narrative. It's just that they've decided that It's just that they've decided that It's just that they've decided that their or they've been told their leader their or they've been told their leader their or they've been told their leader is a god, you know. So, I think when is a god, you know. So, I think when is a god, you know. So, I think when you don't have a core foundational when you don't have a core foundational when you don't have a core foundational religious narrative that prohibits religious narrative that prohibits religious narrative that prohibits divorce as part of its structure, then divorce as part of its structure, then divorce as part of its structure, then you're left to people's desires to some you're left to people's desires to some you're left to people's desires to some degree and the cultural foundations of degree and the cultural foundations of degree and the cultural foundations of it. And tradition, right? And tradition it. And tradition, right? And tradition it. And tradition, right? And tradition for many, many years, tradition was you for many, many years, tradition was you for many, many years, tradition was you stay married even if you're unhappy. And stay married even if you're unhappy. And stay married even if you're unhappy. And then tradition in the 1970s and 1980s then tradition in the 1970s and 1980s then tradition in the 1970s and 1980s started turning into your happiness is started turning into your happiness is started turning into your happiness is more important than the institution of more important than the institution of more important than the institution of marriage. So if you're unhappy, you marriage. So if you're unhappy, you marriage. So if you're unhappy, you might need to leave your marriage and might need to leave your marriage and might need to leave your marriage and get divorced. And that's when the get divorced. And that's when the get divorced. And that's when the divorce rate started to spike, right? So divorce rate started to spike, right? So divorce rate started to spike, right? So and I think there's some value to that. and I think there's some value to that. and I think there's some value to that. Like I, you know, tradition is in some Like I, you know, tradition is in some Like I, you know, tradition is in some ways like the wisdom of the people ways like the wisdom of the people ways like the wisdom of the people before us and they saw things we might before us and they saw things we might before us and they saw things we might not see. And to some degree, tradition not see. And to some degree, tradition not see. And to some degree, tradition is peer pressure exerted by dead people. is peer pressure exerted by dead people. is peer pressure exerted by dead people. So I think our fascination with So I think our fascination with So I think our fascination with marriage as this I found my soulmate and marriage as this I found my soulmate and marriage as this I found my soulmate and now we're not even going to think about now we're not even going to think about now we're not even going to think about the possibility of us ending even though the possibility of us ending even though the possibility of us ending even though fully 56% of the time the thing's going fully 56% of the time the thing's going fully 56% of the time the thing's going to end. Like that's the part I can't to end. Like that's the part I can't to end. Like that's the part I can't wrap my head around is and again look at wrap my head around is and again look at wrap my head around is and again look at the numbers there. Like let's the numbers there. Like let's the numbers there. Like let's assume conservatively that another 10% stay conservatively that another 10% stay conservatively that another 10% stay together for the kids cuz the 56 is just together for the kids cuz the 56 is just together for the kids cuz the 56 is just the ones who actually said this is so the ones who actually said this is so the ones who actually said this is so bad we're getting lawyers and we're bad we're getting lawyers and we're bad we're getting lawyers and we're ending this thing. Like how many people ending this thing. Like how many people ending this thing. Like how many people stay together for the kids or religious stay together for the kids or religious stay together for the kids or religious reasons or because they don't want to reasons or because they don't want to reasons or because they don't want to give away half their [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Like that's a give away half their [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Like that's a give away half their [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Like that's a got to be a big number. I mean got to be a big number. I mean got to be a big number. I mean conservative 10%. I think it's more than conservative 10%. I think it's more than conservative 10%. I think it's more than that. 20%. Definitely more. And these that. 20%. Definitely more. And these that. 20%. Definitely more. And these are first marriages. First marriages. are first marriages. First marriages. are first marriages. First marriages. the statistics for each subsequent the statistics for each subsequent the statistics for each subsequent marriage the divorce rate gets much marriage the divorce rate gets much marriage the divorce rate gets much higher. So like by the time really higher. So like by the time really higher. So like by the time really second marriage is higher than first second marriage is higher than first second marriage is higher than first marriage, third marriage is much higher. marriage, third marriage is much higher. marriage, third marriage is much higher. Interesting. And then once you get past Interesting. And then once you get past Interesting. And then once you get past three it's like you're you know all the three it's like you're you know all the three it's like you're you know all the divorced people in my family remarried divorced people in my family remarried divorced people in my family remarried and have been in those second marriages and have been in those second marriages and have been in those second marriages very long periods of time. I know a lot very long periods of time. I know a lot very long periods of time. I know a lot of very happy secondary very happy of very happy secondary very happy of very happy secondary very happy because I and I think there's value to because I and I think there's value to because I and I think there's value to that because I do think as a divorced that because I do think as a divorced that because I do think as a divorced person um you learn a lot about yourself person um you learn a lot about yourself person um you learn a lot about yourself through the process of divorce. You through the process of divorce. You through the process of divorce. You learn a lot about what you don't want to learn a lot about what you don't want to learn a lot about what you don't want to do again in a relationship and what do again in a relationship and what do again in a relationship and what didn't work for you. So I don't do didn't work for you. So I don't do didn't work for you. So I don't do anything perfectly the first time I do anything perfectly the first time I do anything perfectly the first time I do it. So I think that there's value in it. So I think that there's value in it. So I think that there's value in sort of giving something a try. Like you sort of giving something a try. Like you sort of giving something a try. Like you don't learn how to swim by reading books don't learn how to swim by reading books don't learn how to swim by reading books about swimming. You learn how to swim in about swimming. You learn how to swim in about swimming. You learn how to swim in the pool. So that's why I'm a like I'm a the pool. So that's why I'm a like I'm a the pool. So that's why I'm a like I'm a fan of marriage even though the fan of marriage even though the fan of marriage even though the divorce rate is very high. It's clearly divorce rate is very high. It's clearly divorce rate is very high. It's clearly a very risky technology. One could argue a very risky technology. One could argue a very risky technology. One could argue it's a reckless thing to do. You know it's a reckless thing to do. You know it's a reckless thing to do. You know that I mean the legal that I mean the legal that I mean the legal definition of definition of definition of negligence is a failure to perceive a negligence is a failure to perceive a negligence is a failure to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk of substantial and unjustifiable risk of substantial and unjustifiable risk of serious harm. Okay. Recklessness legally serious harm. Okay. Recklessness legally serious harm. Okay. Recklessness legally is a conscious disregard for a is a conscious disregard for a is a conscious disregard for a substantial and unjustifiable risk of substantial and unjustifiable risk of substantial and unjustifiable risk of serious harm. Okay. So if you know serious harm. Okay. So if you know serious harm. Okay. So if you know something ends in heartbreak and something ends in heartbreak and something ends in heartbreak and division of assets and fighting that division of assets and fighting that division of assets and fighting that requires attorneys 56% of the time and requires attorneys 56% of the time and requires attorneys 56% of the time and you don't make any plan for that in you don't make any plan for that in you don't make any plan for that in advance. I would argue that's reckless. advance. I would argue that's reckless. advance. I would argue that's reckless. You're consciously disregarding a You're consciously disregarding a You're consciously disregarding a substantial risk of harm. Period. Yeah. substantial risk of harm. Period. Yeah. substantial risk of harm. Period. Yeah. And if there's kids it brings them And if there's kids it brings them And if there's kids it brings them different kind of even higher level. different kind of even higher level. different kind of even higher level. Yeah. Do you happen to know the numbers Yeah. Do you happen to know the numbers Yeah. Do you happen to know the numbers or the rough numbers on percentage of or the rough numbers on percentage of or the rough numbers on percentage of first marriages with kids that last first marriages with kids that last first marriages with kids that last whether or not they're happy or not? I whether or not they're happy or not? I whether or not they're happy or not? I don't I don't know that delineation. I don't I don't know that delineation. I don't I don't know that delineation. I mean, I know that these statistics are mean, I know that these statistics are mean, I know that these statistics are fairly closely tracked. So, you can find fairly closely tracked. So, you can find fairly closely tracked. So, you can find them out online pretty easily because them out online pretty easily because them out online pretty easily because they're tracked by the government. Every they're tracked by the government. Every they're tracked by the government. Every time we do a divorce, we have to file time we do a divorce, we have to file time we do a divorce, we have to file what's called a certificate of what's called a certificate of what's called a certificate of dissolution of marriage. And that dissolution of marriage. And that dissolution of marriage. And that certificate includes the grade level, certificate includes the grade level, certificate includes the grade level, the highest grade level each person the highest grade level each person the highest grade level each person completed, um whether there are completed, um whether there are completed, um whether there are children, how many children, the ages of children, how many children, the ages of children, how many children, the ages of the children. And the whole purpose of the children. And the whole purpose of the children. And the whole purpose of that document is to compile demographic that document is to compile demographic that document is to compile demographic information. So the government for many information. So the government for many information. So the government for many years has been monitoring this and many years has been monitoring this and many years has been monitoring this and looking at you know, okay, what are looking at you know, okay, what are looking at you know, okay, what are those numbers? Those numbers are not those numbers? Those numbers are not those numbers? Those numbers are not well publicized. I think partly because well publicized. I think partly because well publicized. I think partly because the wedding industrial complex does not the wedding industrial complex does not the wedding industrial complex does not want people getting involved in that want people getting involved in that want people getting involved in that conversation. Like you don't want people conversation. Like you don't want people conversation. Like you don't want people to really look at the truth of things to really look at the truth of things to really look at the truth of things because it takes away from the fantasy because it takes away from the fantasy because it takes away from the fantasy of things. But see, again, I think of things. But see, again, I think of things. But see, again, I think that's a framing issue because to me, I that's a framing issue because to me, I that's a framing issue because to me, I think, you know, the stars are still think, you know, the stars are still think, you know, the stars are still beautiful even if you know astronomy. beautiful even if you know astronomy. beautiful even if you know astronomy. Like I think if anything I actually Like I think if anything I actually Like I think if anything I actually think and maybe this is just the way think and maybe this is just the way think and maybe this is just the way that I look at things, the fact that I look at things, the fact that I look at things, the fact that love is loaned and not permanently love is loaned and not permanently love is loaned and not permanently gifted makes it more beautiful. Like the gifted makes it more beautiful. Like the gifted makes it more beautiful. Like the fact that I'm going to die for sure fact that I'm going to die for sure fact that I'm going to die for sure makes my life more beautiful. There's a makes my life more beautiful. There's a makes my life more beautiful. There's a finite number of sunsets I'm going to finite number of sunsets I'm going to finite number of sunsets I'm going to see. There's a number. I don't know it see. There's a number. I don't know it see. There's a number. I don't know it yet. It might be five. It might be 500, yet. It might be five. It might be 500, yet. It might be five. It might be 500, but there's a number, right? And so when but there's a number, right? And so when but there's a number, right? And so when you when you're with someone, that you when you're with someone, that you when you're with someone, that marriage is going to end. Every marriage is going to end. Every marriage is going to end. Every marriage ends. It ends in death or in divorce. ends. It ends in death or in divorce. ends. It ends in death or in divorce. It's one of the only things in the world It's one of the only things in the world It's one of the only things in the world that you go, I hope this ends in death. that you go, I hope this ends in death. that you go, I hope this ends in death. Like if you said to someone at their Like if you said to someone at their Like if you said to someone at their wedding like, "Man, I really hope your wedding like, "Man, I really hope your wedding like, "Man, I really hope your marriage ends in death." They would be marriage ends in death." They would be marriage ends in death." They would be like, "What is wrong with that guy?" But like, "What is wrong with that guy?" But like, "What is wrong with that guy?" But it's the truth because all marriages it's the truth because all marriages it's the truth because all marriages end. They end in death or divorce. I end. They end in death or divorce. I end. They end in death or divorce. I hope that yours ends in death. But you I hope that yours ends in death. But you I hope that yours ends in death. But you I don't think that makes it less don't think that makes it less don't think that makes it less beautiful. It makes it more beautiful beautiful. It makes it more beautiful beautiful. It makes it more beautiful that every day this person wakes up and that every day this person wakes up and that every day this person wakes up and decides to continue to be your spouse decides to continue to be your spouse decides to continue to be your spouse and to continue to be your partner and to continue to be your partner and to continue to be your partner and ideally your cheerleader and your, you ideally your cheerleader and your, you ideally your cheerleader and your, you know, your fan, you know, and to know, your fan, you know, and to know, your fan, you know, and to me, the fact that you don't own this me, the fact that you don't own this me, the fact that you don't own this person, that they have free will, they person, that they have free will, they person, that they have free will, they have autonomy and agency, and they have autonomy and agency, and they have autonomy and agency, and they choose you, not just on one day where choose you, not just on one day where choose you, not just on one day where you put on nice clothes and played good you put on nice clothes and played good you put on nice clothes and played good music and everybody got drunk, which is music and everybody got drunk, which is music and everybody got drunk, which is there's value in that and the memory of there's value in that and the memory of there's value in that and the memory of that and the photos of that and a that and the photos of that and a that and the photos of that and a reminder, but like the fact that they reminder, but like the fact that they reminder, but like the fact that they every day get up and continue to choose every day get up and continue to choose every day get up and continue to choose to be with you like that and if you to be with you like that and if you to be with you like that and if you said to me that the reason why they stay said to me that the reason why they stay said to me that the reason why they stay with you is they don't want to get with you is they don't want to get with you is they don't want to get divorced. Like that's a terrible reason. divorced. Like that's a terrible reason. divorced. Like that's a terrible reason. You know, I was a smoker many You know, I was a smoker many You know, I was a smoker many years ago. You know, people used to say years ago. You know, people used to say years ago. You know, people used to say like, "Oh, you got to quit smoking. You like, "Oh, you got to quit smoking. You like, "Oh, you got to quit smoking. You know, it takes it's going to take 10 know, it takes it's going to take 10 know, it takes it's going to take 10 years off your life." And I'm like, years off your life." And I'm like, years off your life." And I'm like, "Right, like the last 10 like the adult "Right, like the last 10 like the adult "Right, like the last 10 like the adult diaper wearing years. I don't want them diaper wearing years. I don't want them diaper wearing years. I don't want them anyway. Like you met a 90-year-old, like anyway. Like you met a 90-year-old, like anyway. Like you met a 90-year-old, like I don't want to be 90. It's fine. Like I don't want to be 90. It's fine. Like I don't want to be 90. It's fine. Like take you're taking them off the tail. take you're taking them off the tail. take you're taking them off the tail. Once I made the connection between I Once I made the connection between I Once I made the connection between I feel better, I taste food better, I can feel better, I taste food better, I can feel better, I taste food better, I can run further and faster. Then it made run further and faster. Then it made run further and faster. Then it made sense to me because now there's sense to me because now there's sense to me because now there's something real and tangible in the something real and tangible in the something real and tangible in the present. There's something that has present. There's something that has present. There's something that has value. So it's the same I think it's the value. So it's the same I think it's the value. So it's the same I think it's the same thing with marriage. It's the same thing with marriage. It's the same thing with marriage. It's the same thing with prenups, which is let's not thing with prenups, which is let's not thing with prenups, which is let's not talk about what is this going to give us talk about what is this going to give us talk about what is this going to give us on the back end or what are we going to on the back end or what are we going to on the back end or what are we going to lose if we don't have this on the back lose if we don't have this on the back lose if we don't have this on the back end. Let's talk about what can this do end. Let's talk about what can this do end. Let's talk about what can this do for us in the present? What can this for us in the present? What can this for us in the present? What can this conversation do for us in the present conversation do for us in the present conversation do for us in the present about understanding what we mean to each about understanding what we mean to each about understanding what we mean to each other and what we owe to each other? As other and what we owe to each other? As other and what we owe to each other? As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 many of you know, I've been taking AG1 many of you know, I've been taking AG1 daily for more than 13 years. However, daily for more than 13 years. However, daily for more than 13 years. However, I've now found an even better vitamin I've now found an even better vitamin I've now found an even better vitamin mineral probiotic drink. That new and mineral probiotic drink. That new and mineral probiotic drink. That new and better drink is the new and improved better drink is the new and improved better drink is the new and improved AG1, which just launched this month. AG1, which just launched this month. AG1, which just launched this month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is a more This nextgen formula from AG1 is a more This nextgen formula from AG1 is a more advanced clinically backed version of advanced clinically backed version of advanced clinically backed version of the product that I've been taking daily the product that I've been taking daily the product that I've been taking daily for years. It includes new bioavailable for years. It includes new bioavailable for years. It includes new bioavailable nutrients and enhanced probiotics. The nutrients and enhanced probiotics. The nutrients and enhanced probiotics. The NextG formula is based on exciting new NextG formula is based on exciting new NextG formula is based on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on research on the effects of probiotics on research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes the gut microbiome. And it now includes the gut microbiome. And it now includes several specific clinically studied several specific clinically studied several specific clinically studied probiotic strains that have been shown probiotic strains that have been shown probiotic strains that have been shown to support both digestive health and to support both digestive health and to support both digestive health and immune system health, as well as to immune system health, as well as to immune system health, as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce improve bowel regularity and to reduce improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. As someone who's been involved bloating. As someone who's been involved bloating. As someone who's been involved in research science for more than three in research science for more than three in research science for more than three decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I discovered and started performance. I discovered and started performance. I discovered and started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been I ever had a podcast, and I've been I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. I find that taking it every day since. I find that taking it every day since. I find that it greatly improves all aspects of my it greatly improves all aspects of my it greatly improves all aspects of my health. I just feel so much better when health. I just feel so much better when health. I just feel so much better when I take it. With each passing year, and I take it. With each passing year, and I take it. With each passing year, and by the way, I'm turning 50 this by the way, I'm turning 50 this by the way, I'm turning 50 this September, I continue to feel better and September, I continue to feel better and September, I continue to feel better and better, and I attribute a lot of that to better, and I attribute a lot of that to better, and I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 uses the highest quality AG1. AG1 uses the highest quality AG1. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, ingredients in the right combinations, ingredients in the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their and they're constantly improving their and they're constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. formulas without increasing the cost. formulas without increasing the cost. So, I'm honored to have them as a So, I'm honored to have them as a So, I'm honored to have them as a sponsor of this podcast. If you'd like sponsor of this podcast. If you'd like sponsor of this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an AG1 welcome kit with five free travel AG1 welcome kit with five free travel AG1 welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to K2. Again, go to K2. Again, go to drinka1.com/huberman to claim the drinka1.com/huberman to claim the drinka1.com/huberman to claim the special welcome kit with five free special welcome kit with five free special welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of travel packs and a free bottle of travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by ourplace. Our place brought to us by ourplace. Our place brought to us by ourplace. Our place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other makes my favorite pots, pans, and other makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are such as PASES or forever chemicals are such as PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as still found in 80% of non-stick pans as still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils, appliances, and well as utensils, appliances, and well as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As countless other kitchen products. As countless other kitchen products. As I've discussed before in this podcast, I've discussed before in this podcast, I've discussed before in this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like these PASES or forever chemicals like these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health Teflon have been linked to major health Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's really important to try and avoid them. really important to try and avoid them. really important to try and avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of our place. This is why I'm a huge fan of our place. This is why I'm a huge fan of our place. Our Place products are made with the Our Place products are made with the Our Place products are made with the highest quality materials and are all highest quality materials and are all highest quality materials and are all completely PAS and toxin-free. I completely PAS and toxin-free. I completely PAS and toxin-free. I especially love their Titanium Always especially love their Titanium Always especially love their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero made with zero chemicals and zero made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful forever This means it has no harmful forever This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose chemicals and does not degrade or lose chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's its non-stick effect over time. It's its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows for the every morning. The design allows for the every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking eggs to cook perfectly without sticking eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and to the pan. I also cook burgers and to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it, and it puts a really nice steaks in it, and it puts a really nice steaks in it, and it puts a really nice sear on the meat, but again, nothing sear on the meat, but again, nothing sear on the meat, but again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to sticks to it, so it's really easy to sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it, and I basically use it love it, and I basically use it love it, and I basically use it constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full line of titanium pro cookware that uses line of titanium pro cookware that uses line of titanium pro cookware that uses its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to go to go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the fromourplace.com/huberman and use the fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code huberman at checkout. Right now, code huberman at checkout. Right now, code huberman at checkout. Right now, ourplace is having their biggest sale of ourplace is having their biggest sale of ourplace is having their biggest sale of the season. You can get up to 30% off the season. You can get up to 30% off the season. You can get up to 30% off all products now through May 12th, 2025. all products now through May 12th, 2025. all products now through May 12th, 2025. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can try shipping, and free returns, you can try shipping, and free returns, you can try ourplace with zero risk and see why more ourplace with zero risk and see why more ourplace with zero risk and see why more than 1 million people have made the than 1 million people have made the than 1 million people have made the switch to ourplace kitchenware. Again, switch to ourplace kitchenware. Again, switch to ourplace kitchenware. Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman to get up to fromourplace.com/huberman to get up to fromourplace.com/huberman to get up to 30% off. I'm beginning to adopt a mindset off. I'm beginning to adopt a mindset off. I'm beginning to adopt a mindset around contracts that they are a tool to around contracts that they are a tool to around contracts that they are a tool to embrace reality, embrace reality, embrace reality, both potential negatives, but also to both potential negatives, but also to both potential negatives, but also to enrich the positives and imagination. I enrich the positives and imagination. I enrich the positives and imagination. I think imagination too. I think imagination too. I think imagination too. I think that marriage is about an imagined that marriage is about an imagined that marriage is about an imagined future, right? Like it's about we're future, right? Like it's about we're future, right? Like it's about we're going to build this thing. What's it going to build this thing. What's it going to build this thing. What's it look like? Like when you and your look like? Like when you and your look like? Like when you and your business partner sat down together, you business partner sat down together, you business partner sat down together, you had an imagination together. Like you had an imagination together. Like you had an imagination together. Like you weren't just like, "Okay, what are we weren't just like, "Okay, what are we weren't just like, "Okay, what are we going to do today? What are we building? going to do today? What are we building? going to do today? What are we building? What do we want it to be?" You know, and What do we want it to be?" You know, and What do we want it to be?" You know, and by the way, it never ends up being what by the way, it never ends up being what by the way, it never ends up being what you thought it would be. It it it's you thought it would be. It it it's you thought it would be. It it it's turns into something completely turns into something completely turns into something completely different. There was no premonition. I different. There was no premonition. I different. There was no premonition. I mean, that's a very different scenario. mean, that's a very different scenario. mean, that's a very different scenario. But but I don't think it's really even But but I don't think it's really even But but I don't think it's really even that different. I think that, you know, that different. I think that, you know, that different. I think that, you know, if you want to make God laugh, tell him if you want to make God laugh, tell him if you want to make God laugh, tell him your plans. Like, I think the best thing your plans. Like, I think the best thing your plans. Like, I think the best thing is this vague idea of like, what do we is this vague idea of like, what do we is this vague idea of like, what do we want to do? I don't know. some we wanted want to do? I don't know. some we wanted want to do? I don't know. some we wanted to do something exciting together. I to do something exciting together. I to do something exciting together. I don't know what exactly what's going to don't know what exactly what's going to don't know what exactly what's going to look like. I think this is the loose look like. I think this is the loose look like. I think this is the loose structure, but I don't know exactly what structure, but I don't know exactly what structure, but I don't know exactly what it is. Like, you know, you and I are it is. Like, you know, you and I are it is. Like, you know, you and I are friends. Like, we didn't talk about what friends. Like, we didn't talk about what friends. Like, we didn't talk about what we're going to talk about today, right? we're going to talk about today, right? we're going to talk about today, right? You know, we talked a dozen times, but You know, we talked a dozen times, but You know, we talked a dozen times, but we didn't go say, "So, what should we didn't go say, "So, what should we didn't go say, "So, what should we talk about when we're Why?" Because I talk about when we're Why?" Because I talk about when we're Why?" Because I think if we did, it wouldn't be think if we did, it wouldn't be think if we did, it wouldn't be authentic. Like, there's something so authentic. Like, there's something so authentic. Like, there's something so much better about like, yeah, we want to much better about like, yeah, we want to much better about like, yeah, we want to have a good conversation, something of have a good conversation, something of have a good conversation, something of value, something we'll both enjoy and value, something we'll both enjoy and value, something we'll both enjoy and then maybe the people watching would then maybe the people watching would then maybe the people watching would enjoy, you know? So, that's so much enjoy, you know? So, that's so much enjoy, you know? So, that's so much better. And and I think that's what better. And and I think that's what better. And and I think that's what you're doing with a prenup or with you're doing with a prenup or with you're doing with a prenup or with a marriage is you're imagining a future a marriage is you're imagining a future a marriage is you're imagining a future together. Okay. What does it look like? together. Okay. What does it look like? together. Okay. What does it look like? Tell me. So it's not just about the rule Tell me. So it's not just about the rule Tell me. So it's not just about the rule outs. Like I think about um you know outs. Like I think about um you know outs. Like I think about um you know certain guidelines like in uh in the certain guidelines like in uh in the certain guidelines like in uh in the octagon it's you know no groin shots you octagon it's you know no groin shots you octagon it's you know no groin shots you know no thumbing eyes. Um so there's all know no thumbing eyes. Um so there's all know no thumbing eyes. Um so there's all the this is not going to happen type the this is not going to happen type the this is not going to happen type stuff and there's reasons for each of stuff and there's reasons for each of stuff and there's reasons for each of those. No matter what, X, Y, and Z are those. No matter what, X, Y, and Z are those. No matter what, X, Y, and Z are off the table. That makes people feel off the table. That makes people feel off the table. That makes people feel safe, right? Because you want to know safe, right? Because you want to know safe, right? Because you want to know that certain very dangerous things are that certain very dangerous things are that certain very dangerous things are off the table. But what you're talking off the table. But what you're talking off the table. But what you're talking about are a number of optins through about are a number of optins through about are a number of optins through contracts and prenups. Sure. And also contracts and prenups. Sure. And also contracts and prenups. Sure. And also markers like markers of Look, you spend markers like markers of Look, you spend markers like markers of Look, you spend so much time, one of the reasons I so much time, one of the reasons I so much time, one of the reasons I consume so much of what you put out consume so much of what you put out consume so much of what you put out there is I like to know the markers there is I like to know the markers there is I like to know the markers before I have the problem. Like I like before I have the problem. Like I like before I have the problem. Like I like to know like what are the things what to know like what are the things what to know like what are the things what are the you know measure what matters are the you know measure what matters are the you know measure what matters right like I want to look at what right like I want to look at what right like I want to look at what has changed and then what can I do to has changed and then what can I do to has changed and then what can I do to adjust at that point and I think adjust at that point and I think adjust at that point and I think relationships it's the same thing like relationships it's the same thing like relationships it's the same thing like by the time you're in my office it's too by the time you're in my office it's too by the time you're in my office it's too late like it is so much harder to take a late like it is so much harder to take a late like it is so much harder to take a broken relationship and try to make it broken relationship and try to make it broken relationship and try to make it good again than it is to take a good again than it is to take a good again than it is to take a good relationship and keep it good and keep relationship and keep it good and keep relationship and keep it good and keep it strong. Like it's so much harder to it strong. Like it's so much harder to it strong. Like it's so much harder to g, you know, gain a bunch of weight and g, you know, gain a bunch of weight and g, you know, gain a bunch of weight and then try to lose all of it than it is to then try to lose all of it than it is to then try to lose all of it than it is to maintain a healthy body mass. Like it's maintain a healthy body mass. Like it's maintain a healthy body mass. Like it's just easier. So I think the same concept just easier. So I think the same concept just easier. So I think the same concept applies, which is be honest with applies, which is be honest with applies, which is be honest with yourself about what it is we're moving yourself about what it is we're moving yourself about what it is we're moving towards and what it is we're building towards and what it is we're building towards and what it is we're building and how do we stay at this place. I and how do we stay at this place. I and how do we stay at this place. I don't like to just have it's not just don't like to just have it's not just don't like to just have it's not just about the opt outs like, okay, if we're about the opt outs like, okay, if we're about the opt outs like, okay, if we're split up, we're not going to have to split up, we're not going to have to split up, we're not going to have to hire lawyers and we're not going to have hire lawyers and we're not going to have hire lawyers and we're not going to have to go through the court system. we're to go through the court system. we're to go through the court system. we're going to know what the rules are. going to know what the rules are. going to know what the rules are. There's value to that, but there's also There's value to that, but there's also There's value to that, but there's also tremendous value to the conversation tremendous value to the conversation tremendous value to the conversation about what do we owe each other? What about what do we owe each other? What about what do we owe each other? What are we bringing to this rel because are we bringing to this rel because are we bringing to this rel because that's where the economy piece of it that's where the economy piece of it that's where the economy piece of it comes in, which is, you know, and this comes in, which is, you know, and this comes in, which is, you know, and this is the part it's so laden with gender is the part it's so laden with gender is the part it's so laden with gender stuff and it's laden that no one wants stuff and it's laden that no one wants stuff and it's laden that no one wants to talk about it or it doesn't feel safe to talk about it or it doesn't feel safe to talk about it or it doesn't feel safe to talk about it or to talk about it to talk about it or to talk about it to talk about it or to talk about it honestly. Hence 56%. Yeah, I think so. I honestly. Hence 56%. Yeah, I think so. I honestly. Hence 56%. Yeah, I think so. I think we are poorer for that dishonesty think we are poorer for that dishonesty think we are poorer for that dishonesty because I think I understand it's an because I think I understand it's an because I think I understand it's an uncomfortable truth. I understand that uncomfortable truth. I understand that uncomfortable truth. I understand that it's difficult to say like yeah I don't it's difficult to say like yeah I don't it's difficult to say like yeah I don't know there's something in me that wants know there's something in me that wants know there's something in me that wants it this way. Like I don't know what it this way. Like I don't know what it this way. Like I don't know what it is. I don't know if it's biology. I is. I don't know if it's biology. I is. I don't know if it's biology. I don't know if it's hormones. I don't know if it's hormones. I don't know if it's hormones. I don't know. But like I this is important to know. But like I this is important to know. But like I this is important to me. Like yeah I want to have a me. Like yeah I want to have a me. Like yeah I want to have a fulfilling sexual relationship with you fulfilling sexual relationship with you fulfilling sexual relationship with you but we want different things sexually. but we want different things sexually. but we want different things sexually. Like I want frequency. You want you know Like I want frequency. You want you know Like I want frequency. You want you know you want intensity. like whatever it you want intensity. like whatever it you want intensity. like whatever it might be like the male sex drive, the might be like the male sex drive, the might be like the male sex drive, the female sex drive, like I they're not female sex drive, like I they're not female sex drive, like I they're not the same. Hormonally, they're not the same. Hormonally, they're not the same. Hormonally, they're not the same. So, is it okay to have a same. So, is it okay to have a same. So, is it okay to have a conversation about, hey, if we're conversation about, hey, if we're conversation about, hey, if we're marrying each other, we have a sexual marrying each other, we have a sexual marrying each other, we have a sexual relationship usually. And so, where it's relationship usually. And so, where it's relationship usually. And so, where it's at right now is good, I'd imagine. So, at right now is good, I'd imagine. So, at right now is good, I'd imagine. So, how do we know when we're slipping off how do we know when we're slipping off how do we know when we're slipping off baseline? And how do we know where and baseline? And how do we know where and baseline? And how do we know where and by the way, how do we know where when we by the way, how do we know where when we by the way, how do we know where when we slip off baseline? It's not a sign of slip off baseline? It's not a sign of slip off baseline? It's not a sign of disaster, right? Like if I'm 8 years disaster, right? Like if I'm 8 years disaster, right? Like if I'm 8 years old and my eyesight starts to get really old and my eyesight starts to get really old and my eyesight starts to get really bad, it's probably more alarming than if bad, it's probably more alarming than if bad, it's probably more alarming than if I'm 52 and now I need reading glasses. I'm 52 and now I need reading glasses. I'm 52 and now I need reading glasses. Like these are more normal things, Like these are more normal things, Like these are more normal things, right? So why not say like, hey, I'm not right? So why not say like, hey, I'm not right? So why not say like, hey, I'm not saying the amount of sex we're having saying the amount of sex we're having saying the amount of sex we're having when we're dating or engaged is the when we're dating or engaged is the when we're dating or engaged is the baseline and if we ever slip off of baseline and if we ever slip off of baseline and if we ever slip off of that, it means that the relationship's that, it means that the relationship's that, it means that the relationship's in trouble. That's an insane statement. in trouble. That's an insane statement. in trouble. That's an insane statement. So do prenups include discussions or So do prenups include discussions or So do prenups include discussions or agreements about sex, money? They can agreements about sex, money? They can agreements about sex, money? They can money for sure, sex they can. And and I money for sure, sex they can. And and I money for sure, sex they can. And and I think the overall conversation that think the overall conversation that think the overall conversation that should surround prenups and the reason should surround prenups and the reason should surround prenups and the reason why I think people who get prenups in my why I think people who get prenups in my why I think people who get prenups in my observation are less likely to get observation are less likely to get observation are less likely to get divorced is at the front of this thing. divorced is at the front of this thing. divorced is at the front of this thing. You are having conversations about what You are having conversations about what You are having conversations about what do we owe each other? What do we expect do we owe each other? What do we expect do we owe each other? What do we expect from each other? What is meaningful to from each other? What is meaningful to from each other? What is meaningful to us about each other? What value do you us about each other? What value do you us about each other? What value do you bring to my life? Like, why can we do bring to my life? Like, why can we do bring to my life? Like, why can we do that in any other relationship? Like, that in any other relationship? Like, that in any other relationship? Like, if right now you as my friend, someone if right now you as my friend, someone if right now you as my friend, someone said, "Why do you like Andrew Huberman said, "Why do you like Andrew Huberman said, "Why do you like Andrew Huberman as a friend?" I could run off a list as a friend?" I could run off a list as a friend?" I could run off a list of things. He's super interesting. He's of things. He's super interesting. He's of things. He's super interesting. He's super interested. He knows a lot of cool super interested. He knows a lot of cool super interested. He knows a lot of cool workout stuff. He's a lot of fun to hang workout stuff. He's a lot of fun to hang workout stuff. He's a lot of fun to hang out with. He eats the same way that I out with. He eats the same way that I out with. He eats the same way that I do, like kind of boring. He doesn't do, like kind of boring. He doesn't do, like kind of boring. He doesn't drink just like me, so we can hang out. drink just like me, so we can hang out. drink just like me, so we can hang out. I don't feel weird cuz I'm not drinking I don't feel weird cuz I'm not drinking I don't feel weird cuz I'm not drinking cuz he's not either. Like, there's a cuz he's not either. Like, there's a cuz he's not either. Like, there's a whole list of stuff I could say. I say whole list of stuff I could say. I say whole list of stuff I could say. I say the exact same things about you except the exact same things about you except the exact same things about you except you know a bunch of stuff I don't know you know a bunch of stuff I don't know you know a bunch of stuff I don't know in addition to that. But you know we're in addition to that. But you know we're in addition to that. But you know we're interested we're interesting. Our interested we're interesting. Our interested we're interesting. Our friendship makes sense, right? So why? friendship makes sense, right? So why? friendship makes sense, right? So why? And by the way, isn't it lovely to hear And by the way, isn't it lovely to hear And by the way, isn't it lovely to hear what someone likes about you? Like I what someone likes about you? Like I what someone likes about you? Like I think it's one of the nicest things in think it's one of the nicest things in think it's one of the nicest things in the world when somebody says, "You know the world when somebody says, "You know the world when somebody says, "You know what I like about you, Jim? I'm all what I like about you, Jim? I'm all what I like about you, Jim? I'm all ears. Tell me." You know, or if someone ears. Tell me." You know, or if someone ears. Tell me." You know, or if someone who I love and trust and know, like I who I love and trust and know, like I who I love and trust and know, like I know you're my friend. So if you called know you're my friend. So if you called know you're my friend. So if you called me and you said, you know, Jim, can I me and you said, you know, Jim, can I me and you said, you know, Jim, can I give you some constructive feedback? give you some constructive feedback? give you some constructive feedback? like something I think you're doing like something I think you're doing like something I think you're doing that's getting in your own way. Dude, I that's getting in your own way. Dude, I that's getting in your own way. Dude, I would be all ears. I would be all ears. would be all ears. I would be all ears. would be all ears. I would be all ears. I would want to hear that. You've made I would want to hear that. You've made I would want to hear that. You've made that call to me a couple of times. Yes. that call to me a couple of times. Yes. that call to me a couple of times. Yes. Turning client privilege. I can't bring Turning client privilege. I can't bring Turning client privilege. I can't bring it up. But yeah, I mean I think it up. But yeah, I mean I think it up. But yeah, I mean I think there's something that's an event in a there's something that's an event in a there's something that's an event in a couple's life, right? So why in this couple's life, right? So why in this couple's life, right? So why in this in this romantic context would you in this romantic context would you in this romantic context would you squander the opportunity to have that squander the opportunity to have that squander the opportunity to have that conversation? Here's what you bring to conversation? Here's what you bring to conversation? Here's what you bring to my life. Here's how you make me feel. my life. Here's how you make me feel. my life. Here's how you make me feel. Here's when I feel the most loved. Here's when I feel the most loved. Here's when I feel the most loved. Here's when I feel not as loved by you. Here's when I feel not as loved by you. Here's when I feel not as loved by you. I think it's because when people hear I think it's because when people hear I think it's because when people hear the word prenup, they're thinking the word prenup, they're thinking the word prenup, they're thinking ending. It's about the ending. It's what ending. It's about the ending. It's what ending. It's about the ending. It's what you It's the contract that is going to you It's the contract that is going to you It's the contract that is going to divide the resources so we don't have to divide the resources so we don't have to divide the resources so we don't have to give a certain amount to the lawyers. give a certain amount to the lawyers. give a certain amount to the lawyers. Everyone's going to feel safe. You don't Everyone's going to feel safe. You don't Everyone's going to feel safe. You don't have to worry that you're going to end have to worry that you're going to end have to worry that you're going to end up with whatever less than there is up with whatever less than there is up with whatever less than there is value to that. But I don't think I don't value to that. But I don't think I don't value to that. But I don't think I don't think I could be wrong, but I don't think I could be wrong, but I don't think I could be wrong, but I don't think most people associate the word think most people associate the word think most people associate the word prenup with anything about the success prenup with anything about the success prenup with anything about the success of the marriage, which is probably why of the marriage, which is probably why of the marriage, which is probably why so few people get them. Is there any so few people get them. Is there any so few people get them. Is there any idea roughly what percentage? No. What's idea roughly what percentage? No. What's idea roughly what percentage? No. What's amazing about a prenup is a prenup is amazing about a prenup is a prenup is amazing about a prenup is a prenup is not filed anywhere. It's just you have not filed anywhere. It's just you have not filed anywhere. It's just you have one in your safe, the lawyer has one in one in your safe, the lawyer has one in one in your safe, the lawyer has one in their safe. It's a contract. And is it their safe. It's a contract. And is it their safe. It's a contract. And is it as binding as anything else? Oh, as binding as anything else? Oh, as binding as anything else? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Because we know nowadays yeah. Oh, yeah. Because we know nowadays yeah. Oh, yeah. Because we know nowadays things like NDAs are kind of fluid. No, things like NDAs are kind of fluid. No, things like NDAs are kind of fluid. No, NDAs are fluid because NDAs are a NDAs are fluid because NDAs are a NDAs are fluid because NDAs are a relatively new construct and they relatively new construct and they relatively new construct and they haven't really been tested. Just like haven't really been tested. Just like haven't really been tested. Just like non-competes, there was a period of time non-competes, there was a period of time non-competes, there was a period of time where non-competes were like they were where non-competes were like they were where non-competes were like they were overly broad and they weren't worth the overly broad and they weren't worth the overly broad and they weren't worth the paper they were printed on and then paper they were printed on and then paper they were printed on and then people tried to tailor them. And now, people tried to tailor them. And now, people tried to tailor them. And now, you know, non-competes that are specific you know, non-competes that are specific you know, non-competes that are specific as to geography and duration like, you as to geography and duration like, you as to geography and duration like, you know, the court system, the living law know, the court system, the living law know, the court system, the living law figures out, okay, here's how we have to figures out, okay, here's how we have to figures out, okay, here's how we have to tweak it. Prenups, the same thing tweak it. Prenups, the same thing tweak it. Prenups, the same thing happened. There was a lot of prenups happened. There was a lot of prenups happened. There was a lot of prenups back in the day used to get tossed out, back in the day used to get tossed out, back in the day used to get tossed out, but for the 25 years I've been but for the 25 years I've been but for the 25 years I've been practicing, trust me, I've had a couple practicing, trust me, I've had a couple practicing, trust me, I've had a couple of prenups I've tried to set aside and of prenups I've tried to set aside and of prenups I've tried to set aside and I've been unsuccessful and I'm a good I've been unsuccessful and I'm a good I've been unsuccessful and I'm a good lawyer, but it's very hard to set aside lawyer, but it's very hard to set aside lawyer, but it's very hard to set aside a properly drafted prenup, you know, and a properly drafted prenup, you know, and a properly drafted prenup, you know, and I think that that's a good thing because I think that that's a good thing because I think that that's a good thing because again, the framing needs to change, again, the framing needs to change, again, the framing needs to change, which is everyone has a prenup. It's which is everyone has a prenup. It's which is everyone has a prenup. It's either written by the government and either written by the government and either written by the government and subject to change by the government subject to change by the government subject to change by the government without notice to you and then you can't without notice to you and then you can't without notice to you and then you can't opt out of the new rule set or it's one opt out of the new rule set or it's one opt out of the new rule set or it's one that you and your partner draft that you and your partner draft that you and your partner draft together. I want to return to prenups um and I want to return to prenups um and I want to return to prenups um and unfortunately to divorce but uh I'd like unfortunately to divorce but uh I'd like unfortunately to divorce but uh I'd like to talk about love and the contracts to talk about love and the contracts to talk about love and the contracts both emotional and practical around love both emotional and practical around love both emotional and practical around love a bit more. Sure. Do you think people a bit more. Sure. Do you think people a bit more. Sure. Do you think people are completely honest with themselves are completely honest with themselves are completely honest with themselves and with the other person when they and with the other person when they and with the other person when they decide to get married or simply to become quote to get married or simply to become quote to get married or simply to become quote unquote life partners or to just become unquote life partners or to just become unquote life partners or to just become partners? I mean, do you think that part partners? I mean, do you think that part partners? I mean, do you think that part of the um the allure of the dopamine of the um the allure of the dopamine of the um the allure of the dopamine oxytocin pheromone social crow uh cloud, oxytocin pheromone social crow uh cloud, oxytocin pheromone social crow uh cloud, excuse me, and all that goes with it? I excuse me, and all that goes with it? I excuse me, and all that goes with it? I mean, what's more fun than leaving the mean, what's more fun than leaving the mean, what's more fun than leaving the bedroom with someone you're totally bedroom with someone you're totally bedroom with someone you're totally crazy about, showering up, and heading crazy about, showering up, and heading crazy about, showering up, and heading out. Yeah. And going to see friends. out. Yeah. And going to see friends. out. Yeah. And going to see friends. Yeah. And you're happy, they're happy, Yeah. And you're happy, they're happy, Yeah. And you're happy, they're happy, and then going back home again. Repeat. and then going back home again. Repeat. and then going back home again. Repeat. Like, there are very few things that Like, there are very few things that Like, there are very few things that are as um from the other side of that are as um from the other side of that are as um from the other side of the fence to uh to see a couple that's the fence to uh to see a couple that's the fence to uh to see a couple that's really happy and in love. And you don't really happy and in love. And you don't really happy and in love. And you don't need to know or care about what they do need to know or care about what they do need to know or care about what they do in private. You just you can feel how in private. You just you can feel how in private. You just you can feel how much they adore one another. You feel much they adore one another. You feel much they adore one another. You feel the vibe off of them. Yeah. I mean, I the vibe off of them. Yeah. I mean, I the vibe off of them. Yeah. I mean, I think there's a pheromone effect of think there's a pheromone effect of think there's a pheromone effect of that. I mean, and there's really serious that. I mean, and there's really serious that. I mean, and there's really serious primate biology that supports all that primate biology that supports all that primate biology that supports all that we don't even have to discuss. We that we don't even have to discuss. We that we don't even have to discuss. We can just kind of like put that one on can just kind of like put that one on can just kind of like put that one on the shelf and everyone knows what we're the shelf and everyone knows what we're the shelf and everyone knows what we're talking about. But, you know, underneath talking about. But, you know, underneath talking about. But, you know, underneath there is um like you said, our needs. there is um like you said, our needs. there is um like you said, our needs. Needs that in the future um somebody Needs that in the future um somebody Needs that in the future um somebody might not feel are being met. Sure. And might not feel are being met. Sure. And might not feel are being met. Sure. And that sort of thing. It's hard to that sort of thing. It's hard to that sort of thing. It's hard to anticipate one's needs too, especially anticipate one's needs too, especially anticipate one's needs too, especially if it's a first relationship or third if it's a first relationship or third if it's a first relationship or third relationship. You know, you need some relationship. You know, you need some relationship. You know, you need some And sometimes you know you meet the And sometimes you know you meet the And sometimes you know you meet the right person at 18 and that's a right person at 18 and that's a right person at 18 and that's a beautiful thing. Oh yeah. So to ext Yeah. and let alone express them. Yeah. and let alone express them. Yeah. and let alone express them. Yeah. I think I've always said that the most I think I've always said that the most I think I've always said that the most dangerous lies are the lies we tell dangerous lies are the lies we tell dangerous lies are the lies we tell ourselves. And I' I say in my book that ourselves. And I' I say in my book that ourselves. And I' I say in my book that all marriage problems stem from two that all marriage problems stem from two that all marriage problems stem from two underlying problems. We don't know what underlying problems. We don't know what underlying problems. We don't know what we want and we don't know how to express we want and we don't know how to express we want and we don't know how to express what we want. Even if we know what we what we want. Even if we know what we what we want. Even if we know what we want, we don't know how to express it to want, we don't know how to express it to want, we don't know how to express it to our partner. And I think those are two our partner. And I think those are two our partner. And I think those are two really different but deeply really different but deeply really different but deeply correlated problems. I think one of the problems. I think one of the problems. I think one of the great mistakes we great mistakes we great mistakes we make is I think we fall in love very fast in is I think we fall in love very fast in is I think we fall in love very fast in what we call love. Right? I mean, I'm what we call love. Right? I mean, I'm what we call love. Right? I mean, I'm fuzzy on the whole love concept because fuzzy on the whole love concept because fuzzy on the whole love concept because a lot of what's described as love is a lot of what's described as love is a lot of what's described as love is like something that, you know, was like something that, you know, was like something that, you know, was designed in the 1950s to sell shampoo. designed in the 1950s to sell shampoo. designed in the 1950s to sell shampoo. Like I don't I don't this idea of like Like I don't I don't this idea of like Like I don't I don't this idea of like you meet this one person and then that you meet this one person and then that you meet this one person and then that person you're going to be your soulmate. person you're going to be your soulmate. person you're going to be your soulmate. Like whoever created the term soulmate, Like whoever created the term soulmate, Like whoever created the term soulmate, I owe them a tremendous amount of money. I owe them a tremendous amount of money. I owe them a tremendous amount of money. Well, in some religions, there's Well, in some religions, there's Well, in some religions, there's actually a word for the god the god actually a word for the god the god actually a word for the god the god designated choice. Yeah. Like my designated choice. Yeah. Like my designated choice. Yeah. Like my bashert, my fate, right? The god-given bashert, my fate, right? The god-given bashert, my fate, right? The god-given choice. singular person that is going to choice. singular person that is going to choice. singular person that is going to meet that need. But even if you meet that need. But even if you meet that need. But even if you were to say, okay, this is person's been were to say, okay, this is person's been were to say, okay, this is person's been selected by an omnipotent creator deity, selected by an omnipotent creator deity, selected by an omnipotent creator deity, that's at least more reasonable than that's at least more reasonable than that's at least more reasonable than saying, I've met this one person and saying, I've met this one person and saying, I've met this one person and they are now going to be the best they are now going to be the best they are now going to be the best friend, best co-parent, best roommate, friend, best co-parent, best roommate, friend, best co-parent, best roommate, best travel partner, best sexual best travel partner, best sexual best travel partner, best sexual partner, best confidant, best financial partner, best confidant, best financial partner, best confidant, best financial partner. Wait, all of those? like all partner. Wait, all of those? like all partner. Wait, all of those? like all they're gonna they're gonna check all of they're gonna they're gonna check all of they're gonna they're gonna check all of those and they happen to live three those and they happen to live three those and they happen to live three miles from you like and go to the same miles from you like and go to the same miles from you like and go to the same coffee shop in a world of eight billion coffee shop in a world of eight billion coffee shop in a world of eight billion people. Like what are the odds? Like I people. Like what are the odds? Like I people. Like what are the odds? Like I would definitely believe in God if would definitely believe in God if would definitely believe in God if that's the reality. But the truth is I that's the reality. But the truth is I that's the reality. But the truth is I don't think it's like that. I think it's don't think it's like that. I think it's don't think it's like that. I think it's a combination of pherommones and it's a combination of pherommones and it's a combination of pherommones and it's a combination of dopamine. And look, I combination of dopamine. And look, I combination of dopamine. And look, I like I get it. Like I get it. I get it. like I get it. Like I get it. I get it. like I get it. Like I get it. I get it. But why do we have to look at it But why do we have to look at it But why do we have to look at it like those early days of a relationship like those early days of a relationship like those early days of a relationship where you look, we've both been in love, where you look, we've both been in love, where you look, we've both been in love, we've both been in a romantic we've both been in a romantic we've both been in a romantic relationship where just the person relationship where just the person relationship where just the person brushes up next to you or the scent of brushes up next to you or the scent of brushes up next to you or the scent of them hits you and it's like an electric them hits you and it's like an electric them hits you and it's like an electric shock through you. It's magic. It's shock through you. It's magic. It's shock through you. It's magic. It's just the greatest drug in the world. And just the greatest drug in the world. And just the greatest drug in the world. And you ju But if that stayed forever, And you ju But if that stayed forever, And you ju But if that stayed forever, you would never get anything done. Like you would never get anything done. Like you would never get anything done. Like civilization would perish because we civilization would perish because we civilization would perish because we would all just want to sit there would all just want to sit there would all just want to sit there smelling someone's hair all day. Like we smelling someone's hair all day. Like we smelling someone's hair all day. Like we would just want to be around each other would just want to be around each other would just want to be around each other all day. And by the way, not just how we all day. And by the way, not just how we all day. And by the way, not just how we feel about them, how they make us feel about them, how they make us feel about them, how they make us feel about ourselves. Like why do you think about ourselves. Like why do you think about ourselves. Like why do you think affairs are so intoxicating? because affairs are so intoxicating? because affairs are so intoxicating? because you've been in this relationship with you've been in this relationship with you've been in this relationship with this person and they don't even see you this person and they don't even see you this person and they don't even see you anymore and you don't even see them anymore and you don't even see them anymore and you don't even see them anymore. And then you meet this other anymore. And then you meet this other anymore. And then you meet this other person and they're like, "You're person and they're like, "You're person and they're like, "You're fascinating. You're brilliant. You're fascinating. You're brilliant. You're fascinating. You're brilliant. You're handsome. You're" and all of a handsome. You're" and all of a handsome. You're" and all of a sudden you start to feel brilliant and sudden you start to feel brilliant and sudden you start to feel brilliant and handsome again. Why? Because the handsome again. Why? Because the handsome again. Why? Because the observed, right? Like you're observed, right? Like you're observed, right? Like you're seeing yourself through the lens of this seeing yourself through the lens of this seeing yourself through the lens of this person's gaze. Esther Pel when she was person's gaze. Esther Pel when she was person's gaze. Esther Pel when she was sitting in the same seat you're sitting in the same seat you're sitting in the same seat you're sitting in now said that 90% of affairs um in now said that 90% of affairs um in now said that 90% of affairs um people describe as um they did them they people describe as um they did them they people describe as um they did them they had those affairs because they made them had those affairs because they made them had those affairs because they made them feel quote unquote alive. There was an feel quote unquote alive. There was an feel quote unquote alive. There was an aliveness that was in stark contrast to aliveness that was in stark contrast to aliveness that was in stark contrast to the deadness or lack of aliveness in the deadness or lack of aliveness in the deadness or lack of aliveness in the in the and it's not a justification. She in the and it's not a justification. She in the and it's not a justification. She was we were discussing the you know so was we were discussing the you know so was we were discussing the you know so what is the underlying thing that what is the underlying thing that what is the underlying thing that they're seeking? Is it sex? Is it they're seeking? Is it sex? Is it they're seeking? Is it sex? Is it adventure? And in some cases it might be adventure? And in some cases it might be adventure? And in some cases it might be well her book you redefining infidelity well her book you redefining infidelity well her book you redefining infidelity like all of her writing I she and I were like all of her writing I she and I were like all of her writing I she and I were on a panel together some years ago and on a panel together some years ago and on a panel together some years ago and um I mean I think she's a brilliant um I mean I think she's a brilliant um I mean I think she's a brilliant mind and she has an insight brilliant mind and she has an insight brilliant mind and she has an insight into the nature of infidelity and human into the nature of infidelity and human into the nature of infidelity and human relationships, romantic relationships. relationships, romantic relationships. relationships, romantic relationships. But again she's saying the quiet part But again she's saying the quiet part But again she's saying the quiet part out loud and I again I don't think she's out loud and I again I don't think she's out loud and I again I don't think she's not a romantic. I don't think that she not a romantic. I don't think that she not a romantic. I don't think that she doesn't believe in love. Like when doesn't believe in love. Like when doesn't believe in love. Like when someone says to me, "Well, do you someone says to me, "Well, do you someone says to me, "Well, do you believe in love?" It's like it's like do believe in love?" It's like it's like do believe in love?" It's like it's like do you believe in oxygen? Like it's all you believe in oxygen? Like it's all you believe in oxygen? Like it's all around me. Love like love's all around me. Love like love's all around me. Love like love's all around me. It's everywhere. It's I guess the me. It's everywhere. It's I guess the me. It's everywhere. It's I guess the question is do you believe in the in the question is do you believe in the in the question is do you believe in the in the potential permanence of romance and potential permanence of romance and potential permanence of romance and love? Yes. Because with the same love? Yes. Because with the same love? Yes. Because with the same person. Yes. Cuz I've seen it just like person. Yes. Cuz I've seen it just like person. Yes. Cuz I've seen it just like you have. It's just it's a rare and you have. It's just it's a rare and you have. It's just it's a rare and special thing. You know, one of the special thing. You know, one of the special thing. You know, one of the things I' I've said before and I get things I' I've said before and I get things I' I've said before and I get pillaried for it every time I say it pillaried for it every time I say it pillaried for it every time I say it because people want to misinterpret it because people want to misinterpret it because people want to misinterpret it intentionally is that marriage is like intentionally is that marriage is like intentionally is that marriage is like the lottery. You are probably not going the lottery. You are probably not going the lottery. You are probably not going to win. But if you win, what you win is to win. But if you win, what you win is to win. But if you win, what you win is so good that you might as well buy a so good that you might as well buy a so good that you might as well buy a ticket. Like give it a try. Like give it ticket. Like give it a try. Like give it ticket. Like give it a try. Like give it a shot. Again, with a prenup, then your a shot. Again, with a prenup, then your a shot. Again, with a prenup, then your downside is controlled to some degree. downside is controlled to some degree. downside is controlled to some degree. But I am offend now. People take that But I am offend now. People take that But I am offend now. People take that quote and go, "Oh, well, so you're quote and go, "Oh, well, so you're quote and go, "Oh, well, so you're saying that it's random. Like you can't saying that it's random. Like you can't saying that it's random. Like you can't do anything to increase your chances of do anything to increase your chances of do anything to increase your chances of winning the lottery of buying more winning the lottery of buying more winning the lottery of buying more tickets. Like marriage is it's a tickets. Like marriage is it's a tickets. Like marriage is it's a practice. It's work. It's" And when practice. It's work. It's" And when practice. It's work. It's" And when people say to me like, "Well, marriage people say to me like, "Well, marriage people say to me like, "Well, marriage is hard work. Marriage is hard." Like I is hard work. Marriage is hard." Like I is hard work. Marriage is hard." Like I don't know what you're talking about. I don't know what you're talking about. I don't know what you're talking about. I don't know that love has to be hard I don't know that love has to be hard I don't know that love has to be hard work. Like there's so much that we put work. Like there's so much that we put work. Like there's so much that we put on love that romantic love that just on love that romantic love that just on love that romantic love that just doesn't make sense as far as I'm doesn't make sense as far as I'm doesn't make sense as far as I'm concerned by observable experience. If concerned by observable experience. If concerned by observable experience. If you watch people who are happily you watch people who are happily you watch people who are happily married, they're cheering for each married, they're cheering for each married, they're cheering for each other. They enjoy each other's company. other. They enjoy each other's company. other. They enjoy each other's company. But again, are they dealing with those But again, are they dealing with those But again, are they dealing with those early days intoxication to the point early days intoxication to the point early days intoxication to the point where if the other person starts where if the other person starts where if the other person starts speaking, they lose their train of speaking, they lose their train of speaking, they lose their train of thought? No. because they're building thought? No. because they're building thought? No. because they're building the life and a family and an ecosystem the life and a family and an ecosystem the life and a family and an ecosystem in the home together and you know they in the home together and you know they in the home together and you know they have to divide responsibilities as but have to divide responsibilities as but have to divide responsibilities as but that those two things do not have to be that those two things do not have to be that those two things do not have to be incompatible with each other. But you incompatible with each other. But you incompatible with each other. But you cannot throw into that equation cannot throw into that equation cannot throw into that equation ignorance and refu willful ignorance and refu willful ignorance and refu willful blindness to the reality of the blindness to the reality of the blindness to the reality of the impermanence of love and the fragility impermanence of love and the fragility impermanence of love and the fragility of love. Like my of love. Like my of love. Like my career is about the fragility of love. career is about the fragility of love. career is about the fragility of love. And why can't we talk about this And why can't we talk about this And why can't we talk about this fragile thing and treat it like you fragile thing and treat it like you fragile thing and treat it like you treat a fragile thing? Like why not treat a fragile thing? Like why not treat a fragile thing? Like why not treat love like what it is? It's treat love like what it is? It's treat love like what it is? It's something that's so amazing, powerful, something that's so amazing, powerful, something that's so amazing, powerful, and beautiful that it takes sucks the and beautiful that it takes sucks the and beautiful that it takes sucks the reason right out of our heads. And all reason right out of our heads. And all reason right out of our heads. And all you want to do is be with this person you want to do is be with this person you want to do is be with this person and tuck in and just what do you and tuck in and just what do you and tuck in and just what do you want to do tonight? Do you want to go to want to do tonight? Do you want to go to want to do tonight? Do you want to go to the greatest concert in the greatest the greatest concert in the greatest the greatest concert in the greatest venue and sit in the front row or just venue and sit in the front row or just venue and sit in the front row or just sit with this person and like watch sit with this person and like watch sit with this person and like watch something on Netflix and eat some something on Netflix and eat some something on Netflix and eat some popcorn? Yep. I'll take that. I'll take popcorn? Yep. I'll take that. I'll take popcorn? Yep. I'll take that. I'll take that cuz it's the best thing. Right. that cuz it's the best thing. Right. that cuz it's the best thing. Right. Well, the friendship piece is something Well, the friendship piece is something Well, the friendship piece is something that I've heard you talk about before that I've heard you talk about before that I've heard you talk about before and you know, you know, with all the and you know, you know, with all the and you know, you know, with all the discussion that we're having here about, discussion that we're having here about, discussion that we're having here about, you know, pheromone clouds and dopamine you know, pheromone clouds and dopamine you know, pheromone clouds and dopamine and romance and sex, I think that um, and romance and sex, I think that um, and romance and sex, I think that um, you know, I'll put in a strong vote you know, I'll put in a strong vote you know, I'll put in a strong vote for saying all that's wonderful, but the for saying all that's wonderful, but the for saying all that's wonderful, but the mellow times just hanging out on the mellow times just hanging out on the mellow times just hanging out on the couch are different, you know, you know, couch are different, you know, you know, couch are different, you know, you know, starkly different, but um, are as starkly different, but um, are as starkly different, but um, are as bonding in many ways, especially on a bonding in many ways, especially on a bonding in many ways, especially on a backdrop of a world that especially now backdrop of a world that especially now backdrop of a world that especially now is, you know, chaos otic uncertain um is, you know, chaos otic uncertain um is, you know, chaos otic uncertain um threatening to many people even if threatening to many people even if threatening to many people even if you're successful in the world like the you're successful in the world like the you're successful in the world like the world world's a lot pretty overwhelming world world's a lot pretty overwhelming world world's a lot pretty overwhelming now there's a lot coming at us all the now there's a lot coming at us all the now there's a lot coming at us all the time through devices and through and time through devices and through and time through devices and through and through things you know there's a lot of through things you know there's a lot of through things you know there's a lot of uncertainty about our whole species at uncertainty about our whole species at uncertainty about our whole species at some point and criticism I mean there's some point and criticism I mean there's some point and criticism I mean there's so much criticism from the outside world so much criticism from the outside world so much criticism from the outside world so much self-criticism and comparison that much self-criticism and comparison that much self-criticism and comparison that there's something about having someone there's something about having someone there's something about having someone who sees the beauty in you and is who sees the beauty in you and is who sees the beauty in you and is cheering for you and that when you fall cheering for you and that when you fall cheering for you and that when you fall down their response is okay you down their response is okay you down their response is okay you fell down like come on people fall down fell down like come on people fall down fell down like come on people fall down it's okay I'm come on get up you got it it's okay I'm come on get up you got it it's okay I'm come on get up you got it you got this you know something about you got this you know something about you got this you know something about that to me is that's the best thing like that to me is that's the best thing like that to me is that's the best thing like that's when I see successful that's when I see successful that's when I see successful married couples they're not taking the married couples they're not taking the married couples they're not taking the piss out of each other like that old all piss out of each other like that old all piss out of each other like that old all the tropes now of like you know like the tropes now of like you know like the tropes now of like you know like women just being like oh yeah he's just women just being like oh yeah he's just women just being like oh yeah he's just such an idiot Yeah, like you know that such an idiot Yeah, like you know that such an idiot Yeah, like you know that it's like cute somehow to like talk crap it's like cute somehow to like talk crap it's like cute somehow to like talk crap about your husband or your wife. Men as about your husband or your wife. Men as about your husband or your wife. Men as children. Men as children and women is children. Men as children and women is children. Men as children and women is the most loathome harpies ever to the most loathome harpies ever to the most loathome harpies ever to castrate a man, you know, like, oh yeah, castrate a man, you know, like, oh yeah, castrate a man, you know, like, oh yeah, well, please, you know, and she's this well, please, you know, and she's this well, please, you know, and she's this one, you know, there's nothing we're not one, you know, there's nothing we're not one, you know, there's nothing we're not like. I don't find that cute. I don't like. I don't find that cute. I don't like. I don't find that cute. I don't find it charming. It's sort of an find it charming. It's sort of an find it charming. It's sort of an American theme, you know. I I've noticed American theme, you know. I I've noticed American theme, you know. I I've noticed like I've half my family's in South like I've half my family's in South like I've half my family's in South America. Completely different picture. America. Completely different picture. America. Completely different picture. Now, one could argue there problems with Now, one could argue there problems with Now, one could argue there problems with the picture there, and I'm sure they the picture there, and I'm sure they the picture there, and I'm sure they exist. Um, but it's not the same, you exist. Um, but it's not the same, you exist. Um, but it's not the same, you know, men are children, women are uh know, men are children, women are uh know, men are children, women are uh women are cutthroat. Yeah. And and women are cutthroat. Yeah. And and women are cutthroat. Yeah. And and the I guess for me, especially in this the I guess for me, especially in this the I guess for me, especially in this increasingly performative and curated increasingly performative and curated increasingly performative and curated age that we live in where, you know, age that we live in where, you know, age that we live in where, you know, we're watching on you know, Instagram we're watching on you know, Instagram we're watching on you know, Instagram and all these other social media, we're and all these other social media, we're and all these other social media, we're watching everyone's greatest hits while watching everyone's greatest hits while watching everyone's greatest hits while we live our gag reel. And we're sort of we live our gag reel. And we're sort of we live our gag reel. And we're sort of comparing ourselves to like this curated comparing ourselves to like this curated comparing ourselves to like this curated version of other people's relationships version of other people's relationships version of other people's relationships and lives. And so a lot of the time and lives. And so a lot of the time and lives. And so a lot of the time we're just not feeling good about what we're just not feeling good about what we're just not feeling good about what we're doing or where we're at, our we're doing or where we're at, our we're doing or where we're at, our bodies, you know, like our minds, our bodies, you know, like our minds, our bodies, you know, like our minds, our success, our accomplishments. Like we're success, our accomplishments. Like we're success, our accomplishments. Like we're looking at everybody else's curated looking at everybody else's curated looking at everybody else's curated greatest hits. And I think there's greatest hits. And I think there's greatest hits. And I think there's something really valuable about having something really valuable about having something really valuable about having another human another human another human being next to you who's not criticizing being next to you who's not criticizing being next to you who's not criticizing you. Like even constructive criticism is you. Like even constructive criticism is you. Like even constructive criticism is criticism. Like there's some something criticism. Like there's some something criticism. Like there's some something about having another person. I'm not about having another person. I'm not about having another person. I'm not saying, by the way, that part of being saying, by the way, that part of being saying, by the way, that part of being in a good relationship is not criticism, in a good relationship is not criticism, in a good relationship is not criticism, you know, or the ability to like give you know, or the ability to like give you know, or the ability to like give feedback to a person, but it's like I feedback to a person, but it's like I feedback to a person, but it's like I said earlier about our friendship. Like said earlier about our friendship. Like said earlier about our friendship. Like if a if you know it's coming from a if a if you know it's coming from a if a if you know it's coming from a place of love of like, hey, man, I know place of love of like, hey, man, I know place of love of like, hey, man, I know you're great and I feel like this is you're great and I feel like this is you're great and I feel like this is dampening your greatness or this is dampening your greatness or this is dampening your greatness or this is shining light in the wrong place. Like I shining light in the wrong place. Like I shining light in the wrong place. Like I think there's so much value in that but think there's so much value in that but think there's so much value in that but again it requires these two people but again it requires these two people but again it requires these two people to have you know a conversation early on to have you know a conversation early on to have you know a conversation early on I think about what do we expect what do I think about what do we expect what do I think about what do we expect what do we feel towards each other and again you we feel towards each other and again you we feel towards each other and again you know to look at that as a I mean know to look at that as a I mean know to look at that as a I mean marriage is a contract divorce is a marriage is a contract divorce is a marriage is a contract divorce is a different contract a prenup is a different contract a prenup is a different contract a prenup is a contract like we're living in this world contract like we're living in this world contract like we're living in this world of contracts whether we want to admit it of contracts whether we want to admit it of contracts whether we want to admit it or not so why not admit it say it out or not so why not admit it say it out or not so why not admit it say it out loud It's not I promise it is not going loud It's not I promise it is not going loud It's not I promise it is not going to take away the beauty and the romance to take away the beauty and the romance to take away the beauty and the romance of this thing. Like I've been a divorce of this thing. Like I've been a divorce of this thing. Like I've been a divorce lawyer 25 years. I still get misty eyed lawyer 25 years. I still get misty eyed lawyer 25 years. I still get misty eyed at weddings. I still watch love stories. at weddings. I still watch love stories. at weddings. I still watch love stories. Like I watch Love on the Spectrum. I Like I watch Love on the Spectrum. I Like I watch Love on the Spectrum. I literally cry every episode because it literally cry every episode because it literally cry every episode because it ever want to just feel the most affirmed ever want to just feel the most affirmed ever want to just feel the most affirmed you'll ever feel in your life because you'll ever feel in your life because you'll ever feel in your life because these are people who are struggling with these are people who are struggling with these are people who are struggling with tremendous difficulties and challenges tremendous difficulties and challenges tremendous difficulties and challenges in life. challenges you and I don't have in life. challenges you and I don't have in life. challenges you and I don't have and all they want is connection with and all they want is connection with and all they want is connection with another person. Beautiful. And there's another person. Beautiful. And there's another person. Beautiful. And there's something about like how they both at something about like how they both at something about like how they both at like oh my god I want this like a oh do like oh my god I want this like a oh do like oh my god I want this like a oh do you like ice cream? Oh I like ice cream you like ice cream? Oh I like ice cream you like ice cream? Oh I like ice cream too. Like and it's just oh okay good. too. Like and it's just oh okay good. too. Like and it's just oh okay good. Like we found a thing. We found a Like we found a thing. We found a Like we found a thing. We found a connection point. Like and you're just connection point. Like and you're just connection point. Like and you're just watching it on the edge of your seat watching it on the edge of your seat watching it on the edge of your seat going oh my god. Yeah. Good. going oh my god. Yeah. Good. going oh my god. Yeah. Good. Okay. Good. You're doing so good. Good. Okay. Good. You're doing so good. Good. Okay. Good. You're doing so good. You're doing so good. Okay. They ran out You're doing so good. Okay. They ran out You're doing so good. Okay. They ran out of things to talk about. Okay. It's of things to talk about. Okay. It's of things to talk about. Okay. It's okay. It just, you know, and I watch okay. It just, you know, and I watch okay. It just, you know, and I watch it like I imagine some people watch the it like I imagine some people watch the it like I imagine some people watch the Super Bowl like just on the edge of my Super Bowl like just on the edge of my Super Bowl like just on the edge of my seat. Like you'd think I had money on seat. Like you'd think I had money on seat. Like you'd think I had money on what happens to Tanner, you know, like what happens to Tanner, you know, like what happens to Tanner, you know, like I'm watching it and it because I'm watching it and it because I'm watching it and it because there's something so pure about I just there's something so pure about I just there's something so pure about I just want to find love. Like I just want to want to find love. Like I just want to want to find love. Like I just want to find another person that I'm going to find another person that I'm going to find another person that I'm going to feel loved by and safe with and who feel loved by and safe with and who feel loved by and safe with and who likes me and who the way they look at me likes me and who the way they look at me likes me and who the way they look at me makes me look at myself in a more makes me look at myself in a more makes me look at myself in a more positive way. There's something so positive way. There's something so positive way. There's something so beautiful about that. And maybe you have beautiful about that. And maybe you have beautiful about that. And maybe you have to strip away a lot of this intellectual to strip away a lot of this intellectual to strip away a lot of this intellectual crap to like be able to really see that crap to like be able to really see that crap to like be able to really see that that's what this comes down to and to that's what this comes down to and to that's what this comes down to and to make it its purest distilled version. make it its purest distilled version. make it its purest distilled version. But again, I think that's something But again, I think that's something But again, I think that's something that's easiest and best to do when that's easiest and best to do when that's easiest and best to do when you're at the beginning of that journey, you're at the beginning of that journey, you're at the beginning of that journey, not midway through, not definitely not midway through, not definitely not midway through, not definitely not where it's gone off the rails. I'm where it's gone off the rails. I'm where it's gone off the rails. I'm thinking about standards of thinking about standards of thinking about standards of expectation. Uh and obviously social expectation. Uh and obviously social expectation. Uh and obviously social media plays an important role in that. media plays an important role in that. media plays an important role in that. Uh you mentioned that people showing Uh you mentioned that people showing Uh you mentioned that people showing their best lives, best selves, best their best lives, best selves, best their best lives, best selves, best everything. I have a friend who uh is everything. I have a friend who uh is everything. I have a friend who uh is very high up in one of the social media very high up in one of the social media very high up in one of the social media platforms, you know, let's just say in platforms, you know, let's just say in platforms, you know, let's just say in the in the original 10, okay? Um who the in the original 10, okay? Um who the in the original 10, okay? Um who told me told me told me um social media is um social media is um social media is 99% about women 99% about women 99% about women and female biology and psychology and female biology and psychology and female biology and psychology communicating to one another and to men communicating to one another and to men communicating to one another and to men and getting men to communicate to the and getting men to communicate to the and getting men to communicate to the world. things that um support kind of an world. things that um support kind of an world. things that um support kind of an ideal. Mhm. Some people are going to ideal. Mhm. Some people are going to ideal. Mhm. Some people are going to hear that and get upset and then I'm hear that and get upset and then I'm hear that and get upset and then I'm going to tell you that the person that going to tell you that the person that going to tell you that the person that told me that is a woman, which kind of told me that is a woman, which kind of told me that is a woman, which kind of bends people's brains around it. Um men bends people's brains around it. Um men bends people's brains around it. Um men will show their workouts. Men will show their workouts. Men will show their workouts. Men will compete with other men. Men will you compete with other men. Men will you compete with other men. Men will you know uh you know just show their know uh you know just show their know uh you know just show their halfcourt shot prowess etc. Is that for halfcourt shot prowess etc. Is that for halfcourt shot prowess etc. Is that for women? Maybe. Is it for men? more likely women? Maybe. Is it for men? more likely women? Maybe. Is it for men? more likely in some cases more both all of it. But in some cases more both all of it. But in some cases more both all of it. But the argument is that this idea of ideals the argument is that this idea of ideals the argument is that this idea of ideals being presented as something to keep being presented as something to keep being presented as something to keep striving toward is very much the modern striving toward is very much the modern striving toward is very much the modern version of the Disney movie, the wedding version of the Disney movie, the wedding version of the Disney movie, the wedding at the end. Yeah. Right. The bride and at the end. Yeah. Right. The bride and at the end. Yeah. Right. The bride and groom and everything's perfect that it groom and everything's perfect that it groom and everything's perfect that it that there's a subconscious text there that there's a subconscious text there that there's a subconscious text there we're all kind of aiming for and hoping we're all kind of aiming for and hoping we're all kind of aiming for and hoping for. And so we see the top for. And so we see the top for. And so we see the top veneer. I mean, let me put it this veneer. I mean, let me put it this veneer. I mean, let me put it this way. I don't think I've seen a movie or way. I don't think I've seen a movie or way. I don't think I've seen a movie or an Instagram account for that matter of an Instagram account for that matter of an Instagram account for that matter of a couple resolving a really hard um a couple resolving a really hard um a couple resolving a really hard um challenge. Yeah. That wasn't like cancer challenge. Yeah. That wasn't like cancer challenge. Yeah. That wasn't like cancer or something like a psych like a or something like a psych like a or something like a psych like a discussion, a hard discussion, a real a discussion, a hard discussion, a real a discussion, a hard discussion, a real one in real time. I've seen some staged one in real time. I've seen some staged one in real time. I've seen some staged ones that are just ridiculous where ones that are just ridiculous where ones that are just ridiculous where somebody listens. I hear you. I hear somebody listens. I hear you. I hear somebody listens. I hear you. I hear you. Okay. But that doesn't get to the you. Okay. But that doesn't get to the you. Okay. But that doesn't get to the underlying emotions at all. And so I underlying emotions at all. And so I underlying emotions at all. And so I think what's happening is um people are think what's happening is um people are think what's happening is um people are getting more and more entranced by this getting more and more entranced by this getting more and more entranced by this ideal and losing track of what you just ideal and losing track of what you just ideal and losing track of what you just described, which maybe the real ideal, described, which maybe the real ideal, described, which maybe the real ideal, this one from this show, uh Love on the this one from this show, uh Love on the this one from this show, uh Love on the Spectrum, right? That you're trying to Spectrum, right? That you're trying to Spectrum, right? That you're trying to find connection along the lines of find connection along the lines of find connection along the lines of simple everyday things that you can bask simple everyday things that you can bask simple everyday things that you can bask in over and over without the fear of in over and over without the fear of in over and over without the fear of them disappearing. Yeah. because they're them disappearing. Yeah. because they're them disappearing. Yeah. because they're not that hard to attain and they're not that hard to attain and they're not that hard to attain and they're not dependent on some transient dopamine dependent on some transient dopamine dependent on some transient dopamine wave that you just can't get back. But I wave that you just can't get back. But I wave that you just can't get back. But I think what you're saying is spot on. I think what you're saying is spot on. I think what you're saying is spot on. But but so I've always interpreted But but so I've always interpreted But but so I've always interpreted social media as a form of advertising. social media as a form of advertising. social media as a form of advertising. Mhm. It's really what it is. It's Mhm. It's really what it is. It's Mhm. It's really what it is. It's advertising. And there's two things advertising. And there's two things advertising. And there's two things about advertising that I think should be about advertising that I think should be about advertising that I think should be said out loud. said out loud. said out loud. One is that advertising is the dream One is that advertising is the dream One is that advertising is the dream life of a culture. Like it's the life of a culture. Like it's the life of a culture. Like it's the ideal It's the dream life. It's this ideal It's the dream life. It's this ideal It's the dream life. It's this idea of like this is what a Bud Light idea of like this is what a Bud Light idea of like this is what a Bud Light drinker looks like. You know, they're drinker looks like. You know, they're drinker looks like. You know, they're having a good time. They're with their having a good time. They're with their having a good time. They're with their friends. This is what a guy who drinks friends. This is what a guy who drinks friends. This is what a guy who drinks this beer looks like. Like, and which this beer looks like. Like, and which this beer looks like. Like, and which guy are you? This is what a BMW driver guy are you? This is what a BMW driver guy are you? This is what a BMW driver looks like versus this is what a Hyundai looks like versus this is what a Hyundai looks like versus this is what a Hyundai or a Subaru or Jeep driver looks like. or a Subaru or Jeep driver looks like. or a Subaru or Jeep driver looks like. Like, so it's the dream life of a Like, so it's the dream life of a Like, so it's the dream life of a culture. And I think there's tremendous culture. And I think there's tremendous culture. And I think there's tremendous value to that. Tremendous value to like value to that. Tremendous value to like value to that. Tremendous value to like what do we imagine ourselves to be? Like what do we imagine ourselves to be? Like what do we imagine ourselves to be? Like cuz whenever I'm talking to someone in a cuz whenever I'm talking to someone in a cuz whenever I'm talking to someone in a negotiation, as someone who negotiates negotiation, as someone who negotiates negotiation, as someone who negotiates for a living and litigates for a living, for a living and litigates for a living, for a living and litigates for a living, like I I'm not just interested in who like I I'm not just interested in who like I I'm not just interested in who you are. I'm interested in who you want you are. I'm interested in who you want you are. I'm interested in who you want me to think you are and who you think me to think you are and who you think me to think you are and who you think you are and who you want to be. Right? you are and who you want to be. Right? you are and who you want to be. Right? So advertising, social media, it's the So advertising, social media, it's the So advertising, social media, it's the dream life of a culture. But here's the dream life of a culture. But here's the dream life of a culture. But here's the thing we don't like to talk about. thing we don't like to talk about. thing we don't like to talk about. Advertising at its core is the opposite Advertising at its core is the opposite Advertising at its core is the opposite of therapy. of therapy. of therapy. If the goal of therapy is to create a If the goal of therapy is to create a If the goal of therapy is to create a sense of wellness and wholeness in a sense of wellness and wholeness in a sense of wellness and wholeness in a person, okay, advertising is the person, okay, advertising is the person, okay, advertising is the opposite, you're not okay. You're not opposite, you're not okay. You're not opposite, you're not okay. You're not okay. You could be you could be you okay. You could be you could be you okay. You could be you could be you could if you could if you could if you had you would have then you would be had you would have then you would be had you would have then you would be better. You're you're good. You're good better. You're you're good. You're good better. You're you're good. You're good now. It is true. It's actually now. It is true. It's actually now. It is true. It's actually delicious. But if you know the delicious. But if you know the delicious. But if you know the purpose of advertising is essentially to purpose of advertising is essentially to purpose of advertising is essentially to say you're not okay. You're not okay. say you're not okay. You're not okay. say you're not okay. You're not okay. You could be redemption is available to You could be redemption is available to You could be redemption is available to you. Subtext. you're not okay. And if you. Subtext. you're not okay. And if you. Subtext. you're not okay. And if you did X, Y, or Z or God, then maybe you did X, Y, or Z or God, then maybe you did X, Y, or Z or God, then maybe you'll be better. You'll be much better. you'll be better. You'll be much better. you'll be better. You'll be much better. So, so, so social media is the same So, so, so social media is the same So, so, so social media is the same thing. You're not okay. Maybe if you did thing. You're not okay. Maybe if you did thing. You're not okay. Maybe if you did contrast therapy, saunas, cold plunge, contrast therapy, saunas, cold plunge, contrast therapy, saunas, cold plunge, you'd be better. You know, maybe if you you'd be better. You know, maybe if you you'd be better. You know, maybe if you took more creatine, you'd be better. took more creatine, you'd be better. took more creatine, you'd be better. Like, you're good now, but you could be Like, you're good now, but you could be Like, you're good now, but you could be better. And so, that constant better. And so, that constant better. And so, that constant barrage of our dream life, our barrage of our dream life, our barrage of our dream life, our imagination, I mean, again, it's imagination, I mean, again, it's imagination, I mean, again, it's inspiring. It's really good for people inspiring. It's really good for people inspiring. It's really good for people in some ways, but to be inundated on a in some ways, but to be inundated on a in some ways, but to be inundated on a daily basis with you're not okay, you're daily basis with you're not okay, you're daily basis with you're not okay, you're not o over and over again. This is not a not o over and over again. This is not a not o over and over again. This is not a normal condition for humans to be in. normal condition for humans to be in. normal condition for humans to be in. And that is why I think to some degree, And that is why I think to some degree, And that is why I think to some degree, we find that like romantic relationships we find that like romantic relationships we find that like romantic relationships so appealing because you're closing the so appealing because you're closing the so appealing because you're closing the door and this person, you're okay. door and this person, you're okay. door and this person, you're okay. You're good. You're good. You're I have You're good. You're good. You're I have You're good. You're good. You're I have you. That's what I need. Yeah. Well, I you. That's what I need. Yeah. Well, I you. That's what I need. Yeah. Well, I have you. That's what I need. Yeah. And have you. That's what I need. Yeah. And have you. That's what I need. Yeah. And what a warm, wonderful place to be. what a warm, wonderful place to be. what a warm, wonderful place to be. Particularly like it's really nice to be Particularly like it's really nice to be Particularly like it's really nice to be in a warm house when it's cold outside. in a warm house when it's cold outside. in a warm house when it's cold outside. It's really nice to be in a dry house It's really nice to be in a dry house It's really nice to be in a dry house when it's raining outside. Well, when it's raining outside. Well, when it's raining outside. Well, when you're living in a ecosystem where you're living in a ecosystem where you're living in a ecosystem where information has become a form of garbage information has become a form of garbage information has become a form of garbage that comes at you from every possible that comes at you from every possible that comes at you from every possible angle all the time, devoid of context, angle all the time, devoid of context, angle all the time, devoid of context, and everything is an advertisement and everything is an advertisement and everything is an advertisement telling you there's something wrong with telling you there's something wrong with telling you there's something wrong with you. Why wouldn't you want to slam the you. Why wouldn't you want to slam the you. Why wouldn't you want to slam the door, close the windows, and be with door, close the windows, and be with door, close the windows, and be with someone and ideally a couple of dogs someone and ideally a couple of dogs someone and ideally a couple of dogs where you guys can just be warm and where you guys can just be warm and where you guys can just be warm and happy and love each other? And by the happy and love each other? And by the happy and love each other? And by the way, it's right there. It's so way, it's right there. It's so way, it's right there. It's so accessible. You don't have to buy much accessible. You don't have to buy much accessible. You don't have to buy much of anything. You don't have to like you of anything. You don't have to like you of anything. You don't have to like you don't need that much. If you have love don't need that much. If you have love don't need that much. If you have love and you have each other, you don't need and you have each other, you don't need and you have each other, you don't need And but that's why I think our society I And but that's why I think our society I And but that's why I think our society I think capitalism likes love in so far as think capitalism likes love in so far as think capitalism likes love in so far as it sells Hyundai and it'll get people to it sells Hyundai and it'll get people to it sells Hyundai and it'll get people to buy like the wedding industrial complex. buy like the wedding industrial complex. buy like the wedding industrial complex. Like it'll get you to go out and do all Like it'll get you to go out and do all Like it'll get you to go out and do all the stuff you do. But like the idea that the stuff you do. But like the idea that the stuff you do. But like the idea that hey, if we just find another person that hey, if we just find another person that hey, if we just find another person that we might realize that this is all the we might realize that this is all the we might realize that this is all the matrix like that I don't need all of matrix like that I don't need all of matrix like that I don't need all of that to be loved and I don't need all of that to be loved and I don't need all of that to be loved and I don't need all of that to feel love. I like the fullness that to feel love. I like the fullness that to feel love. I like the fullness you feel when you love someone and are you feel when you love someone and are you feel when you love someone and are loved by them. Like again, it doesn't loved by them. Like again, it doesn't loved by them. Like again, it doesn't even have to be a human. Your dog, why even have to be a human. Your dog, why even have to be a human. Your dog, why people are always like, "Man, we don't people are always like, "Man, we don't people are always like, "Man, we don't deserve dogs." Yeah. Cuz your dog deserve dogs." Yeah. Cuz your dog deserve dogs." Yeah. Cuz your dog doesn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what car you drive doesn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what car you drive doesn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what car you drive or what you do or how if you got or what you do or how if you got or what you do or how if you got six-pack abs. Like, they don't care. six-pack abs. Like, they don't care. six-pack abs. Like, they don't care. Like, they just love you. and you love Like, they just love you. and you love Like, they just love you. and you love them in a way that is like mindblowing them in a way that is like mindblowing them in a way that is like mindblowing in that again, do you ever look like in that again, do you ever look like in that again, do you ever look like people are always like, "Oh, well, you people are always like, "Oh, well, you people are always like, "Oh, well, you know, this person I'm in a romantic know, this person I'm in a romantic know, this person I'm in a romantic relationship with, like they're aging, relationship with, like they're aging, relationship with, like they're aging, their body is not as jacked as it was or their body is not as jacked as it was or their body is not as jacked as it was or they're not as Do you ever look at your they're not as Do you ever look at your they're not as Do you ever look at your dog and go like I got to get a dog and go like I got to get a dog and go like I got to get a puppy, man? Like this dog is old now. puppy, man? Like this dog is old now. puppy, man? Like this dog is old now. Like this dog's like, you know, it's Like this dog's like, you know, it's Like this dog's like, you know, it's just more and more appreciated. It's just more and more appreciated. It's just more and more appreciated. It's just deeper and deeper. It's like the just deeper and deeper. It's like the just deeper and deeper. It's like the pair of jeans that you're like, "Oh my pair of jeans that you're like, "Oh my pair of jeans that you're like, "Oh my god, it gets more comfortable every god, it gets more comfortable every god, it gets more comfortable every year." Like and like love that's how year." Like and like love that's how year." Like and like love that's how love can be and should be. But again, it love can be and should be. But again, it love can be and should be. But again, it requires to some degree that noise requires to some degree that noise requires to some degree that noise of that ecosystem, that constant you're of that ecosystem, that constant you're of that ecosystem, that constant you're not okay. You're not okay. That we can not okay. You're not okay. That we can not okay. You're not okay. That we can figure out a way to turn the volume down figure out a way to turn the volume down figure out a way to turn the volume down on that and turn up the volume on what on that and turn up the volume on what on that and turn up the volume on what are we feeding here together. Again, it are we feeding here together. Again, it are we feeding here together. Again, it may not sell as many cars. It may not may not sell as many cars. It may not may not sell as many cars. It may not sell as much beer. It may not, you know, sell as much beer. It may not, you know, sell as much beer. It may not, you know, but that's okay. Like that's the but that's okay. Like that's the but that's okay. Like that's the wholeness. that sense of wholeness, like wholeness. that sense of wholeness, like wholeness. that sense of wholeness, like that depth of connection to me, like that depth of connection to me, like that depth of connection to me, like that makes all the sense in the world. that makes all the sense in the world. that makes all the sense in the world. What you're describing is very alluring. What you're describing is very alluring. What you're describing is very alluring. And um when you said, you know, two And um when you said, you know, two And um when you said, you know, two people together in the cocoon, maybe people together in the cocoon, maybe people together in the cocoon, maybe some dogs as some dogs as some dogs as well, if one were just to well, if one were just to well, if one were just to inject a smartphone in there, completely inject a smartphone in there, completely inject a smartphone in there, completely different picture. Totally changes the different picture. Totally changes the different picture. Totally changes the EOS. You know, and I'm not trying to be EOS. You know, and I'm not trying to be EOS. You know, and I'm not trying to be a buzzkill here, but what you describe a buzzkill here, but what you describe a buzzkill here, but what you describe is so beautiful. And you know, if I look is so beautiful. And you know, if I look is so beautiful. And you know, if I look back on the best moments in romantic back on the best moments in romantic back on the best moments in romantic relationships that I've had, it was relationships that I've had, it was relationships that I've had, it was well, in recent years, driving a segment well, in recent years, driving a segment well, in recent years, driving a segment of the California Coast where there was of the California Coast where there was of the California Coast where there was no Yeah. phone reception. Yeah. Like the no Yeah. phone reception. Yeah. Like the no Yeah. phone reception. Yeah. Like the amount like the kind of peace that comes amount like the kind of peace that comes amount like the kind of peace that comes from that, you know, it's always moments from that, you know, it's always moments from that, you know, it's always moments of simplicity. Yeah. Always. Um almost of simplicity. Yeah. Always. Um almost of simplicity. Yeah. Always. Um almost anybody if you ask them you know anybody if you ask them you know anybody if you ask them you know genuinely ask them like what was a genuinely ask them like what was a genuinely ask them like what was a moment where you felt the most loved moment where you felt the most loved moment where you felt the most loved like their answer will surprise you like their answer will surprise you like their answer will surprise you like it rarely cost anything. It really, you it rarely cost anything. It really, you it rarely cost anything. It really, you know, I was on you and I both done Diary know, I was on you and I both done Diary know, I was on you and I both done Diary of a CEO, you know, Steve Bartlett, and of a CEO, you know, Steve Bartlett, and of a CEO, you know, Steve Bartlett, and you we both have a friendship with Steve you we both have a friendship with Steve you we both have a friendship with Steve and one of the questions he asked me and one of the questions he asked me and one of the questions he asked me was, "When when did you feel in your was, "When when did you feel in your was, "When when did you feel in your life the most life the most life the most loved and I instantly knew the answer loved and I instantly knew the answer loved and I instantly knew the answer and it was the silliest answer and yet and it was the silliest answer and yet and it was the silliest answer and yet the most honest and it I told the story the most honest and it I told the story the most honest and it I told the story about how my when I was a kid, we used about how my when I was a kid, we used about how my when I was a kid, we used to get pizza every once in a while and to get pizza every once in a while and to get pizza every once in a while and you know, pizza's cut in a certain you know, pizza's cut in a certain you know, pizza's cut in a certain number of number of number of slices And I remember my friend Tommy slices And I remember my friend Tommy slices And I remember my friend Tommy and I were having pizza and my dad like and I were having pizza and my dad like and I were having pizza and my dad like there was an odd number of slices and my there was an odd number of slices and my there was an odd number of slices and my dad had one slice and we like two young dad had one slice and we like two young dad had one slice and we like two young boys just devoured you know like three boys just devoured you know like three boys just devoured you know like three four slices a piece so there's only one four slices a piece so there's only one four slices a piece so there's only one more slice left and of course he and I more slice left and of course he and I more slice left and of course he and I are both looking at it even though we'd are both looking at it even though we'd are both looking at it even though we'd had like three or four slices of pizza had like three or four slices of pizza had like three or four slices of pizza and my dad had only had one and my dad and my dad had only had one and my dad and my dad had only had one and my dad went like yeah you guys can have it and went like yeah you guys can have it and went like yeah you guys can have it and we split that last piece my friend and I we split that last piece my friend and I we split that last piece my friend and I and a couple of weeks later I was at his and a couple of weeks later I was at his and a couple of weeks later I was at his house and ordered pizza And the his house and ordered pizza And the his house and ordered pizza And the his father just like ate the last slice of father just like ate the last slice of father just like ate the last slice of pizza. He ate like more slices than we pizza. He ate like more slices than we pizza. He ate like more slices than we did. And I remember looking at him and did. And I remember looking at him and did. And I remember looking at him and thinking, "My dad would never do that." thinking, "My dad would never do that." thinking, "My dad would never do that." And I remember thinking, "Oh, he loves And I remember thinking, "Oh, he loves And I remember thinking, "Oh, he loves me." Like I just felt it to my core me." Like I just felt it to my core me." Like I just felt it to my core that like he loves me so much. Like I that like he loves me so much. Like I that like he loves me so much. Like I know he wanted that other piece of know he wanted that other piece of know he wanted that other piece of pizza, but the joy he felt in watching pizza, but the joy he felt in watching pizza, but the joy he felt in watching me eat another piece of pizza was bigger me eat another piece of pizza was bigger me eat another piece of pizza was bigger than the hunger he had for another piece than the hunger he had for another piece than the hunger he had for another piece of pizza. That is the purest expression of pizza. That is the purest expression of pizza. That is the purest expression of love. And like most people, if you of love. And like most people, if you of love. And like most people, if you say to them like, "What was a moment in say to them like, "What was a moment in say to them like, "What was a moment in your romantic relationship where you your romantic relationship where you your romantic relationship where you felt loved or you just felt joy inside felt loved or you just felt joy inside felt loved or you just felt joy inside yourself?" Like they like, "God, I'd yourself?" Like they like, "God, I'd yourself?" Like they like, "God, I'd rather be here than anywhere in the rather be here than anywhere in the rather be here than anywhere in the world." The answer is not going to be we world." The answer is not going to be we world." The answer is not going to be we were at the most expensive restaurant were at the most expensive restaurant were at the most expensive restaurant and we were or we were having the most and we were or we were having the most and we were or we were having the most mind-blowing sex like that. Listen, mind-blowing sex like that. Listen, mind-blowing sex like that. Listen, you'll have fond memories of all those you'll have fond memories of all those you'll have fond memories of all those things, but it's some little moment of things, but it's some little moment of things, but it's some little moment of just connection or just the feeling of just connection or just the feeling of just connection or just the feeling of like holding this person's hand or like holding this person's hand or like holding this person's hand or like the way that the light hit them at the way that the light hit them at the way that the light hit them at the particular sunset when you were sitting particular sunset when you were sitting particular sunset when you were sitting outside together. Like, and to me, like, outside together. Like, and to me, like, outside together. Like, and to me, like, of course, modern consumer culture doesn't course, modern consumer culture doesn't course, modern consumer culture doesn't shove that down your throat because you shove that down your throat because you shove that down your throat because you don't need anything. You don't need to don't need anything. You don't need to don't need anything. You don't need to buy anything to experience that. You buy anything to experience that. You buy anything to experience that. You don't need to do anything to experience don't need to do anything to experience don't need to do anything to experience that other than find another person and that other than find another person and that other than find another person and love them, you know, and let them love them, you know, and let them love them, you know, and let them love you. And that's not doesn't require a you. And that's not doesn't require a you. And that's not doesn't require a lot of lot of lot of purchases. I'd like to take a quick purchases. I'd like to take a quick purchases. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became sponsors, Function. Last year, I became sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for a Function member after searching for a Function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab the most comprehensive approach to lab the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 testing. Function provides over 100 testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for from harmful plastics, and tests for from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 only provides testing of over 100 only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can knack and acetylcyine, both of which can knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function functionhealth.com/huberman. Function functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of over currently has a wait list of over currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're offering 250,000 people, but they're offering 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman podcast early access to Huberman podcast early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. You got my mind access to Function. You got my mind access to Function. You got my mind going to a number of uh pleasant going to a number of uh pleasant going to a number of uh pleasant memories and examples, but I love I love memories and examples, but I love I love memories and examples, but I love I love your pizza example. I'll just your pizza example. I'll just your pizza example. I'll just quickly give one. I uh I was in a long quickly give one. I uh I was in a long quickly give one. I uh I was in a long relationship with somebody. We're still relationship with somebody. We're still relationship with somebody. We're still on very good terms, and we still on very good terms, and we still on very good terms, and we still laugh um and delight in this one moment. laugh um and delight in this one moment. laugh um and delight in this one moment. There's there's a diner here in Los There's there's a diner here in Los There's there's a diner here in Los Angeles that we had come to that uh it's Angeles that we had come to that uh it's Angeles that we had come to that uh it's closed now, but it's still there. Yeah. closed now, but it's still there. Yeah. closed now, but it's still there. Yeah. Every time I drive past it, I think Every time I drive past it, I think Every time I drive past it, I think about this. Yeah. Like I think about this. Yeah. Like I think about this. Yeah. Like I think about this and you think about her. I think this and you think about her. I think this and you think about her. I think about her and we were on a it was a about her and we were on a it was a about her and we were on a it was a early days of dating and um I early days of dating and um I early days of dating and um I remember she asked for cream for her remember she asked for cream for her remember she asked for cream for her coffee and put like a little bit more coffee and put like a little bit more coffee and put like a little bit more cream than one would normally put in the cream than one would normally put in the cream than one would normally put in the coffee. And I was like, "A little cream coffee. And I was like, "A little cream coffee. And I was like, "A little cream with your coffee?" She's like, "Well, with your coffee?" She's like, "Well, with your coffee?" She's like, "Well, actually, I want to put the whole thing actually, I want to put the whole thing actually, I want to put the whole thing in here, but I'm trying to be polite." in here, but I'm trying to be polite." in here, but I'm trying to be polite." And I said, "Put the whole thing in." And I said, "Put the whole thing in." And I said, "Put the whole thing in." And without hesitating, she just went And without hesitating, she just went And without hesitating, she just went and put the entire beaker of cream in and put the entire beaker of cream in and put the entire beaker of cream in there. And we still laugh about that. there. And we still laugh about that. there. And we still laugh about that. And I remember that moment being so And I remember that moment being so And I remember that moment being so freeing for me because it was this freeing for me because it was this freeing for me because it was this moment where I knew she was relaxed moment where I knew she was relaxed moment where I knew she was relaxed enough to do it. It was hilarious for enough to do it. It was hilarious for enough to do it. It was hilarious for reasons that were only clear to us. Um, reasons that were only clear to us. Um, reasons that were only clear to us. Um, and people are probably bewildered about and people are probably bewildered about and people are probably bewildered about why it would be so meaningful now. And I why it would be so meaningful now. And I why it would be so meaningful now. And I don't think they will be. And to me, it don't think they will be. And to me, it don't think they will be. And to me, it was a moment where I was like, I it was a moment where I was like, I it was a moment where I was like, I don't want to reveal who this person is. don't want to reveal who this person is. don't want to reveal who this person is. people in my life will know, but she has people in my life will know, but she has people in my life will know, but she has such a lust for life, like full such a lust for life, like full such a lust for life, like full blast, all gas pedal on everything. Um, blast, all gas pedal on everything. Um, blast, all gas pedal on everything. Um, and it was like, I love cream. I want and it was like, I love cream. I want and it was like, I love cream. I want the entire beaker of cream. And it the entire beaker of cream. And it the entire beaker of cream. And it was this permission that she gave was this permission that she gave was this permission that she gave herself. So, I still delight in that. herself. So, I still delight in that. herself. So, I still delight in that. So, these little things, right? And I So, these little things, right? And I So, these little things, right? And I think as you were describing the pizza think as you were describing the pizza think as you were describing the pizza example or this my example, what example or this my example, what example or this my example, what clear to me is that the memory of say clear to me is that the memory of say clear to me is that the memory of say like the incredible early stage of a like the incredible early stage of a like the incredible early stage of a relationship or um some big vacation or relationship or um some big vacation or relationship or um some big vacation or event which is wonderful. That stuff can event which is wonderful. That stuff can event which is wonderful. That stuff can set a kind of yearning as much as an set a kind of yearning as much as an set a kind of yearning as much as an appreciation like you want it again. appreciation like you want it again. appreciation like you want it again. Whereas the for me this probably silly Whereas the for me this probably silly Whereas the for me this probably silly sounding uh thing about the creamer sounding uh thing about the creamer sounding uh thing about the creamer the cream in the coffee or the pizza the cream in the coffee or the pizza the cream in the coffee or the pizza thing, you still have that like it's not thing, you still have that like it's not thing, you still have that like it's not like you want it again. You've got that. like you want it again. You've got that. like you want it again. You've got that. It's yours. It's never going away. And I It's yours. It's never going away. And I It's yours. It's never going away. And I think there's something very deeply think there's something very deeply think there's something very deeply biological and psychological about those biological and psychological about those biological and psychological about those kinds of things because I think they kinds of things because I think they kinds of things because I think they drive really deep pillars into our drive really deep pillars into our drive really deep pillars into our memory. It's like we still have them. I memory. It's like we still have them. I memory. It's like we still have them. I mean, look at the way you describe it or mean, look at the way you describe it or mean, look at the way you describe it or the way that I Well, first of all, the way that I Well, first of all, the way that I Well, first of all, there's nothing silly about that. Just there's nothing silly about that. Just there's nothing silly about that. Just the fact that you say like, "Well, that the fact that you say like, "Well, that the fact that you say like, "Well, that silly example I gave." Like, there's silly example I gave." Like, there's silly example I gave." Like, there's absolutely nothing silly about that. absolutely nothing silly about that. absolutely nothing silly about that. Like there there's I completely Like there there's I completely Like there there's I completely got it. I completely was smiling while got it. I completely was smiling while got it. I completely was smiling while you were telling that story because it's you were telling that story because it's you were telling that story because it's lovely. Because what is it? It's lovely. Because what is it? It's lovely. Because what is it? It's intimacy. Like the definition of intimacy. Like the definition of intimacy. Like the definition of intimacy has nothing to do with sex. intimacy has nothing to do with sex. intimacy has nothing to do with sex. Intimacy is defined as the ability to be Intimacy is defined as the ability to be Intimacy is defined as the ability to be completely yourself with another person. completely yourself with another person. completely yourself with another person. And what was she doing there? She was And what was she doing there? She was And what was she doing there? She was doing what we all do on a date. Those doing what we all do on a date. Those doing what we all do on a date. Those first few days, those early days, we first few days, those early days, we first few days, those early days, we have spanks on our personality. You have spanks on our personality. You have spanks on our personality. You know, everything is like, "Okay, I'm know, everything is like, "Okay, I'm know, everything is like, "Okay, I'm gonna" And again, is it lying? No. Is gonna" And again, is it lying? No. Is gonna" And again, is it lying? No. Is makeup lying? No. It accentuates the makeup lying? No. It accentuates the makeup lying? No. It accentuates the positive, decentuates the negative. It's positive, decentuates the negative. It's positive, decentuates the negative. It's not a lie. If someone was wearing makeup not a lie. If someone was wearing makeup not a lie. If someone was wearing makeup and then they take their makeup off, I and then they take their makeup off, I and then they take their makeup off, I don't go, "You're a liar. Your eyelashes don't go, "You're a liar. Your eyelashes don't go, "You're a liar. Your eyelashes don't look like that. You're a liar." don't look like that. You're a liar." don't look like that. You're a liar." No. Look, you're trying to impress me. I No. Look, you're trying to impress me. I No. Look, you're trying to impress me. I get it. Like, you're trying to be this, get it. Like, you're trying to be this, get it. Like, you're trying to be this, but eventually you're going to see this but eventually you're going to see this but eventually you're going to see this person without makeup. Like, eventually person without makeup. Like, eventually person without makeup. Like, eventually you're going to find out she puts an you're going to find out she puts an you're going to find out she puts an insane amount of cream into her coffee. insane amount of cream into her coffee. insane amount of cream into her coffee. But these are the things we love about But these are the things we love about But these are the things we love about people. It's what makes them human is people. It's what makes them human is people. It's what makes them human is that you're just you're she puts so much that you're just you're she puts so much that you're just you're she puts so much cream in her coffee. Like it's so weird cream in her coffee. Like it's so weird cream in her coffee. Like it's so weird to me. It's ridiculous. But it's but to me. It's ridiculous. But it's but to me. It's ridiculous. But it's but let me tell you something. You still let me tell you something. You still let me tell you something. You still think of her when you drive it. You think of her when you drive it. You think of her when you drive it. You think of that moment like that was an think of that moment like that was an think of that moment like that was an investment that paid dividends investment that paid dividends investment that paid dividends forever. You'll remember that forever. You'll remember that forever. You'll remember that forever. And by the way, it's not a betrayal to And by the way, it's not a betrayal to And by the way, it's not a betrayal to future relationships that you fondly future relationships that you fondly future relationships that you fondly recall this moment of intimacy where recall this moment of intimacy where recall this moment of intimacy where this person felt loved enough and this person felt loved enough and this person felt loved enough and comfortable enough with you to go, comfortable enough with you to go, comfortable enough with you to go, "Yeah, I'm going to take that mask off. "Yeah, I'm going to take that mask off. "Yeah, I'm going to take that mask off. I'm going to show you I like an insane I'm going to show you I like an insane I'm going to show you I like an insane amount of cream. I have no idea why I amount of cream. I have no idea why I amount of cream. I have no idea why I like that much cream, but I just do." like that much cream, but I just do." like that much cream, but I just do." Like, is that make me weird? Is that Like, is that make me weird? Is that Like, is that make me weird? Is that okay? And you going like, "Yeah, go to okay? And you going like, "Yeah, go to okay? And you going like, "Yeah, go to town. Like, whatever, man. Like, I like town. Like, whatever, man. Like, I like town. Like, whatever, man. Like, I like I don't even use cream, but like go like I don't even use cream, but like go like I don't even use cream, but like go to town. Like, be you." Like that's the to town. Like, be you." Like that's the to town. Like, be you." Like that's the feeling we all want is that feeling of feeling we all want is that feeling of feeling we all want is that feeling of like yeah you're not crazy you make like yeah you're not crazy you make like yeah you're not crazy you make sense to me you make s you're not just sense to me you make s you're not just sense to me you make s you're not just like me we're very different but you like me we're very different but you like me we're very different but you make sense to me you know I feel make sense to me you know I feel make sense to me you know I feel understood and that to me like that understood and that to me like that understood and that to me like that that's the whole thing and so if you say that's the whole thing and so if you say that's the whole thing and so if you say well this is where we were in early days well this is where we were in early days well this is where we were in early days and that's the baseline and if we don't and that's the baseline and if we don't and that's the baseline and if we don't continue to feel that intoxicated by continue to feel that intoxicated by continue to feel that intoxicated by each other that we're doing it wrong each other that we're doing it wrong each other that we're doing it wrong okay then it's You've said an okay then it's You've said an okay then it's You've said an impossible stand. That's like saying I'm impossible stand. That's like saying I'm impossible stand. That's like saying I'm not in the shape I was in when I was 25, not in the shape I was in when I was 25, not in the shape I was in when I was 25, so I must be doing something wrong. No, so I must be doing something wrong. No, so I must be doing something wrong. No, like that the organism doesn't like that the organism doesn't like that the organism doesn't change. It doesn't evolve that way. Like change. It doesn't evolve that way. Like change. It doesn't evolve that way. Like this is the nature of things is that this is the nature of things is that this is the nature of things is that it's supposed to be what it is. Like it's supposed to be what it is. Like it's supposed to be what it is. Like it's supposed to merge or evolve into it's supposed to merge or evolve into it's supposed to merge or evolve into something different. But something different. But something different. But again, having conversations about what again, having conversations about what again, having conversations about what that is and what it looks like, that is and what it looks like, that is and what it looks like, that that's the best possible way to preserve that's the best possible way to preserve that's the best possible way to preserve what's best in it. And I think starting what's best in it. And I think starting what's best in it. And I think starting a marriage with we're not going to talk marriage with we're not going to talk marriage with we're not going to talk about any of that. We're not going to about any of that. We're not going to about any of that. We're not going to look at any of it. We're just in love. look at any of it. We're just in love. look at any of it. We're just in love. That's all that matters. We're just in That's all that matters. We're just in That's all that matters. We're just in love. That's all that matters. Let's love. That's all that matters. Let's love. That's all that matters. Let's talk about any of this other stuff. Like talk about any of this other stuff. Like talk about any of this other stuff. Like that's not that's that to me, you're that's not that's that to me, you're that's not that's that to me, you're doing yourself a disservice. Start doing yourself a disservice. Start doing yourself a disservice. Start early. by creating the pattern of we're early. by creating the pattern of we're early. by creating the pattern of we're just going to say it. We're just going just going to say it. We're just going just going to say it. We're just going to say it. We're just going to say what to say it. We're just going to say what to say it. We're just going to say what we're doing right, what we're doing that we're doing right, what we're doing that we're doing right, what we're doing that hit the wrong way. Like, cuz here's that hit the wrong way. Like, cuz here's that hit the wrong way. Like, cuz here's the thing, like you and I are friends. the thing, like you and I are friends. the thing, like you and I are friends. If if you hurt my feelings, if we had If if you hurt my feelings, if we had If if you hurt my feelings, if we had a conversation and you said something a conversation and you said something a conversation and you said something and it just hurt my feelings, I know you and it just hurt my feelings, I know you and it just hurt my feelings, I know you didn't mean to. We're friends. I know didn't mean to. We're friends. I know didn't mean to. We're friends. I know you don't want to hurt me. I don't want you don't want to hurt me. I don't want you don't want to hurt me. I don't want to hurt you. You're my friend. Like, I to hurt you. You're my friend. Like, I to hurt you. You're my friend. Like, I get it. But I'm going to probably say get it. But I'm going to probably say get it. But I'm going to probably say something sometime that hurts you. and I something sometime that hurts you. and I something sometime that hurts you. and I didn't mean to, you know. didn't mean to, you know. didn't mean to, you know. So, what do you do? Carry that around? So, what do you do? Carry that around? So, what do you do? Carry that around? Just don't say it out loud because it's Just don't say it out loud because it's Just don't say it out loud because it's uncomfortable to say that to Jim. He's uncomfortable to say that to Jim. He's uncomfortable to say that to Jim. He's going to feel badly that he said that to going to feel badly that he said that to going to feel badly that he said that to me and that it upset me, so I'm just me and that it upset me, so I'm just me and that it upset me, so I'm just going to carry it around. That's how if going to carry it around. That's how if going to carry it around. That's how if you've been in a long-term romantic you've been in a long-term romantic you've been in a long-term romantic relationship, which we both have in our relationship, which we both have in our relationship, which we both have in our lives. That's how you're having some lives. That's how you're having some lives. That's how you're having some very benal sort of argument about like what's benal sort of argument about like what's benal sort of argument about like what's the best way to get from here to the best way to get from here to the best way to get from here to Calabasas or whatever and 5 minutes Calabasas or whatever and 5 minutes Calabasas or whatever and 5 minutes later it's like you know I never liked later it's like you know I never liked later it's like you know I never liked your mother and like you never your mother and like you never your mother and like you never respected me and you're like where how respected me and you're like where how respected me and you're like where how did we get there? Like how long have you did we get there? Like how long have you did we get there? Like how long have you had that in the chamber? Like how long had that in the chamber? Like how long had that in the chamber? Like how long you been holding on to that? And the you been holding on to that? And the you been holding on to that? And the answer is since the day it happened. So answer is since the day it happened. So answer is since the day it happened. So why not create a framework early where why not create a framework early where why not create a framework early where if we something blips the wrong way, if we something blips the wrong way, if we something blips the wrong way, like I'm not saying dwell on it. I'm not like I'm not saying dwell on it. I'm not like I'm not saying dwell on it. I'm not saying put a person in a defensive saying put a person in a defensive saying put a person in a defensive situation by immediately calling it out, situation by immediately calling it out, situation by immediately calling it out, but like if you if I said I'm telling but like if you if I said I'm telling but like if you if I said I'm telling you right now as my friend, if I say you right now as my friend, if I say you right now as my friend, if I say something to you at some point that something to you at some point that something to you at some point that hurts you, I know I didn't mean to. I hurts you, I know I didn't mean to. I hurts you, I know I didn't mean to. I know I didn't mean to. So I'm I'll tell know I didn't mean to. So I'm I'll tell know I didn't mean to. So I'm I'll tell you in advance, I'm sorry. I'm sorry cuz you in advance, I'm sorry. I'm sorry cuz you in advance, I'm sorry. I'm sorry cuz I know I didn't mean to hurt you. I know I didn't mean to hurt you. I know I didn't mean to hurt you. Doesn't mean what I said isn't true. It Doesn't mean what I said isn't true. It Doesn't mean what I said isn't true. It might be true. It might be fair might be true. It might be fair might be true. It might be fair criticism, but I know I didn't mean to criticism, but I know I didn't mean to criticism, but I know I didn't mean to hurt you. I know cuz I love you. And so hurt you. I know cuz I love you. And so hurt you. I know cuz I love you. And so if you're my friend and I love you, I if you're my friend and I love you, I if you're my friend and I love you, I didn't mean to hurt you. I know that for didn't mean to hurt you. I know that for didn't mean to hurt you. I know that for sure. So why can't we from the sure. So why can't we from the sure. So why can't we from the beginning? And that's why I like prenups beginning? And that's why I like prenups beginning? And that's why I like prenups because from the beginning, let's talk because from the beginning, let's talk because from the beginning, let's talk about this. What do we mean to each about this. What do we mean to each about this. What do we mean to each other? What do we owe to each other? What do we owe to each other? What do we owe to each other? What what are the benchmarks of this What what are the benchmarks of this What what are the benchmarks of this economy? Like what are the what are the economy? Like what are the what are the economy? Like what are the what are the exchanges of value between us? And as we exchanges of value between us? And as we exchanges of value between us? And as we grow and change, how will we hold on to grow and change, how will we hold on to grow and change, how will we hold on to the part that's most meaningful to both the part that's most meaningful to both the part that's most meaningful to both of us? Can you give some examples of us? Can you give some examples of us? Can you give some examples of what a prenup kind of the scaffold of a what a prenup kind of the scaffold of a what a prenup kind of the scaffold of a prenup might look like? Um, prenup might look like? Um, prenup might look like? Um, barring the extremes of like barring the extremes of like barring the extremes of like billionaires and um, you know, and billionaires and um, you know, and billionaires and um, you know, and they have 19 Chihuahua or whatever and they have 19 Chihuahua or whatever and they have 19 Chihuahua or whatever it is. Good lord, who has 19 Chihuahua? it is. Good lord, who has 19 Chihuahua? it is. Good lord, who has 19 Chihuahua? But ambitious for actually one of my But ambitious for actually one of my But ambitious for actually one of my jiu-jitsu teachers, Paul Shriner, is jiu-jitsu teachers, Paul Shriner, is jiu-jitsu teachers, Paul Shriner, is he's got a remarkable number of he's got a remarkable number of he's got a remarkable number of Chihuahua. He rescues Chihuahua. I Chihuahua. He rescues Chihuahua. I Chihuahua. He rescues Chihuahua. I admire it tremendously. I think Steven admire it tremendously. I think Steven admire it tremendously. I think Steven Cutotler who um is involved in a lot a Cutotler who um is involved in a lot a Cutotler who um is involved in a lot a lot of the literature and popular lot of the literature and popular lot of the literature and popular writing around flow. Yeah. Has a lot of writing around flow. Yeah. Has a lot of writing around flow. Yeah. Has a lot of Chihuahua and he told me that in some Chihuahua and he told me that in some Chihuahua and he told me that in some country other than the United States country other than the United States country other than the United States where they translate book, someone did where they translate book, someone did where they translate book, someone did played a joke or something where the on played a joke or something where the on played a joke or something where the on the title of the book it translates as the title of the book it translates as the title of the book it translates as Chihuahua man. Love that or something Chihuahua man. Love that or something Chihuahua man. Love that or something like that. Well, I mean if you think like that. Well, I mean if you think like that. Well, I mean if you think about Chihuahua it's fair because if you about Chihuahua it's fair because if you about Chihuahua it's fair because if you if you glued like 20 of them together if you glued like 20 of them together if you glued like 20 of them together it's still not a great dance. You know it's still not a great dance. You know it's still not a great dance. You know what I mean? size-wise, just mass in what I mean? size-wise, just mass in what I mean? size-wise, just mass in terms of volume of it. I like all dogs. terms of volume of it. I like all dogs. terms of volume of it. I like all dogs. I like all dogs. I like all dogs. For I like all dogs. I like all dogs. For I like all dogs. I like all dogs. For the record, I'm not being politically the record, I'm not being politically the record, I'm not being politically correct. I'm partial to hounds, but I correct. I'm partial to hounds, but I correct. I'm partial to hounds, but I like all dogs. Well, you and I are like all dogs. Well, you and I are like all dogs. Well, you and I are friends for a reason. Um, some of friends for a reason. Um, some of friends for a reason. Um, some of the basic scaffold of our prenup cuz I the basic scaffold of our prenup cuz I the basic scaffold of our prenup cuz I How like I can imagine that if we break How like I can imagine that if we break How like I can imagine that if we break up, you'll get x amount of uh blah up, you'll get x amount of uh blah up, you'll get x amount of uh blah blah. Yeah. Maybe list off some like blah. Yeah. Maybe list off some like blah. Yeah. Maybe list off some like core tenants. So, so to do like core tenants. So, so to do like core tenants. So, so to do that, you know what you're what you're that, you know what you're what you're that, you know what you're what you're doing is we're going to do we're going doing is we're going to do we're going doing is we're going to do we're going to do a consultation for a prenuptual to do a consultation for a prenuptual to do a consultation for a prenuptual agreement right here. I do I do them all agreement right here. I do I do them all agreement right here. I do I do them all the time. Great. So, the first thing the time. Great. So, the first thing the time. Great. So, the first thing that Yeah, you're getting it for free. I that Yeah, you're getting it for free. I that Yeah, you're getting it for free. I mean, that's pretty good. It's usually mean, that's pretty good. It's usually mean, that's pretty good. It's usually $850. So, what I'll say is the following $850. So, what I'll say is the following $850. So, what I'll say is the following to understand what a contract does. The to understand what a contract does. The to understand what a contract does. The first thing you have to understand is first thing you have to understand is first thing you have to understand is what are your rights in the absence of what are your rights in the absence of what are your rights in the absence of that contract, right? Most contracts, that contract, right? Most contracts, that contract, right? Most contracts, that's pretty easy. Like, I'm going to that's pretty easy. Like, I'm going to that's pretty easy. Like, I'm going to lease a car. I know in the absence of lease a car. I know in the absence of lease a car. I know in the absence of that car lease, they have the car and I that car lease, they have the car and I that car lease, they have the car and I have the money, right? So, that's a have the money, right? So, that's a have the money, right? So, that's a really easy contract because whatever really easy contract because whatever really easy contract because whatever the contract is, we both want the same the contract is, we both want the same the contract is, we both want the same thing. They want my money and I want thing. They want my money and I want thing. They want my money and I want their car. So, now we're just trying to their car. So, now we're just trying to their car. So, now we're just trying to figure out what are the terms and how do figure out what are the terms and how do figure out what are the terms and how do we codify them? And then we'll come up we codify them? And then we'll come up we codify them? And then we'll come up with what are some things that could go with what are some things that could go with what are some things that could go wrong. What if I stop making the wrong. What if I stop making the wrong. What if I stop making the payments? What if I drive the car off payments? What if I drive the car off payments? What if I drive the car off the lot and the wheels fall off? Like, the lot and the wheels fall off? Like, the lot and the wheels fall off? Like, okay, now we have to start using some okay, now we have to start using some okay, now we have to start using some imagination about what do we do in these imagination about what do we do in these imagination about what do we do in these contingencies? But at its core, simple contingencies? But at its core, simple contingencies? But at its core, simple contract, which is I want the car, you contract, which is I want the car, you contract, which is I want the car, you got a car, you want money, I've got a car, you want money, I've got a car, you want money, I've got money. Let's figure this out. And if we money. Let's figure this out. And if we money. Let's figure this out. And if we can't, somebody else will get the car can't, somebody else will get the car can't, somebody else will get the car and somebody else will take my money. and somebody else will take my money. and somebody else will take my money. We'll be all right. We'll be okay scheme We'll be all right. We'll be okay scheme We'll be all right. We'll be okay scheme of things, right? So, this is the same of things, right? So, this is the same of things, right? So, this is the same thing. Okay? It's the same thing. So, if thing. Okay? It's the same thing. So, if thing. Okay? It's the same thing. So, if we don't marry, we both know that's we don't marry, we both know that's we don't marry, we both know that's easy, right? We both know we're in love, easy, right? We both know we're in love, easy, right? We both know we're in love, we're happy, we're together, we're happy, we're together, we're happy, we're together, we're enjoying each other's company. Now we're enjoying each other's company. Now we're enjoying each other's company. Now we're not gonna get married. What happens? So not gonna get married. What happens? So not gonna get married. What happens? So you suddenly the love goes out the you suddenly the love goes out the you suddenly the love goes out the window. The whole thing falls apart. I window. The whole thing falls apart. I window. The whole thing falls apart. I don't think so. That's kind of weird, don't think so. That's kind of weird, don't think so. That's kind of weird, right? So again, first order of business right? So again, first order of business right? So again, first order of business is why are we getting is why are we getting is why are we getting married? Why? Like what is the problem married? Why? Like what is the problem married? Why? Like what is the problem to which marriage is a solution? Like to which marriage is a solution? Like to which marriage is a solution? Like why is it so strange to say to another why is it so strange to say to another why is it so strange to say to another human being if I said to you, Andrew, human being if I said to you, Andrew, human being if I said to you, Andrew, great news. I'm getting married. If you great news. I'm getting married. If you great news. I'm getting married. If you said, really? Why? Like why would that said, really? Why? Like why would that said, really? Why? Like why would that be like what kind of jerk is Andrew be like what kind of jerk is Andrew be like what kind of jerk is Andrew today? Like it's why? Well, my parents today? Like it's why? Well, my parents today? Like it's why? Well, my parents it's really important to them that I get it's really important to them that I get it's really important to them that I get married and you know we're having a married and you know we're having a married and you know we're having a great time she and I but like you know great time she and I but like you know great time she and I but like you know her parents are very religious and they her parents are very religious and they her parents are very religious and they say oh that's a good reason. It's a good say oh that's a good reason. It's a good say oh that's a good reason. It's a good reason to get married. Like we do things reason to get married. Like we do things reason to get married. Like we do things to make our parents happy or our to make our parents happy or our to make our parents happy or our partner's parents happy. That's okay. partner's parents happy. That's okay. partner's parents happy. That's okay. That makes sense to me. I genuinely That makes sense to me. I genuinely That makes sense to me. I genuinely think that there's a valid thing there think that there's a valid thing there think that there's a valid thing there which is this is the reason why we're which is this is the reason why we're which is this is the reason why we're getting married or I want the tax break getting married or I want the tax break getting married or I want the tax break that comes with getting married. There's that comes with getting married. There's that comes with getting married. There's a tax break. There's a significant tax a tax break. There's a significant tax a tax break. There's a significant tax break. Yeah. On federal and state, break. Yeah. On federal and state, break. Yeah. On federal and state, you get you different dependency you get you different dependency you get you different dependency exemptions. You get different schedules exemptions. You get different schedules exemptions. You get different schedules of how much you have to make to pay at a of how much you have to make to pay at a of how much you have to make to pay at a different town. Yeah. There's there's a different town. Yeah. There's there's a different town. Yeah. There's there's a whole bunch of purely financial reasons whole bunch of purely financial reasons whole bunch of purely financial reasons to get married. Like again, with a to get married. Like again, with a to get married. Like again, with a prenup, you can take away the risk but prenup, you can take away the risk but prenup, you can take away the risk but still have all those benefits. You can still have all those benefits. You can still have all those benefits. You can file married joint returns. You have all file married joint returns. You have all file married joint returns. You have all kinds of inheritance rights if you want kinds of inheritance rights if you want kinds of inheritance rights if you want them. Like there's all kinds of them. Like there's all kinds of them. Like there's all kinds of potential perks to getting married, potential perks to getting married, potential perks to getting married, right? There's also certain cultural right? There's also certain cultural right? There's also certain cultural legitimacy like that. Again, another legitimacy like that. Again, another legitimacy like that. Again, another good reason for people to say they're good reason for people to say they're good reason for people to say they're getting married, isn't it? Yeah, we'll getting married, isn't it? Yeah, we'll getting married, isn't it? Yeah, we'll return to that one. I want to make sure return to that one. I want to make sure return to that one. I want to make sure we flag that because things are we flag that because things are we flag that because things are changing. But I agree. There's always changing. But I agree. There's always changing. But I agree. There's always the have they ever been married? Why the have they ever been married? Why the have they ever been married? Why aren't they married? There's this. We'll aren't they married? There's this. We'll aren't they married? There's this. We'll get back to that. If you say this is my get back to that. If you say this is my get back to that. If you say this is my girlfriend, that could mean a week. girlfriend, that could mean a week. girlfriend, that could mean a week. We've been together a week. Or it could We've been together a week. Or it could We've been together a week. Or it could mean we've been together 10 years and we mean we've been together 10 years and we mean we've been together 10 years and we have kids together. It implies you say have kids together. It implies you say have kids together. It implies you say my wife. Now that's a fallacy. That's my wife. Now that's a fallacy. That's my wife. Now that's a fallacy. That's insane, right? just cuz we went and insane, right? just cuz we went and insane, right? just cuz we went and did like we 20 bucks Elvis will marry did like we 20 bucks Elvis will marry did like we 20 bucks Elvis will marry you in Vegas and you're telling me that you in Vegas and you're telling me that you in Vegas and you're telling me that gives more legitimacy than someone that gives more legitimacy than someone that gives more legitimacy than someone who's got two children with someone has who's got two children with someone has who's got two children with someone has lived with them for 10 years but just lived with them for 10 years but just lived with them for 10 years but just didn't get the government involved like didn't get the government involved like didn't get the government involved like that doesn't make any sense to me but that doesn't make any sense to me but that doesn't make any sense to me but we've decided it's like presto change we've decided it's like presto change we've decided it's like presto change you're married that means now you're a you're married that means now you're a you're married that means now you're a totally legitimate relationship a family totally legitimate relationship a family totally legitimate relationship a family member told me that years ago I won't member told me that years ago I won't member told me that years ago I won't tell you what the course of their tell you what the course of their tell you what the course of their relationship was um said the reason to relationship was um said the reason to relationship was um said the reason to get married is because it's an get married is because it's an get married is because it's an additional buff buffer against uh additional buff buffer against uh additional buff buffer against uh walking out when things get tough and walking out when things get tough and walking out when things get tough and they're going to get tough. Yeah. See, I they're going to get tough. Yeah. See, I they're going to get tough. Yeah. See, I want to hear that a lot. And I you know want to hear that a lot. And I you know want to hear that a lot. And I you know what if we what if we closed emergency what if we what if we closed emergency what if we what if we closed emergency rooms from 1000 p.m. until like 500 a.m. rooms from 1000 p.m. until like 500 a.m. rooms from 1000 p.m. until like 500 a.m. Do you think people would do less risky Do you think people would do less risky Do you think people would do less risky [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Do you think people would go like, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Do you think people would go like, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Do you think people would go like, "Hey, you know what? If I break my leg "Hey, you know what? If I break my leg "Hey, you know what? If I break my leg skateboarding, sorry to pick on skateboarding, sorry to pick on skateboarding, sorry to pick on skateboarding. if the ER is closed, I skateboarding. if the ER is closed, I skateboarding. if the ER is closed, I won't be like that's insane to think won't be like that's insane to think won't be like that's insane to think that people in this dopamine state, you that people in this dopamine state, you that people in this dopamine state, you know, intoxicated by pherommones that know, intoxicated by pherommones that know, intoxicated by pherommones that they're going to say like, oh, you know, they're going to say like, oh, you know, they're going to say like, oh, you know, like we are legally married, I might like we are legally married, I might like we are legally married, I might have to guess. Like it's the have to guess. Like it's the have to guess. Like it's the numbers don't bear it out. Like with numbers don't bear it out. Like with numbers don't bear it out. Like with the divorce rate what it is, it with the divorce rate what it is, it with the divorce rate what it is, it doesn't work. You want to create doesn't work. You want to create doesn't work. You want to create barriers, create barriers to entry. Like barriers, create barriers to entry. Like barriers, create barriers to entry. Like how bad do you want it? Like how bad do how bad do you want it? Like how bad do how bad do you want it? Like how bad do you want to get married? You have to you want to get married? You have to you want to get married? You have to there's a waiting period or you have to there's a waiting period or you have to there's a waiting period or you have to take a test or you have to whatever take a test or you have to whatever take a test or you have to whatever something some barrier to entry you have something some barrier to entry you have something some barrier to entry you have to pay some amount of money to get m I to pay some amount of money to get m I to pay some amount of money to get m I don't know create barrier if you believe don't know create barrier if you believe don't know create barrier if you believe in the barrier concept barriers to exit in the barrier concept barriers to exit in the barrier concept barriers to exit makes no sense barriers to entry might makes no sense barriers to entry might makes no sense barriers to entry might make sense again still don't think it make sense again still don't think it make sense again still don't think it would make that much sense but to tie it would make that much sense but to tie it would make that much sense but to tie it back to the prenup question so the first back to the prenup question so the first back to the prenup question so the first question is why are you getting married question is why are you getting married question is why are you getting married okay what's the purpose what is the okay what's the purpose what is the okay what's the purpose what is the problem to which marriage is a solution problem to which marriage is a solution problem to which marriage is a solution the next question is okay if we marry the next question is okay if we marry the next question is okay if we marry without a prenup what will govern mhm without a prenup what will govern mhm without a prenup what will govern mhm our relationship in the event that it our relationship in the event that it our relationship in the event that it doesn't end in death okay so if it ends doesn't end in death okay so if it ends doesn't end in death okay so if it ends by some other reason either I divorce by some other reason either I divorce by some other reason either I divorce you divorce me we come to the joint you divorce me we come to the joint you divorce me we come to the joint decision that this isn't working some decision that this isn't working some decision that this isn't working some intervening circumstance occurs that intervening circumstance occurs that intervening circumstance occurs that changes the dynamic between us in a way changes the dynamic between us in a way changes the dynamic between us in a way that we couldn't possibly have antic that we couldn't possibly have antic that we couldn't possibly have antic anticipated whatever that might be a anticipated whatever that might be a anticipated whatever that might be a medical issue something with a child medical issue something with a child medical issue something with a child like I've had cases where and these are like I've had cases where and these are like I've had cases where and these are tragic cases but I've had maybe a in a tragic cases but I've had maybe a in a tragic cases but I've had maybe a in a 25 year career I've maybe had a dozen 25 year career I've maybe had a dozen 25 year career I've maybe had a dozen cases where people lost a child by cases where people lost a child by cases where people lost a child by usually some kind of tragic accident so usually some kind of tragic accident so usually some kind of tragic accident so kid falls in the pool kid falls in the pool kid falls in the pool drowns and they cannot be together drowns and they cannot be together drowns and they cannot be together anymore like they are a reminder to the anymore like they are a reminder to the anymore like they are a reminder to the other person of this immeasurable loss other person of this immeasurable loss other person of this immeasurable loss that they can't wrap their brains around that they can't wrap their brains around that they can't wrap their brains around like and so they lose each other, you like and so they lose each other, you like and so they lose each other, you know, and it's not anyone's fault. Like know, and it's not anyone's fault. Like know, and it's not anyone's fault. Like it's not either of their fault that this it's not either of their fault that this it's not either of their fault that this horrible tragedy occurred, but it's just horrible tragedy occurred, but it's just horrible tragedy occurred, but it's just too painful. Like they just remind each too painful. Like they just remind each too painful. Like they just remind each other of this loss. They can't ever, you other of this loss. They can't ever, you other of this loss. They can't ever, you know, they can't ever extricate that know, they can't ever extricate that know, they can't ever extricate that from their feelings. So now I don't look from their feelings. So now I don't look from their feelings. So now I don't look at that person and go, "Well, you have at that person and go, "Well, you have at that person and go, "Well, you have you should never get divorced. divorces, you should never get divorced. divorces, you should never get divorced. divorces, dude. Who the who am I to say to that dude. Who the who am I to say to that dude. Who the who am I to say to that person? No, no, continue to feel that person? No, no, continue to feel that person? No, no, continue to feel that torturous pain or oh, go to therapy and torturous pain or oh, go to therapy and torturous pain or oh, go to therapy and that'll get rid of that. Like, like it's that'll get rid of that. Like, like it's that'll get rid of that. Like, like it's not it's not that simple. So, if that not it's not that simple. So, if that not it's not that simple. So, if that person who's been through that exquisite person who's been through that exquisite person who's been through that exquisite unique kind of torture, that person unique kind of torture, that person unique kind of torture, that person says, "Yeah, we just can't do that. says, "Yeah, we just can't do that. says, "Yeah, we just can't do that. Like, we love each other, but we just Like, we love each other, but we just Like, we love each other, but we just can't. Like, we have to start over and can't. Like, we have to start over and can't. Like, we have to start over and reboot our lives separately so that we reboot our lives separately so that we reboot our lives separately so that we have no memory of that anymore or as few have no memory of that anymore or as few have no memory of that anymore or as few reminders as possible. I have nothing I reminders as possible. I have nothing I reminders as possible. I have nothing I can say to that except of that's not a can say to that except of that's not a can say to that except of that's not a choice I could tell you is wrong. I choice I could tell you is wrong. I choice I could tell you is wrong. I don't have the right to tell you that. don't have the right to tell you that. don't have the right to tell you that. So there are circumstances that can end So there are circumstances that can end So there are circumstances that can end a marriage that were not anticipated by a marriage that were not anticipated by a marriage that were not anticipated by or caused by either person's males. or caused by either person's males. or caused by either person's males. Right? So okay now what? Right? So so if Right? So okay now what? Right? So so if Right? So okay now what? Right? So so if we know in the absence of a rule set in we know in the absence of a rule set in we know in the absence of a rule set in the absence of a prenup what happens if the absence of a prenup what happens if the absence of a prenup what happens if we divorce? Well most people never even we divorce? Well most people never even we divorce? Well most people never even get to that step. Like most people never get to that step. Like most people never get to that step. Like most people never when they get married, they never sit when they get married, they never sit when they get married, they never sit down with anyone and go, "What's legally down with anyone and go, "What's legally down with anyone and go, "What's legally going to happen to me right now?" Like going to happen to me right now?" Like going to happen to me right now?" Like what just changed? You know, like what? what just changed? You know, like what? what just changed? You know, like what? Like you buy a house, you get a HUD one Like you buy a house, you get a HUD one Like you buy a house, you get a HUD one that tells you the nature of the loan that tells you the nature of the loan that tells you the nature of the loan and how much you're paying in interest and how much you're paying in interest and how much you're paying in interest so that nobody can like claim they so that nobody can like claim they so that nobody can like claim they didn't know that. You get a lead paint didn't know that. You get a lead paint didn't know that. You get a lead paint disclosure. You get all kinds of things. disclosure. You get all kinds of things. disclosure. You get all kinds of things. You get married, you didn't get a You get married, you didn't get a You get married, you didn't get a pamphlet. You just did the most legally pamphlet. You just did the most legally pamphlet. You just did the most legally significant thing you're ever going to significant thing you're ever going to significant thing you're ever going to do other than dying. And no one told you do other than dying. And no one told you do other than dying. And no one told you anything about what just happened. So, anything about what just happened. So, anything about what just happened. So, you've opted out of the title system. you've opted out of the title system. you've opted out of the title system. So, like right now, if you and I buy a So, like right now, if you and I buy a So, like right now, if you and I buy a house together, right, title controls, house together, right, title controls, house together, right, title controls, whose name is it in? If it's in your whose name is it in? If it's in your whose name is it in? If it's in your name, it's yours. If it's in my name, it's yours. If it's in my name, it's yours. If it's in my name, it's mine. If it's in our joint names, it's mine. If it's in our joint names, it's mine. If it's in our joint names, we own it 50/50 unless there's a we own it 50/50 unless there's a we own it 50/50 unless there's a contract that says otherwise, right? So, contract that says otherwise, right? So, contract that says otherwise, right? So, there are defaults in the absence of a there are defaults in the absence of a there are defaults in the absence of a contract. There are legal defaults. contract. There are legal defaults. contract. There are legal defaults. Again, lawyers make a ton of money over Again, lawyers make a ton of money over Again, lawyers make a ton of money over people's aversion to contracts. Like, people's aversion to contracts. Like, people's aversion to contracts. Like, it's great. Like the worst thing when I it's great. Like the worst thing when I it's great. Like the worst thing when I got involved and trusted prenup and I got involved and trusted prenup and I got involved and trusted prenup and I told people, "Oh, I'm doing this thing. told people, "Oh, I'm doing this thing. told people, "Oh, I'm doing this thing. I want to democratize prenups." All my I want to democratize prenups." All my I want to democratize prenups." All my colleagues were like, "Are you nuts?" colleagues were like, "Are you nuts?" colleagues were like, "Are you nuts?" Like a prenups are the easiest thing we Like a prenups are the easiest thing we Like a prenups are the easiest thing we do. And and we make pure profit on them. do. And and we make pure profit on them. do. And and we make pure profit on them. We can charge 5 $10,000 for basically a We can charge 5 $10,000 for basically a We can charge 5 $10,000 for basically a document that you go into Word and document that you go into Word and document that you go into Word and change the names and it's the same one change the names and it's the same one change the names and it's the same one for a lot of people. Okay? Or we've done for a lot of people. Okay? Or we've done for a lot of people. Okay? Or we've done so many of them that we just go, "Oh, so many of them that we just go, "Oh, so many of them that we just go, "Oh, this is just like that one." And you this is just like that one." And you this is just like that one." And you just change the and here it is and I can just change the and here it is and I can just change the and here it is and I can charge you5$10,000 for it. charge you5$10,000 for it. charge you5$10,000 for it. And if it's successful, I'm taking And if it's successful, I'm taking And if it's successful, I'm taking hundreds of thousands of dollars in hundreds of thousands of dollars in hundreds of thousands of dollars in council fees out of my pocket because council fees out of my pocket because council fees out of my pocket because now you're not going to have a litigated now you're not going to have a litigated now you're not going to have a litigated divorce. It's not going to be a divorce. It's not going to be a divorce. It's not going to be a knockdown dragout with whatever the knockdown dragout with whatever the knockdown dragout with whatever the government's current way of handling government's current way of handling government's current way of handling things happens to be, which by the way things happens to be, which by the way things happens to be, which by the way is going to be different 5 years from is going to be different 5 years from is going to be different 5 years from now than it was 5 years ago. I know that now than it was 5 years ago. I know that now than it was 5 years ago. I know that because I've been doing this 25 years because I've been doing this 25 years because I've been doing this 25 years and the law is completely different than and the law is completely different than and the law is completely different than it was 25 years ago, 10 years ago, 15 it was 25 years ago, 10 years ago, 15 it was 25 years ago, 10 years ago, 15 years ago. It changes constantly because years ago. It changes constantly because years ago. It changes constantly because politicians change constantly. So politicians change constantly. So politicians change constantly. So fundamentally what happens with a prenup fundamentally what happens with a prenup fundamentally what happens with a prenup is simple. We're creating a rule set is simple. We're creating a rule set is simple. We're creating a rule set together, whatever that might be. And it together, whatever that might be. And it together, whatever that might be. And it can be as detailed as you want it to be. can be as detailed as you want it to be. can be as detailed as you want it to be. So I've seen ones that have very So I've seen ones that have very So I've seen ones that have very specific things about how often we're specific things about how often we're specific things about how often we're going to have sex and um if we split up, going to have sex and um if we split up, going to have sex and um if we split up, what'll happen? Requirements. Well, what what'll happen? Requirements. Well, what what'll happen? Requirements. Well, what they are is either aspirational they are is either aspirational they are is either aspirational guidelines or it is tied in some way to guidelines or it is tied in some way to guidelines or it is tied in some way to some incentive or disincentive like some incentive or disincentive like some incentive or disincentive like some penalty. Oh, yeah. You're kidding me. penalty. Oh, yeah. You're kidding me. penalty. Oh, yeah. You're kidding me. I'm not kidding you. I don't advocate I'm not kidding you. I don't advocate I'm not kidding you. I don't advocate for that. I don't think it's a good for that. I don't think it's a good for that. I don't think it's a good idea. But I mean, the story I tell idea. But I mean, the story I tell idea. But I mean, the story I tell pretty frequently is I did a prenup pretty frequently is I did a prenup pretty frequently is I did a prenup defense where I didn't write the prenup, defense where I didn't write the prenup, defense where I didn't write the prenup, so don't blame me, but I defended the so don't blame me, but I defended the so don't blame me, but I defended the prenup successfully where um for every prenup successfully where um for every prenup successfully where um for every 10 pounds the bride gained, she would 10 pounds the bride gained, she would 10 pounds the bride gained, she would lose $10,000 a month in alimony when lose $10,000 a month in alimony when lose $10,000 a month in alimony when they split up. Yeah. And a court upheld they split up. Yeah. And a court upheld they split up. Yeah. And a court upheld it. A court upheld it. The court in its it. A court upheld it. The court in its it. A court upheld it. The court in its decision actually said, "This is borish. decision actually said, "This is borish. decision actually said, "This is borish. This is disgusting. I don't know why you This is disgusting. I don't know why you This is disgusting. I don't know why you married this person who insisted on this married this person who insisted on this married this person who insisted on this being in the contract, but it's a being in the contract, but it's a being in the contract, but it's a contract. You signed it. He signed it. contract. You signed it. He signed it. contract. You signed it. He signed it. You're adults. You were both represented You're adults. You were both represented You're adults. You were both represented by counsel. And I'm It's enforceable." by counsel. And I'm It's enforceable." by counsel. And I'm It's enforceable." Whoa. Yeah. But did the marriage last? Whoa. Yeah. But did the marriage last? Whoa. Yeah. But did the marriage last? No. No, they divorced. Yeah, they No. No, they divorced. Yeah, they No. No, they divorced. Yeah, they divorced. And she lost She lost divorced. And she lost She lost divorced. And she lost She lost $20,000 a month in alimony. He gained $20,000 a month in alimony. He gained $20,000 a month in alimony. He gained little around 20 pounds during Do you little around 20 pounds during Do you little around 20 pounds during Do you think that was the Well, he was rich think that was the Well, he was rich think that was the Well, he was rich and she was gorgeous. I mean, you know, and she was gorgeous. I mean, you know, and she was gorgeous. I mean, you know, and he got richer and she got less and he got richer and she got less and he got richer and she got less gorgeous. But there are a lot of rich gorgeous. But there are a lot of rich gorgeous. But there are a lot of rich gorgeous matchups. Um pretty common. And gorgeous matchups. Um pretty common. And gorgeous matchups. Um pretty common. And that's by the way, it's gender blind, that's by the way, it's gender blind, that's by the way, it's gender blind, too. Like the seauite executive founder too. Like the seauite executive founder too. Like the seauite executive founder that you're talking about, like female that you're talking about, like female that you're talking about, like female founder, they very often don't marry. I founder, they very often don't marry. I founder, they very often don't marry. I know like some people in the red pill know like some people in the red pill know like some people in the red pill community want to say like hypergamy and community want to say like hypergamy and community want to say like hypergamy and stuff like that like seauite women stuff like that like seauite women stuff like that like seauite women only marry like even more successful men only marry like even more successful men only marry like even more successful men than that. I have a lot of female than that. I have a lot of female than that. I have a lot of female clients who I have to tell them they owe clients who I have to tell them they owe clients who I have to tell them they owe alimony and they're like wait why do I alimony and they're like wait why do I alimony and they're like wait why do I have to pay I'm a woman he's a man he's have to pay I'm a woman he's a man he's have to pay I'm a woman he's a man he's got a strong back why do I have to pay got a strong back why do I have to pay got a strong back why do I have to pay alimony I'm like because you are a alimony I'm like because you are a alimony I'm like because you are a seuite executive who makes millions and seuite executive who makes millions and seuite executive who makes millions and you married the like super hot you married the like super hot you married the like super hot unsuccessful musician who has the like unsuccessful musician who has the like unsuccessful musician who has the like oops I didn't know I was sexy stubble oops I didn't know I was sexy stubble oops I didn't know I was sexy stubble cuz he looks really good like and that's cuz he looks really good like and that's cuz he looks really good like and that's you married the equivalent of me you married the equivalent of me you married the equivalent of me marrying like the hot yoga teacher like marrying like the hot yoga teacher like marrying like the hot yoga teacher like I get it like but you know you did I get it like but you know you did I get it like but you know you did the thing and gender has nothing to do the thing and gender has nothing to do the thing and gender has nothing to do with it. If you marry someone who earns with it. If you marry someone who earns with it. If you marry someone who earns significantly less money than you do and significantly less money than you do and significantly less money than you do and they have a diminished lifetime earning they have a diminished lifetime earning they have a diminished lifetime earning capacity, then you owe them alimony most capacity, then you owe them alimony most capacity, then you owe them alimony most likely. Is it always 50/50 of assets? likely. Is it always 50/50 of assets? likely. Is it always 50/50 of assets? Generally, yeah, there's a presumption Generally, yeah, there's a presumption Generally, yeah, there's a presumption that e equitable distribution, equitable that e equitable distribution, equitable that e equitable distribution, equitable meaning fair, is really the law, but meaning fair, is really the law, but meaning fair, is really the law, but equitable is presumed to mean equal. equitable is presumed to mean equal. equitable is presumed to mean equal. There are some reasons and some There are some reasons and some There are some reasons and some circumstances where equitable does circumstances where equitable does circumstances where equitable does not mean equal. There can be things not mean equal. There can be things not mean equal. There can be things called wasteful dissipation of marital called wasteful dissipation of marital called wasteful dissipation of marital assets where a person has squandered assets where a person has squandered assets where a person has squandered money that should have stayed in the money that should have stayed in the money that should have stayed in the marital estate, gambling, having a marital estate, gambling, having a marital estate, gambling, having a paramore, a girlfriend or a boyfriend. paramore, a girlfriend or a boyfriend. paramore, a girlfriend or a boyfriend. So there's rule. But again, like So there's rule. But again, like So there's rule. But again, like to tie it back to prenups, what you're to tie it back to prenups, what you're to tie it back to prenups, what you're doing with a doing with a doing with a prenup as a fundamental is just saying, prenup as a fundamental is just saying, prenup as a fundamental is just saying, okay, there's yours, there's mine, and okay, there's yours, there's mine, and okay, there's yours, there's mine, and there's ours, right? like in terms of there's ours, right? like in terms of there's ours, right? like in terms of assets and liabilities, which by the assets and liabilities, which by the assets and liabilities, which by the way, I think is an excellent analog to way, I think is an excellent analog to way, I think is an excellent analog to the nature of relationships themselves, the nature of relationships themselves, the nature of relationships themselves, right? There's you, there's me, and right? There's you, there's me, and right? There's you, there's me, and there's we, right? And and a healthy there's we, right? And and a healthy there's we, right? And and a healthy relationship, there's still you, there's relationship, there's still you, there's relationship, there's still you, there's still me, and then there's this ven still me, and then there's this ven still me, and then there's this ven diagram of we, right? And of course, you diagram of we, right? And of course, you diagram of we, right? And of course, you don't want you and me to be subsumed by don't want you and me to be subsumed by don't want you and me to be subsumed by the Wii because I fell in love with you. the Wii because I fell in love with you. the Wii because I fell in love with you. You fell in love with me. Why would we You fell in love with me. Why would we You fell in love with me. Why would we want those to go away completely? But of want those to go away completely? But of want those to go away completely? But of course, the Wii is like, you know, course, the Wii is like, you know, course, the Wii is like, you know, it's a it's intoxicating and you it's a it's intoxicating and you it's a it's intoxicating and you want to become the Wii more. But there's want to become the Wii more. But there's want to become the Wii more. But there's value in staying you and me and having a value in staying you and me and having a value in staying you and me and having a healthy we having a healthy, you know, healthy we having a healthy, you know, healthy we having a healthy, you know, intersection there. So why not in your intersection there. So why not in your intersection there. So why not in your structure of the marriage have okay structure of the marriage have okay structure of the marriage have okay yours, mine, and ours. So at a yours, mine, and ours. So at a yours, mine, and ours. So at a fundamental level, if you're going to fundamental level, if you're going to fundamental level, if you're going to have a basic prenuptual agreement, it's have a basic prenuptual agreement, it's have a basic prenuptual agreement, it's just going to say, "Hey, we're staying just going to say, "Hey, we're staying just going to say, "Hey, we're staying in that system. You, me, we, right? in that system. You, me, we, right? in that system. You, me, we, right? Yours, mine, ours. If it's yours, you Yours, mine, ours. If it's yours, you Yours, mine, ours. If it's yours, you keep it. Asset or liability. If it's in keep it. Asset or liability. If it's in keep it. Asset or liability. If it's in mine, I keep it. Asset or liability. If mine, I keep it. Asset or liability. If mine, I keep it. Asset or liability. If it's ours, we divide it 50/50." Fair it's ours, we divide it 50/50." Fair it's ours, we divide it 50/50." Fair enough. And now we're going into this enough. And now we're going into this enough. And now we're going into this relationship with knowing the rule set. relationship with knowing the rule set. relationship with knowing the rule set. So I get a big bonus at work. Okay. If I So I get a big bonus at work. Okay. If I So I get a big bonus at work. Okay. If I put it in my account in my sole name, put it in my account in my sole name, put it in my account in my sole name, I've protected it. We also need to have I've protected it. We also need to have I've protected it. We also need to have a conversation. Hey babe, you just got a conversation. Hey babe, you just got a conversation. Hey babe, you just got that big bonus at work and you didn't that big bonus at work and you didn't that big bonus at work and you didn't put any of it in the joint account. Like put any of it in the joint account. Like put any of it in the joint account. Like what's that about? Something going on what's that about? Something going on what's that about? Something going on that we need to talk about? Like and that we need to talk about? Like and that we need to talk about? Like and again, I understand people don't want to again, I understand people don't want to again, I understand people don't want to have uncomfortable conversations. Well, have uncomfortable conversations. Well, have uncomfortable conversations. Well, you can have like a series of mildly you can have like a series of mildly you can have like a series of mildly uncomfortable conversations throughout uncomfortable conversations throughout uncomfortable conversations throughout the course of a relationship or you can the course of a relationship or you can the course of a relationship or you can duck that and then have some really duck that and then have some really duck that and then have some really difficult conversations in divorce difficult conversations in divorce difficult conversations in divorce court. And to me, that's pretty easy court. And to me, that's pretty easy court. And to me, that's pretty easy like which of those two things I'd like which of those two things I'd like which of those two things I'd choose. So, at its core, a prenuptual choose. So, at its core, a prenuptual choose. So, at its core, a prenuptual agreement can cover as many like people agreement can cover as many like people agreement can cover as many like people put in infidelity clauses where there put in infidelity clauses where there put in infidelity clauses where there are financial penalties if someone are financial penalties if someone are financial penalties if someone cheats. Again, I discourage it. cheats. Again, I discourage it. cheats. Again, I discourage it. financial penalties. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. financial penalties. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. financial penalties. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Liquidated damages, whether it's a lump Liquidated damages, whether it's a lump Liquidated damages, whether it's a lump sum or a waiver of alimony if you're sum or a waiver of alimony if you're sum or a waiver of alimony if you're caught cheating. I mean, it used to be caught cheating. I mean, it used to be caught cheating. I mean, it used to be the law of the land that if you could the law of the land that if you could the law of the land that if you could prove adultery, a person at that point, adultery, a person at that point, adultery, a person at that point, typically women because the workforce typically women because the workforce typically women because the workforce was predominantly male at that time. If was predominantly male at that time. If was predominantly male at that time. If you could catch, that's why like the you could catch, that's why like the you could catch, that's why like the picture of a divorce lawyer with a picture of a divorce lawyer with a picture of a divorce lawyer with a private investigator with a telephoto private investigator with a telephoto private investigator with a telephoto lens taking pictures of someone coming lens taking pictures of someone coming lens taking pictures of someone coming out of the hotel. It's like in out of the hotel. It's like in out of the hotel. It's like in everyone's mind forever because, and by everyone's mind forever because, and by everyone's mind forever because, and by the way, people still come in to my the way, people still come in to my the way, people still come in to my office and they're like, "I've got him. office and they're like, "I've got him. office and they're like, "I've got him. I've got photos of him coming out of I've got photos of him coming out of I've got photos of him coming out of this hotel with his girlfriend." I'm this hotel with his girlfriend." I'm this hotel with his girlfriend." I'm like, "Okay." like, "Okay." like, "Okay." Like you, you know, there's no like good Like you, you know, there's no like good Like you, you know, there's no like good spouse bonus and bad spouse penalty, spouse bonus and bad spouse penalty, spouse bonus and bad spouse penalty, right? Like you don't get like extra right? Like you don't get like extra right? Like you don't get like extra stuff because you were a super good stuff because you were a super good stuff because you were a super good spouse who never cheated. And you don't spouse who never cheated. And you don't spouse who never cheated. And you don't lose stuff because you cheated. like lose stuff because you cheated. like lose stuff because you cheated. like other than maybe the marriage, you don't other than maybe the marriage, you don't other than maybe the marriage, you don't lose like you don't get anything less. lose like you don't get anything less. lose like you don't get anything less. It's not like you don't get it. Used to It's not like you don't get it. Used to It's not like you don't get it. Used to be if you could prove be if you could prove be if you could prove adultery, you waved alimony. So if this adultery, you waved alimony. So if this adultery, you waved alimony. So if this person cheated, they weren't allowed to person cheated, they weren't allowed to person cheated, they weren't allowed to ask for alimony. That was abolished in ask for alimony. That was abolished in ask for alimony. That was abolished in the 1970s by statute. So it's gone now. the 1970s by statute. So it's gone now. the 1970s by statute. So it's gone now. It's not divorce. No fault divorce is It's not divorce. No fault divorce is It's not divorce. No fault divorce is the law of the land according to the law of the land according to the law of the land according to the prenup or according to the law again prenup or according to the law again prenup or according to the law again according to the law as it stands, which according to the law as it stands, which according to the law as it stands, which has changed dramatically over 25 years has changed dramatically over 25 years has changed dramatically over 25 years and varies stateto state. Whereas with a and varies stateto state. Whereas with a and varies stateto state. Whereas with a prenuptual agreement, you're agreeing on prenuptual agreement, you're agreeing on prenuptual agreement, you're agreeing on a rule set. You're agreeing and again, a rule set. You're agreeing and again, a rule set. You're agreeing and again, if people want to agree to weird clauses if people want to agree to weird clauses if people want to agree to weird clauses like infidelity penalties and things like infidelity penalties and things like infidelity penalties and things like you can do that and lawyers, we can like you can do that and lawyers, we can like you can do that and lawyers, we can draft stuff like that. No problem. who draft stuff like that. No problem. who draft stuff like that. No problem. who gets the listen pet gets the listen pet gets the listen pet clauses the level of it was very funny clauses the level of it was very funny clauses the level of it was very funny because when the team at trusted because when the team at trusted because when the team at trusted prenup I you know I was the legal prenup I you know I was the legal prenup I you know I was the legal advisor piece of it obviously and so I advisor piece of it obviously and so I advisor piece of it obviously and so I was really feeding them so they could was really feeding them so they could was really feeding them so they could feed to this AI kind of all of these feed to this AI kind of all of these feed to this AI kind of all of these prenups I had prenups I had prenups I had done and uh Ben who's our tech guy uh he done and uh Ben who's our tech guy uh he done and uh Ben who's our tech guy uh he lives in Australia uh he called me lives in Australia uh he called me lives in Australia uh he called me up and he was like you do know like the up and he was like you do know like the up and he was like you do know like the pet clauses are actually the most pet clauses are actually the most pet clauses are actually the most complicated and diverse out of all of complicated and diverse out of all of complicated and diverse out of all of the things. I believe it. And I said, the things. I believe it. And I said, the things. I believe it. And I said, "Yeah, do you have pets?" I said, "Yeah, do you have pets?" I said, "Yeah, do you have pets?" I said, "Because I'll tell you right now, "Because I'll tell you right now, "Because I'll tell you right now, because there are people that go so hard because there are people that go so hard because there are people that go so hard in the paint on pet stuff like that, in the paint on pet stuff like that, in the paint on pet stuff like that, it's like they have custody rotation it's like they have custody rotation it's like they have custody rotation schedules for the pets. They have schedules for the pets. They have schedules for the pets. They have clauses about what to do if there's a clauses about what to do if there's a clauses about what to do if there's a conflict about veterary decisions. And conflict about veterary decisions. And conflict about veterary decisions. And unlike children, you are most likely going to children, you are most likely going to children, you are most likely going to outlive your pet. And so you have to outlive your pet. And so you have to outlive your pet. And so you have to have clauses in for if this pet has to have clauses in for if this pet has to have clauses in for if this pet has to be euthanized, can we both be there? be euthanized, can we both be there? be euthanized, can we both be there? What do we do with the cremated remains What do we do with the cremated remains What do we do with the cremated remains of this pet? You know, if we can't agree of this pet? You know, if we can't agree of this pet? You know, if we can't agree on a park or whatever that it's going to on a park or whatever that it's going to on a park or whatever that it's going to be sprinkled at, should we each get half be sprinkled at, should we each get half be sprinkled at, should we each get half and then we can do what we want with it? and then we can do what we want with it? and then we can do what we want with it? Like these are things that again have Like these are things that again have Like these are things that again have that convers because here's the thing. that convers because here's the thing. that convers because here's the thing. If we have that If we have that If we have that conversation when we are now angry at conversation when we are now angry at conversation when we are now angry at each other and breaking up, right? When each other and breaking up, right? When each other and breaking up, right? When when hell hath no fury like a woman or a when hell hath no fury like a woman or a when hell hath no fury like a woman or a man scorned, do you think the answer is man scorned, do you think the answer is man scorned, do you think the answer is going to be a compassionate and going to be a compassionate and going to be a compassionate and thoughtful one that honors the thoughtful one that honors the thoughtful one that honors the relationship we both had with this relationship we both had with this relationship we both had with this companion animal? No. It's going to be companion animal? No. It's going to be companion animal? No. It's going to be I'm keeping the ashes. Why? Cuz [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm keeping the ashes. Why? Cuz [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm keeping the ashes. Why? Cuz [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. That's why. Like that's the answer. you. That's why. Like that's the answer. you. That's why. Like that's the answer. Like I've had people explicitly say I Like I've had people explicitly say I Like I've had people explicitly say I had a case a couple weeks ago where we had a case a couple weeks ago where we had a case a couple weeks ago where we went in and had like it was supposed to went in and had like it was supposed to went in and had like it was supposed to be a four-way discussion, but I was be a four-way discussion, but I was be a four-way discussion, but I was doing like shuttle stuff. So, I'm doing like shuttle stuff. So, I'm doing like shuttle stuff. So, I'm talking to the wife and her counsel, and talking to the wife and her counsel, and talking to the wife and her counsel, and I've got my client in another conference I've got my client in another conference I've got my client in another conference room, and these people own like 12 room, and these people own like 12 room, and these people own like 12 properties, like really high netw worth properties, like really high netw worth properties, like really high netw worth case, and I said, "Look, which of case, and I said, "Look, which of case, and I said, "Look, which of these properties do you want to keep?" these properties do you want to keep?" these properties do you want to keep?" And she was like, "Well, which ones does And she was like, "Well, which ones does And she was like, "Well, which ones does he want?" And I said, "Well, why he want?" And I said, "Well, why he want?" And I said, "Well, why does that matter? Why don't you tell does that matter? Why don't you tell does that matter? Why don't you tell me?" And she's like, "Well, because I me?" And she's like, "Well, because I me?" And she's like, "Well, because I want to know which ones he wants." And I want to know which ones he wants." And I want to know which ones he wants." And I said, "Right, but why?" And she's like, said, "Right, but why?" And she's like, said, "Right, but why?" And she's like, "Because whichever one he wants, I want "Because whichever one he wants, I want "Because whichever one he wants, I want those." Wow. And I said, "Well, that those." Wow. And I said, "Well, that those." Wow. And I said, "Well, that feels like you're just trying to be feels like you're just trying to be feels like you're just trying to be contrarian." And she goes, "Well, no, contrarian." And she goes, "Well, no, contrarian." And she goes, "Well, no, like he's actually a pretty shrewd like he's actually a pretty shrewd like he's actually a pretty shrewd investor, so whichever ones he wants are investor, so whichever ones he wants are investor, so whichever ones he wants are probably the best ones, so that's probably the best ones, so that's probably the best ones, so that's actually why I want them." Now, look, actually why I want them." Now, look, actually why I want them." Now, look, whether that's true, which seems like a whether that's true, which seems like a whether that's true, which seems like a fair logic, or whether it was cuz [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fair logic, or whether it was cuz [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fair logic, or whether it was cuz [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you, that's why. Like, the time to have you, that's why. Like, the time to have you, that's why. Like, the time to have that conversation was not that moment that conversation was not that moment that conversation was not that moment where we're at odds and we both lawyered where we're at odds and we both lawyered where we're at odds and we both lawyered up. The conversation should have been up. The conversation should have been up. The conversation should have been had back in the day. you know, back when had back in the day. you know, back when had back in the day. you know, back when there was still an abundance of optimism there was still an abundance of optimism there was still an abundance of optimism and affection between these people. And and affection between these people. And and affection between these people. And so, pet clauses, great example. Like, I so, pet clauses, great example. Like, I so, pet clauses, great example. Like, I think there's tremendous value in think there's tremendous value in think there's tremendous value in putting that stuff in there because let putting that stuff in there because let putting that stuff in there because let me tell you something, heartbreak is me tell you something, heartbreak is me tell you something, heartbreak is hard enough. Breaking up cohabitation with enough. Breaking up cohabitation with enough. Breaking up cohabitation with someone, like I don't care if you're someone, like I don't care if you're someone, like I don't care if you're married or not, you live with someone married or not, you live with someone married or not, you live with someone and now you're not cohabitating anymore. and now you're not cohabitating anymore. and now you're not cohabitating anymore. It sucks. It sucks. We've all been It sucks. It sucks. We've all been It sucks. It sucks. We've all been there. It sucks, man. Like, who keeps there. It sucks, man. Like, who keeps there. It sucks, man. Like, who keeps what? And like but even if I keep a what? And like but even if I keep a what? And like but even if I keep a thing like I don't want that anymore. thing like I don't want that anymore. thing like I don't want that anymore. Like it just reminds me of you. Like we Like it just reminds me of you. Like we Like it just reminds me of you. Like we got that on that trip. I don't want to got that on that trip. I don't want to got that on that trip. I don't want to look at it, you know? Like and I don't look at it, you know? Like and I don't look at it, you know? Like and I don't want to throw it out cuz it's like it want to throw it out cuz it's like it want to throw it out cuz it's like it was special. But I also want to look at was special. But I also want to look at was special. But I also want to look at it. So I'm going to put in a box it. So I'm going to put in a box it. So I'm going to put in a box somewhere and hope that someday I'm somewhere and hope that someday I'm somewhere and hope that someday I'm going to open that box and smile and no going to open that box and smile and no going to open that box and smile and no one else opens that box and no one else one else opens that box and no one else one else opens that box and no one else opens that box and goes, "Oh, where'd opens that box and goes, "Oh, where'd opens that box and goes, "Oh, where'd you get?" Oh, nothing. You know what I you get?" Oh, nothing. You know what I you get?" Oh, nothing. You know what I mean? Like and that's, you know, like mean? Like and that's, you know, like mean? Like and that's, you know, like this is the challenge of this. But this is the challenge of this. But this is the challenge of this. But that's why having that conversation that's why having that conversation that's why having that conversation earlier, that's the way it is. So for earlier, that's the way it is. So for earlier, that's the way it is. So for me, what prenups me, what prenups me, what prenups combined is a long list of things you combined is a long list of things you combined is a long list of things you can bind with prenups. What's important can bind with prenups. What's important can bind with prenups. What's important is what's the prenup that's right for is what's the prenup that's right for is what's the prenup that's right for this couple. What issues are important this couple. What issues are important this couple. What issues are important to you? The simplest one, yours, mine, to you? The simplest one, yours, mine, to you? The simplest one, yours, mine, ours. 50/50 divide on the hours. Yours ours. 50/50 divide on the hours. Yours ours. 50/50 divide on the hours. Yours and mine. We each keep our own. Whether and mine. We each keep our own. Whether and mine. We each keep our own. Whether that's the stuff we had before the that's the stuff we had before the that's the stuff we had before the marriage or what because even like marriage or what because even like marriage or what because even like states like California that have states like California that have states like California that have community property. Okay, community property. Okay, community property. Okay, community property just to give you like a property just to give you like a property just to give you like a cliffnotes on it. And there's a couple cliffnotes on it. And there's a couple cliffnotes on it. And there's a couple of community property states. California of community property states. California of community property states. California is not the only one. So when you marry, is not the only one. So when you marry, is not the only one. So when you marry, what you own at the time of marriage is what you own at the time of marriage is what you own at the time of marriage is your separate property. Okay? And then your separate property. Okay? And then your separate property. Okay? And then everything you acquire from the date of everything you acquire from the date of everything you acquire from the date of marriage forward is presumed to be marriage forward is presumed to be marriage forward is presumed to be marital property. You're one person in marital property. You're one person in marital property. You're one person in the eyes of the law. So if you buy your the eyes of the law. So if you buy your the eyes of the law. So if you buy your wife a Rolex watch, you bought yourself wife a Rolex watch, you bought yourself wife a Rolex watch, you bought yourself one half of a Rolex watch. Okay? It one half of a Rolex watch. Okay? It one half of a Rolex watch. Okay? It doesn't matter. Title is irrelevant. If doesn't matter. Title is irrelevant. If doesn't matter. Title is irrelevant. If you win the lottery, she won half the you win the lottery, she won half the you win the lottery, she won half the lottery. Okay? So that's how it works. lottery. Okay? So that's how it works. lottery. Okay? So that's how it works. In the absence of a prenuptual In the absence of a prenuptual In the absence of a prenuptual agreement, community property is after a agreement, community property is after a agreement, community property is after a certain period of time, and that period certain period of time, and that period certain period of time, and that period of time varies from state to state. In of time varies from state to state. In of time varies from state to state. In California, 7 years. Once you hit that California, 7 years. Once you hit that California, 7 years. Once you hit that benchmark, all the separate property is benchmark, all the separate property is benchmark, all the separate property is now marital property. You're considered now marital property. You're considered now marital property. You're considered like fully married. You're one person in like fully married. You're one person in like fully married. You're one person in the eyes of the law. All the mind the eyes of the law. All the mind the eyes of the law. All the mind becomes ours. All the mind becomes ours. becomes ours. All the mind becomes ours. becomes ours. All the mind becomes ours. So the you and the me both becomes part So the you and the me both becomes part So the you and the me both becomes part of the Wii. Now in of the Wii. Now in of the Wii. Now in theory, the legislative intent, okay, theory, the legislative intent, okay, theory, the legislative intent, okay, was yeah, after a certain number of was yeah, after a certain number of was yeah, after a certain number of years, you're like the tree that's grown years, you're like the tree that's grown years, you're like the tree that's grown in the way that now it's inextricably. in the way that now it's inextricably. in the way that now it's inextricably. There's no more you and me. There's just There's no more you and me. There's just There's no more you and me. There's just we, right? Love that idea. Love that we, right? Love that idea. Love that we, right? Love that idea. Love that idea. Cool. Like very romantic concept, idea. Cool. Like very romantic concept, idea. Cool. Like very romantic concept, right? In reality, do you know what it right? In reality, do you know what it right? In reality, do you know what it did? It spiked the divorce rate at 6 and did? It spiked the divorce rate at 6 and did? It spiked the divorce rate at 6 and 1/2 years. 1/2 years. 1/2 years. Cuz why? Cuz 6 and 1/2 years, Cuz why? Cuz 6 and 1/2 years, Cuz why? Cuz 6 and 1/2 years, honeymoon's over. Like that honeymoon's over. Like that honeymoon's over. Like that intoxication's passed. You know, that intoxication's passed. You know, that intoxication's passed. You know, that early days intoxication's passed. The early days intoxication's passed. The early days intoxication's passed. The the creamer is no longer like Look at the creamer is no longer like Look at the creamer is no longer like Look at how much creamer she uses. It's like how much creamer she uses. It's like how much creamer she uses. It's like Jesus Christ, you need that much Jesus Christ, you need that much Jesus Christ, you need that much creamer. Like, I got to go buy more creamer. Like, I got to go buy more creamer. Like, I got to go buy more creamer now. I don't throw my story, creamer now. I don't throw my story, creamer now. I don't throw my story, man. No, I'm not trying. I'm not trying man. No, I'm not trying. I'm not trying man. No, I'm not trying. I'm not trying to divorce. I'm the skunk in the to divorce. I'm the skunk in the to divorce. I'm the skunk in the picture. She'll listen to this and picture. She'll listen to this and picture. She'll listen to this and she'll be like, wait a second. I know she'll be like, wait a second. I know she'll be like, wait a second. I know I'm kidding. No, you were still speaking I'm kidding. No, you were still speaking I'm kidding. No, you were still speaking of it fondly. So, I'm the divorce. of it fondly. So, I'm the divorce. of it fondly. So, I'm the divorce. There's nothing I'm just joking as if I There's nothing I'm just joking as if I There's nothing I'm just joking as if I don't bring a little black cloud to the don't bring a little black cloud to the don't bring a little black cloud to the conversation. There's nothing you can do conversation. There's nothing you can do conversation. There's nothing you can do to take away to puncture that memory for to take away to puncture that memory for to take away to puncture that memory for me. I love that. And by the way, all the me. I love that. And by the way, all the me. I love that. And by the way, all the more reason why it's not silly or more reason why it's not silly or more reason why it's not silly or stupid. It's incredible. That's an stupid. It's incredible. That's an stupid. It's incredible. That's an incredible thing, you know, and that's incredible thing, you know, and that's incredible thing, you know, and that's and we all have those things if we're and we all have those things if we're and we all have those things if we're being honest in every relationship we've being honest in every relationship we've being honest in every relationship we've ever had. In every single one. Nina, my ever had. In every single one. Nina, my ever had. In every single one. Nina, my girlfriend in high school, loved Skid girlfriend in high school, loved Skid girlfriend in high school, loved Skid Row. She loved the band Skid Row. She Row. She loved the band Skid Row. She Row. She loved the band Skid Row. She was madly in love with Sebastian Bach was madly in love with Sebastian Bach was madly in love with Sebastian Bach from Skid Row. And I was so jealous from Skid Row. And I was so jealous from Skid Row. And I was so jealous because I looked absolutely nothing like because I looked absolutely nothing like because I looked absolutely nothing like him. And I just remember that about her him. And I just remember that about her him. And I just remember that about her that she had a poster of Skid Row on her that she had a poster of Skid Row on her that she had a poster of Skid Row on her wall. Like how many years ago that was wall. Like how many years ago that was wall. Like how many years ago that was like she's a mother of two. Like she's like she's a mother of two. Like she's like she's a mother of two. Like she's a, you know, but I still remember very a, you know, but I still remember very a, you know, but I still remember very fondly like sort of like being so fondly like sort of like being so fondly like sort of like being so insecure about Sebastian Bach from Skid insecure about Sebastian Bach from Skid insecure about Sebastian Bach from Skid Row and her like kind of reassuring me Row and her like kind of reassuring me Row and her like kind of reassuring me like, "Oh, that's okay. I think you're like, "Oh, that's okay. I think you're like, "Oh, that's okay. I think you're much more handsome than him. And me much more handsome than him. And me much more handsome than him. And me being like, that is so not true. He's so being like, that is so not true. He's so being like, that is so not true. He's so good-looking. But like it, we all have good-looking. But like it, we all have good-looking. But like it, we all have those memories of every single, no those memories of every single, no those memories of every single, no matter how short the relationship was, matter how short the relationship was, matter how short the relationship was, we have a memory like that. And many of we have a memory like that. And many of we have a memory like that. And many of them, it's been eclipsed by the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] them, it's been eclipsed by the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] them, it's been eclipsed by the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that happened at the end, the negative that happened at the end, the negative that happened at the end, the negative stuff that happened at the end. And and stuff that happened at the end. And and stuff that happened at the end. And and by the way, that's another good reason by the way, that's another good reason by the way, that's another good reason to control that downside because you can to control that downside because you can to control that downside because you can destroy 20 years of amazing, beautiful destroy 20 years of amazing, beautiful destroy 20 years of amazing, beautiful memories with six months of litigation. memories with six months of litigation. memories with six months of litigation. All you're going to remember is that All you're going to remember is that All you're going to remember is that last six months. Like that's it. Like last six months. Like that's it. Like last six months. Like that's it. Like whoever said that money can't buy love, whoever said that money can't buy love, whoever said that money can't buy love, you know, they didn't know it's you know, they didn't know it's you know, they didn't know it's like a restaurant. The check comes at like a restaurant. The check comes at like a restaurant. The check comes at the end. Like that's when you got to pay the end. Like that's when you got to pay the end. Like that's when you got to pay the bill is at the end, right? if you do the bill is at the end, right? if you do the bill is at the end, right? if you do it the old-fashioned way, which is we're it the old-fashioned way, which is we're it the old-fashioned way, which is we're just going to submit ourselves to a game just going to submit ourselves to a game just going to submit ourselves to a game that we don't know the rule set of, and that we don't know the rule set of, and that we don't know the rule set of, and then when it's ending, we're going to then when it's ending, we're going to then when it's ending, we're going to let lawyers just go at each other, or let lawyers just go at each other, or let lawyers just go at each other, or we're going to rely on the hope that we're going to rely on the hope that we're going to rely on the hope that we won't use the adversarial system, and we won't use the adversarial system, and we won't use the adversarial system, and we'll be able to sit across each other we'll be able to sit across each other we'll be able to sit across each other from a table with a mediator and hold from a table with a mediator and hold from a table with a mediator and hold hands and sing kumbaya. what you're hands and sing kumbaya. what you're hands and sing kumbaya. what you're saying is really important uh as forgive saying is really important uh as forgive saying is really important uh as forgive me um for interrupting but because I me um for interrupting but because I me um for interrupting but because I think that nowadays there's kind of a think that nowadays there's kind of a think that nowadays there's kind of a growing I hear more often like yeah we growing I hear more often like yeah we growing I hear more often like yeah we were these are colleagues of mine were these are colleagues of mine were these are colleagues of mine typically like oh yeah you know we typically like oh yeah you know we typically like oh yeah you know we were married we got divorced but you were married we got divorced but you were married we got divorced but you know we had 15 really great years we know we had 15 really great years we know we had 15 really great years we raised our daughter and they're still raised our daughter and they're still raised our daughter and they're still friends or at least friendly and they friends or at least friendly and they friends or at least friendly and they look they look on those years or at look they look on those years or at look they look on those years or at least speak about them I believe them least speak about them I believe them least speak about them I believe them um with a ton of fond um with a ton of fond um with a ton of fond and without the kind the major injury of and without the kind the major injury of and without the kind the major injury of what you're talking about, which is this what you're talking about, which is this what you're talking about, which is this rough litigation at the end. So, that's rough litigation at the end. So, that's rough litigation at the end. So, that's another reason to have a prenup. Another another reason to have a prenup. Another another reason to have a prenup. Another great reason to have a prenup because great reason to have a prenup because great reason to have a prenup because look, I have an ex-wife. I've been look, I have an ex-wife. I've been look, I have an ex-wife. I've been divorced for 20 years. She's been divorced for 20 years. She's been divorced for 20 years. She's been remarried for 15. Like, she's a remarried for 15. Like, she's a remarried for 15. Like, she's a wonderful person. She's a friend. I care wonderful person. She's a friend. I care wonderful person. She's a friend. I care deeply about her. She will always be deeply about her. She will always be deeply about her. She will always be There's a lot of people I love I There's a lot of people I love I There's a lot of people I love I wouldn't want to be married to. And she wouldn't want to be married to. And she wouldn't want to be married to. And she would describe me that way. She she'd be would describe me that way. She she'd be would describe me that way. She she'd be like, "I love Jim. He's a great guy. like, "I love Jim. He's a great guy. like, "I love Jim. He's a great guy. He's a great ex-husband. I'm a much He's a great ex-husband. I'm a much He's a great ex-husband. I'm a much better ex-husband than I am husband. better ex-husband than I am husband. better ex-husband than I am husband. Totally different skill set, totally Totally different skill set, totally Totally different skill set, totally different resume. I'm an excellent different resume. I'm an excellent different resume. I'm an excellent ex-husband. I do not have the patience ex-husband. I do not have the patience ex-husband. I do not have the patience to be a good husband, but I have the to be a good husband, but I have the to be a good husband, but I have the patience to be a good ex-husband. I can patience to be a good ex-husband. I can patience to be a good ex-husband. I can be a great co-parent, too. I'm a really be a great co-parent, too. I'm a really be a great co-parent, too. I'm a really good father. You know, you don't have to good father. You know, you don't have to good father. You know, you don't have to be a great husband to be a great father. be a great husband to be a great father. be a great husband to be a great father. It's a different skill set. Like, just It's a different skill set. Like, just It's a different skill set. Like, just because you cook doesn't mean you can because you cook doesn't mean you can because you cook doesn't mean you can farm. You know, like those are two farm. You know, like those are two farm. You know, like those are two different things. Yes, they both deal different things. Yes, they both deal different things. Yes, they both deal with food, but they're two totally with food, but they're two totally with food, but they're two totally different skill sets. So fundamentally I different skill sets. So fundamentally I different skill sets. So fundamentally I think how things end very often impacts think how things end very often impacts think how things end very often impacts your perception and memory of the entire your perception and memory of the entire your perception and memory of the entire thing. And you as the brain scientist thing. And you as the brain scientist thing. And you as the brain scientist would be able to tell me why that works would be able to tell me why that works would be able to tell me why that works in terms of what actually imprints on in terms of what actually imprints on in terms of what actually imprints on us. But I believe and I'm sure there's us. But I believe and I'm sure there's us. But I believe and I'm sure there's some chemical reason for it. Pain, we some chemical reason for it. Pain, we some chemical reason for it. Pain, we remember pain more than pleasure. Well, remember pain more than pleasure. Well, remember pain more than pleasure. Well, you know all this stuff about 28 days to you know all this stuff about 28 days to you know all this stuff about 28 days to form a habit or adult neuroplasticity. form a habit or adult neuroplasticity. form a habit or adult neuroplasticity. There's something called one trial There's something called one trial There's something called one trial learning and it comes fast and it sticks learning and it comes fast and it sticks learning and it comes fast and it sticks around forever unless you do something around forever unless you do something around forever unless you do something to reverse it. And that's the basis of to reverse it. And that's the basis of to reverse it. And that's the basis of trauma. Yeah. Bad, hard, painful stuff. trauma. Yeah. Bad, hard, painful stuff. trauma. Yeah. Bad, hard, painful stuff. Yeah. Is etched into our nervous system Yeah. Is etched into our nervous system Yeah. Is etched into our nervous system in one trial. Uh sadly in some cases and in one trial. Uh sadly in some cases and in one trial. Uh sadly in some cases and it shakes you. Yeah. And it changes your it shakes you. Yeah. And it changes your it shakes you. Yeah. And it changes your memory of everything that precedes it. memory of everything that precedes it. memory of everything that precedes it. The truth The truth The truth is divorce of the ugly kind is trauma. is divorce of the ugly kind is trauma. is divorce of the ugly kind is trauma. Period. Like I am involved in a Period. Like I am involved in a Period. Like I am involved in a tremendous amount of trauma. Trauma for tremendous amount of trauma. Trauma for tremendous amount of trauma. Trauma for each of the parties, trauma for their each of the parties, trauma for their each of the parties, trauma for their children. Like it's a tremendous trauma. children. Like it's a tremendous trauma. children. Like it's a tremendous trauma. And it does not have to be like, but And it does not have to be like, but And it does not have to be like, but here's the here's the here's the problem. No one comes into my office and problem. No one comes into my office and problem. No one comes into my office and sits down in front of me and says, "I sits down in front of me and says, "I sits down in front of me and says, "I want this to be complicated and want this to be complicated and want this to be complicated and expensive and awful. I want it to last a expensive and awful. I want it to last a expensive and awful. I want it to last a really long time. I want to put your really long time. I want to put your really long time. I want to put your kids through college instead of mine. kids through college instead of mine. kids through college instead of mine. And I just I want it to just be just And I just I want it to just be just And I just I want it to just be just miserable. I want it to be a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] show. miserable. I want it to be a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] show. miserable. I want it to be a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] show. Everybody comes in and says the same Everybody comes in and says the same Everybody comes in and says the same thing. I want to be fair. I just want to thing. I want to be fair. I just want to thing. I want to be fair. I just want to be I want this over with quickly. And I be I want this over with quickly. And I be I want this over with quickly. And I want to be fair. Problem is their want to be fair. Problem is their want to be fair. Problem is their definition of fair and their spouse's definition of fair and their spouse's definition of fair and their spouse's definition of fair are completely definition of fair are completely definition of fair are completely different. Completely different. And different. Completely different. And different. Completely different. And what they think they owe each other is what they think they owe each other is what they think they owe each other is completely different. And now you both completely different. And now you both completely different. And now you both got guns on each other. You both hired got guns on each other. You both hired got guns on each other. You both hired lawyers and I've argued both sides of lawyers and I've argued both sides of lawyers and I've argued both sides of every single issue you could argue in a every single issue you could argue in a every single issue you could argue in a divorce. I have argued both sid probably divorce. I have argued both sid probably divorce. I have argued both sid probably in front of the same judges. I've had in front of the same judges. I've had in front of the same judges. I've had days where in front of the same judge I days where in front of the same judge I days where in front of the same judge I argue complete opposite positions on argue complete opposite positions on argue complete opposite positions on different cases because that's the different cases because that's the different cases because that's the nature of our job, right? And a weapon nature of our job, right? And a weapon nature of our job, right? And a weapon in the hands of a of a virtuous in the hands of a of a virtuous in the hands of a of a virtuous person protects and a weapon in the person protects and a weapon in the person protects and a weapon in the hands of the villain causes tremendous hands of the villain causes tremendous hands of the villain causes tremendous harm. But the weapon is neutral. Like harm. But the weapon is neutral. Like harm. But the weapon is neutral. Like like and I'm the weapon like and there's like and I'm the weapon like and there's like and I'm the weapon like and there's plenty of me out there and we get paid plenty of me out there and we get paid plenty of me out there and we get paid by the hour and we get paid whether we by the hour and we get paid whether we by the hour and we get paid whether we win or lose. By the way, like personal win or lose. By the way, like personal win or lose. By the way, like personal injury lawyers and everything is no fee injury lawyers and everything is no fee injury lawyers and everything is no fee unless we recover for you. Not divorce unless we recover for you. Not divorce unless we recover for you. Not divorce lawyers. Yeah. You're lawyers. Yeah. You're lawyers. Yeah. You're 56% uh statistic reminded me of like 56% uh statistic reminded me of like 56% uh statistic reminded me of like Marines sometimes you'll see them with Marines sometimes you'll see them with Marines sometimes you'll see them with the tattoo like killing is my business the tattoo like killing is my business the tattoo like killing is my business and on the other arm it's and business and on the other arm it's and business and on the other arm it's and business is good. You say divorce is at 56%. And is good. You say divorce is at 56%. And is good. You say divorce is at 56%. And business is good. Business is good. business is good. Business is good. business is good. Business is good. Business is really good. And and the Business is really good. And and the Business is really good. And and the truth is like I don't need to make it truth is like I don't need to make it truth is like I don't need to make it rain just cuz I sell umbrellas. Like I'm rain just cuz I sell umbrellas. Like I'm rain just cuz I sell umbrellas. Like I'm not at a bar saying to people like, "Hey not at a bar saying to people like, "Hey not at a bar saying to people like, "Hey man, you could do better than her." Like man, you could do better than her." Like man, you could do better than her." Like I don't need to. Like people are doing a I don't need to. Like people are doing a I don't need to. Like people are doing a fine job of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] their relationships fine job of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] their relationships fine job of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] their relationships up all by themselves. No, you're the up all by themselves. No, you're the up all by themselves. No, you're the love guy. Yeah. Oh, well I happen to be, love guy. Yeah. Oh, well I happen to be, love guy. Yeah. Oh, well I happen to be, but even my colleagues like we're not but even my colleagues like we're not but even my colleagues like we're not cheering for divorce any more than an cheering for divorce any more than an cheering for divorce any more than an oncologist is cheering for cancer. And oncologist is cheering for cancer. And oncologist is cheering for cancer. And like when people say to me, "Oh, you like when people say to me, "Oh, you like when people say to me, "Oh, you make your how could you? this guy, he make your how could you? this guy, he make your how could you? this guy, he makes his living in people's ruined makes his living in people's ruined makes his living in people's ruined lives and heartbreak. It's like, okay, lives and heartbreak. It's like, okay, lives and heartbreak. It's like, okay, like my mom had cancer. Like, I didn't like my mom had cancer. Like, I didn't like my mom had cancer. Like, I didn't look at the oncologist and go, "Well, I look at the oncologist and go, "Well, I look at the oncologist and go, "Well, I bet you feel good about yourselves bet you feel good about yourselves bet you feel good about yourselves making money on my mom's cancer." Like, making money on my mom's cancer." Like, making money on my mom's cancer." Like, no, I understand what they're not. no, I understand what they're not. no, I understand what they're not. They're there cuz this exists and They're there cuz this exists and They're there cuz this exists and they're there to try to do what they can they're there to try to do what they can they're there to try to do what they can to help. And by the way, like there are to help. And by the way, like there are to help. And by the way, like there are so many people that divorce the way that so many people that divorce the way that so many people that divorce the way that you described your friend's divorce and you described your friend's divorce and you described your friend's divorce and the way that I described mine. You just the way that I described mine. You just the way that I described mine. You just don't hear about it. You know why? It's don't hear about it. You know why? It's don't hear about it. You know why? It's the least interesting thing. Like, do the least interesting thing. Like, do the least interesting thing. Like, do you think that's interesting? Like, if you think that's interesting? Like, if you think that's interesting? Like, if you invited me to a party and if you invited me to a party and if you invited me to a party and somebody said, "Oh, what do you do for a somebody said, "Oh, what do you do for a somebody said, "Oh, what do you do for a living?" I said, "I'm a divorce lawyer." living?" I said, "I'm a divorce lawyer." living?" I said, "I'm a divorce lawyer." And they said, "Oh my god, you must have And they said, "Oh my god, you must have And they said, "Oh my god, you must have some stories." And I went, "Oh my god, some stories." And I went, "Oh my god, some stories." And I went, "Oh my god, I've got this one." So, there's this I've got this one." So, there's this I've got this one." So, there's this couple. And they fell in love with each couple. And they fell in love with each couple. And they fell in love with each other and they were quite young when it other and they were quite young when it other and they were quite young when it happened. And then, um, gradually like happened. And then, um, gradually like happened. And then, um, gradually like they just wanted different things. They they just wanted different things. They they just wanted different things. They matured into different people and they matured into different people and they matured into different people and they sort of lost the plot of what they were sort of lost the plot of what they were sort of lost the plot of what they were together. in the ven diagram of their together. in the ven diagram of their together. in the ven diagram of their overlapping interests and joys their overlapping interests and joys their overlapping interests and joys kind of got smaller and smaller. So they kind of got smaller and smaller. So they kind of got smaller and smaller. So they decided amicably that you know they decided amicably that you know they decided amicably that you know they should end the relationship but they should end the relationship but they should end the relationship but they wanted to continue to co-parent really wanted to continue to co-parent really wanted to continue to co-parent really well. Dude, you'd be like that is the well. Dude, you'd be like that is the well. Dude, you'd be like that is the worst story. Whereas if I go like and worst story. Whereas if I go like and worst story. Whereas if I go like and then he took a chainsaw and he cut the then he took a chainsaw and he cut the then he took a chainsaw and he cut the car in half and he was like pick which car in half and he was like pick which car in half and he was like pick which half you want [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Like that's one half you want [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Like that's one half you want [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Like that's one that you're going to be like oh my god that you're going to be like oh my god that you're going to be like oh my god Jim you got to tell the story to this Jim you got to tell the story to this Jim you got to tell the story to this guy. Like you want to hear that story. guy. Like you want to hear that story. guy. Like you want to hear that story. It's so much more interesting. And by It's so much more interesting. And by It's so much more interesting. And by the way, people who have an ugly the way, people who have an ugly the way, people who have an ugly divorce, it's so traumatic that it divorce, it's so traumatic that it divorce, it's so traumatic that it becomes part of who they are. Like it becomes part of who they are. Like it becomes part of who they are. Like it becomes a lens that they see the becomes a lens that they see the becomes a lens that they see the whole world through. It damages their whole world through. It damages their whole world through. It damages their trust so much and they're so wounded by trust so much and they're so wounded by trust so much and they're so wounded by it. And it's the fight. I mean, I Yeah. it. And it's the fight. I mean, I Yeah. it. And it's the fight. I mean, I Yeah. And they almost don't know what to do And they almost don't know what to do And they almost don't know what to do with themselves when it's over. And the with themselves when it's over. And the with themselves when it's over. And the and the impact on the kids and the pets. and the impact on the kids and the pets. and the impact on the kids and the pets. Yeah. And by the way, like most human Yeah. And by the way, like most human Yeah. And by the way, like most human beings, you and I both know, when they beings, you and I both know, when they beings, you and I both know, when they tell you the story of their life, tell you the story of their life, tell you the story of their life, they're the hero of the story or the they're the hero of the story or the they're the hero of the story or the victim or the victim, right? Like one of victim or the victim, right? Like one of victim or the victim, right? Like one of one of the things I like about our one of the things I like about our one of the things I like about our friendship is that like you and I are friendship is that like you and I are friendship is that like you and I are very aware of our own flaws and very aware of our own flaws and very aware of our own flaws and cognitive biases. And so we're when we cognitive biases. And so we're when we cognitive biases. And so we're when we talk to each other that, you know, like talk to each other that, you know, like talk to each other that, you know, like all of the people I like best are people all of the people I like best are people all of the people I like best are people that like reality, you know, and that like reality, you know, and that like reality, you know, and that see themselves with a certain level of see themselves with a certain level of see themselves with a certain level of reality, you know, and so I don't reality, you know, and so I don't reality, you know, and so I don't have to be afraid to like talk to them have to be afraid to like talk to them have to be afraid to like talk to them candidly and blunt. And I think that candidly and blunt. And I think that candidly and blunt. And I think that in marriage like and in divorce, if that in marriage like and in divorce, if that in marriage like and in divorce, if you tell the story and you're like, you tell the story and you're like, you tell the story and you're like, "Yeah, I could have done better. Like I "Yeah, I could have done better. Like I "Yeah, I could have done better. Like I really screwed that up, but you know, I really screwed that up, but you know, I really screwed that up, but you know, I did get this right and you know, she's did get this right and you know, she's did get this right and you know, she's being unfair when it comes to that." being unfair when it comes to that." being unfair when it comes to that." Like I when you tell the story and Like I when you tell the story and Like I when you tell the story and you're not the hero of the story, it's you're not the hero of the story, it's you're not the hero of the story, it's much more credible as far as I'm much more credible as far as I'm much more credible as far as I'm concerned. And I say that as someone who concerned. And I say that as someone who concerned. And I say that as someone who tells stories for a living, you know, in tells stories for a living, you know, in tells stories for a living, you know, in a courtroom to try to be as persuasive a courtroom to try to be as persuasive a courtroom to try to be as persuasive as possible. I always tell my clients, as possible. I always tell my clients, as possible. I always tell my clients, I'm like, if you make yourself the hero I'm like, if you make yourself the hero I'm like, if you make yourself the hero and you make the other person the and you make the other person the and you make the other person the villain, like you lose credibility villain, like you lose credibility villain, like you lose credibility tremendously. Everybody has to be like a tremendously. Everybody has to be like a tremendously. Everybody has to be like a flawed hero, a villain that has some flawed hero, a villain that has some flawed hero, a villain that has some traits of positive to them. Like it's a traits of positive to them. Like it's a traits of positive to them. Like it's a much more believable real story. The much more believable real story. The much more believable real story. The cookie cut that's why little kids TV cookie cut that's why little kids TV cookie cut that's why little kids TV shows there's like the villain and the shows there's like the villain and the shows there's like the villain and the music gets dark when the villain comes music gets dark when the villain comes music gets dark when the villain comes on and the hero is all good and all. But on and the hero is all good and all. But on and the hero is all good and all. But as adults, that's not what we want. We as adults, that's not what we want. We as adults, that's not what we want. We want Breaking Bad. We want anti-heroes. want Breaking Bad. We want anti-heroes. want Breaking Bad. We want anti-heroes. We want complicated heroes. We want We want complicated heroes. We want We want complicated heroes. We want villains that we kind of feel a little villains that we kind of feel a little villains that we kind of feel a little bad for like the Joker. We get it, you bad for like the Joker. We get it, you bad for like the Joker. We get it, you know, like because we can relate, right? know, like because we can relate, right? know, like because we can relate, right? Because we know that's what we actually Because we know that's what we actually Because we know that's what we actually are. And by the way, that's what our are. And by the way, that's what our are. And by the way, that's what our partners are. So this idea that let's partners are. So this idea that let's partners are. So this idea that let's just put a tux on him and a white dress just put a tux on him and a white dress just put a tux on him and a white dress on her and then everybody's heroes. Like on her and then everybody's heroes. Like on her and then everybody's heroes. Like that's kind of silly, you know? And and that's kind of silly, you know? And and that's kind of silly, you know? And and that's where I that's where I that's where I think that anger that becomes toxic and think that anger that becomes toxic and think that anger that becomes toxic and def definitional to a person. It doesn't def definitional to a person. It doesn't def definitional to a person. It doesn't have to be that way. If early in the have to be that way. If early in the have to be that way. If early in the discourse about love, we just normalize discourse about love, we just normalize discourse about love, we just normalize this idea of you're a human being. I'm a this idea of you're a human being. I'm a this idea of you're a human being. I'm a human being. We're flawed. We have human being. We're flawed. We have human being. We're flawed. We have hopes. We have fears. We have things we hopes. We have fears. We have things we hopes. We have fears. We have things we got right, things we get wrong. We're got right, things we get wrong. We're got right, things we get wrong. We're going to change. We're going to change going to change. We're going to change going to change. We're going to change in good and bad ways. if you want to in good and bad ways. if you want to in good and bad ways. if you want to parse it that way. So, how do we water parse it that way. So, how do we water parse it that way. So, how do we water the plant? Like, how do we keep this the plant? Like, how do we keep this the plant? Like, how do we keep this thing healthy and vibrant? How do we thing healthy and vibrant? How do we thing healthy and vibrant? How do we check in with each? You have a job. You check in with each? You have a job. You check in with each? You have a job. You have performance reviews, right? You have performance reviews, right? You have performance reviews, right? You have some system whereby there's have some system whereby there's have some system whereby there's feedback about what you're doing right feedback about what you're doing right feedback about what you're doing right and doing wrong or there's a bonus and doing wrong or there's a bonus and doing wrong or there's a bonus structure so that there's skin in the structure so that there's skin in the structure so that there's skin in the game. Like, why does it make it less game. Like, why does it make it less game. Like, why does it make it less romantic to look at our relationship romantic to look at our relationship romantic to look at our relationship that way to say like, "Hey, it's that way to say like, "Hey, it's that way to say like, "Hey, it's important to check in on this stuff. important to check in on this stuff. important to check in on this stuff. It's important to have like routine It's important to have like routine It's important to have like routine preventative maintenance on this thing. preventative maintenance on this thing. preventative maintenance on this thing. Like if you said to me like, "I'm taking Like if you said to me like, "I'm taking Like if you said to me like, "I'm taking my car for an oil change." You'd be my car for an oil change." You'd be my car for an oil change." You'd be like, "What? You don't have faith in like, "What? You don't have faith in like, "What? You don't have faith in your car?" Like, "No, what? You have a your car?" Like, "No, what? You have a your car?" Like, "No, what? You have a cheap car?" Like, no. Like, of course, cheap car?" Like, no. Like, of course, cheap car?" Like, no. Like, of course, preventative maintenance makes sense. preventative maintenance makes sense. preventative maintenance makes sense. It's a whole lot better than waiting for It's a whole lot better than waiting for It's a whole lot better than waiting for there to be a problem, then trying to there to be a problem, then trying to there to be a problem, then trying to fix the problem. Well, I think it's this fix the problem. Well, I think it's this fix the problem. Well, I think it's this uh business of egos, right? It's there's uh business of egos, right? It's there's uh business of egos, right? It's there's something in the quote unquote something in the quote unquote something in the quote unquote traditional courtship dance that is traditional courtship dance that is traditional courtship dance that is about, you know, sort of um before about, you know, sort of um before about, you know, sort of um before people are critiquing one another, people are critiquing one another, people are critiquing one another, before people are commenting on the before people are commenting on the before people are commenting on the things that aren't working. Um things that aren't working. Um things that aren't working. Um where, you know, it's a it's a where, you know, it's a it's a where, you know, it's a it's a false reality, right? That you're only false reality, right? That you're only false reality, right? That you're only seeing the good, they're only seeing the seeing the good, they're only seeing the seeing the good, they're only seeing the good. Um and it feels good. And um well, good. Um and it feels good. And um well, good. Um and it feels good. And um well, sure, what wouldn't feel good about only sure, what wouldn't feel good about only sure, what wouldn't feel good about only seeing the good? Like the previews is seeing the good? Like the previews is seeing the good? Like the previews is the best part of the movie. If you watch the best part of the movie. If you watch the best part of the movie. If you watch the previews and you go, "Oh my god, the previews and you go, "Oh my god, the previews and you go, "Oh my god, that preview was good." Haven't you ever that preview was good." Haven't you ever that preview was good." Haven't you ever seen a preview and gone, "Oh my god, I seen a preview and gone, "Oh my god, I seen a preview and gone, "Oh my god, I can't wait to see that movie." And then can't wait to see that movie." And then can't wait to see that movie." And then you see the movie and you're like, "That you see the movie and you're like, "That you see the movie and you're like, "That sucked." Like the only good scenes were sucked." Like the only good scenes were sucked." Like the only good scenes were the things that were in the preview and the things that were in the preview and the things that were in the preview and that two-minute preview. Like, okay, that two-minute preview. Like, okay, that two-minute preview. Like, okay, well, what do you think courtship is? well, what do you think courtship is? well, what do you think courtship is? Courtship's the preview. By the way, if Courtship's the preview. By the way, if Courtship's the preview. By the way, if the preview sucks, the movie's really the preview sucks, the movie's really the preview sucks, the movie's really going to suck. Yeah. The relationships going to suck. Yeah. The relationships going to suck. Yeah. The relationships are more like the deer hunter or are more like the deer hunter or are more like the deer hunter or something. really they're long and something. really they're long and something. really they're long and they're complicated and there's and they're complicated and there's and they're complicated and there's and there's moments in it that you kind of there's moments in it that you kind of there's moments in it that you kind of go like I don't know what the point of go like I don't know what the point of go like I don't know what the point of this is but I'm in for the ride so let's this is but I'm in for the ride so let's this is but I'm in for the ride so let's do it right yeah hats off to anyone that do it right yeah hats off to anyone that do it right yeah hats off to anyone that got through the deer hunter it's great got through the deer hunter it's great got through the deer hunter it's great movie but it's yeah it takes some time movie but it's yeah it takes some time movie but it's yeah it takes some time to get through it let's talk about to get through it let's talk about to get through it let's talk about movies and as a serious thing um movies and as a serious thing um movies and as a serious thing um couple years ago I saw you on a podcast couple years ago I saw you on a podcast couple years ago I saw you on a podcast and you were talking about the movie and you were talking about the movie and you were talking about the movie True Romance Oh sure uh love that movie True Romance Oh sure uh love that movie True Romance Oh sure uh love that movie anyone that was a teener in their 20s anyone that was a teener in their 20s anyone that was a teener in their 20s in the '9s uh will remember that movie in the '9s uh will remember that movie in the '9s uh will remember that movie everyone should see that movie who's old everyone should see that movie who's old everyone should see that movie who's old enough and I get so excited when anybody enough and I get so excited when anybody enough and I get so excited when anybody knows that movie. It's just such an knows that movie. It's just such an knows that movie. It's just such an awesome movie and the cast is amazing. awesome movie and the cast is amazing. awesome movie and the cast is amazing. Um uh Gary Oldman, Gary Oldman, greatest Um uh Gary Oldman, Gary Oldman, greatest Um uh Gary Oldman, Gary Oldman, greatest scene in history. U Michael Rapaort's scene in history. U Michael Rapaort's scene in history. U Michael Rapaort's hilarious. Um Brad Pitt is in it. He has hilarious. Um Brad Pitt is in it. He has hilarious. Um Brad Pitt is in it. He has a little scene in it. I think Quinton a little scene in it. I think Quinton a little scene in it. I think Quinton Tarantino makes a Quinton Tarantino makes a Quinton Tarantino makes a Quinton Tarantino might make a cameo. He wrote it. Makes a might make a cameo. He wrote it. Makes a might make a cameo. He wrote it. Makes a cameo. Um anyway, incredible movie and cameo. Um anyway, incredible movie and cameo. Um anyway, incredible movie and Patricia Arquette who's just awesome and Patricia Arquette who's just awesome and Patricia Arquette who's just awesome and Christian Slater at his coolest. Yeah, Christian Slater at his coolest. Yeah, Christian Slater at his coolest. Yeah, very uh cool movie and you made very uh cool movie and you made very uh cool movie and you made the excellent point which uh doesn't the excellent point which uh doesn't the excellent point which uh doesn't give away the plot uh so no spoiler give away the plot uh so no spoiler give away the plot uh so no spoiler alert uh necessary which is that you alert uh necessary which is that you alert uh necessary which is that you know the essence of the movie is really know the essence of the movie is really know the essence of the movie is really about someone seeing something or a about someone seeing something or a about someone seeing something or a collection of things uh in somebody and collection of things uh in somebody and collection of things uh in somebody and just thinking that they're awesome. just thinking that they're awesome. just thinking that they're awesome. Yeah, I don't want to give away any more Yeah, I don't want to give away any more Yeah, I don't want to give away any more than that. than that. than that. you know, and just that kind of um you know, and just that kind of um you know, and just that kind of um appreciation for quirkiness and appreciation for quirkiness and appreciation for quirkiness and uniqueness. The two protagonists of the uniqueness. The two protagonists of the uniqueness. The two protagonists of the film, without giving anything away, are film, without giving anything away, are film, without giving anything away, are deeply flawed. Mhm. Like they're deeply flawed. Mhm. Like they're deeply flawed. Mhm. Like they're deeply flawed by any traditional definition. flawed by any traditional definition. flawed by any traditional definition. Yeah. They are not something that you Yeah. They are not something that you Yeah. They are not something that you would go, "Oh, this is the perfect would go, "Oh, this is the perfect would go, "Oh, this is the perfect romantic partner." It's actually quite romantic partner." It's actually quite romantic partner." It's actually quite the opposite. Like, yeah, their the opposite. Like, yeah, their the opposite. Like, yeah, their histories alone are a reason to walk histories alone are a reason to walk histories alone are a reason to walk away. On paper, there's a lot of reasons away. On paper, there's a lot of reasons away. On paper, there's a lot of reasons to just walk away from this person. to just walk away from this person. to just walk away from this person. and they meet and there is this instant and they meet and there is this instant and they meet and there is this instant true romance. There is this sense of true romance. There is this sense of true romance. There is this sense of like I see you for what you actually are like I see you for what you actually are like I see you for what you actually are and all that negative stuff on paper and all that negative stuff on paper and all that negative stuff on paper that means nothing cuz that's not who that means nothing cuz that's not who that means nothing cuz that's not who you are. I see who you are and I'm you are. I see who you are and I'm you are. I see who you are and I'm cheering for you and you are so cheering for you and you are so cheering for you and you are so cool. Like that's the reality and cool. Like that's the reality and cool. Like that's the reality and that to that to that to me movie still stands up for that reason me movie still stands up for that reason me movie still stands up for that reason cuz it's this it's this sense of being cuz it's this it's this sense of being cuz it's this it's this sense of being seen with all your warts and all and seen with all your warts and all and seen with all your warts and all and just being I see you and you see me and just being I see you and you see me and just being I see you and you see me and it's you and me. It's you and me. Let's it's you and me. It's you and me. Let's it's you and me. It's you and me. Let's do this. Like you know let's hold hands do this. Like you know let's hold hands do this. Like you know let's hold hands and walk this thing together and it's a and walk this thing together and it's a and walk this thing together and it's a game you cannot win and we're going to game you cannot win and we're going to game you cannot win and we're going to play it to the utmost. like let's just play it to the utmost. like let's just play it to the utmost. like let's just play this thing through and it's it play this thing through and it's it play this thing through and it's it doesn't get better than that. Yeah, you doesn't get better than that. Yeah, you doesn't get better than that. Yeah, you nailed it. Uh you nailed the nailed it. Uh you nailed the nailed it. Uh you nailed the description. I feel that in contrast description. I feel that in contrast description. I feel that in contrast to how you described I think very aptly to how you described I think very aptly to how you described I think very aptly social media as an advertisement of a social media as an advertisement of a social media as an advertisement of a um of a life to aspire to even if it's um of a life to aspire to even if it's um of a life to aspire to even if it's not um possible to not um possible to not um possible to have. I felt for a long while that have. I felt for a long while that have. I felt for a long while that movies and television and books and movies and television and books and movies and television and books and music were advertisements for exactly what you were advertisements for exactly what you were advertisements for exactly what you just described. The uniqueness and the just described. The uniqueness and the just described. The uniqueness and the quirkiness of a of relationships that quirkiness of a of relationships that quirkiness of a of relationships that are not typical. Um there's nothing are not typical. Um there's nothing are not typical. Um there's nothing generic about them. Even if the decision generic about them. Even if the decision generic about them. Even if the decision to um the bond the legal bond that to um the bond the legal bond that to um the bond the legal bond that the marriage, you know, marriage is the marriage, you know, marriage is the marriage, you know, marriage is marriage is marriage is marriage. I marriage is marriage is marriage. I marriage is marriage is marriage. I mean there's some subtleties depending mean there's some subtleties depending mean there's some subtleties depending on state and conditions but um but each on state and conditions but um but each on state and conditions but um but each one of those is unique that the right one of those is unique that the right one of those is unique that the right people found one another. So, so there's people found one another. So, so there's people found one another. So, so there's something really quite beautiful and something really quite beautiful and something really quite beautiful and special about that picture, right? True special about that picture, right? True special about that picture, right? True romance, right? As as seeing the romance, right? As as seeing the romance, right? As as seeing the quirkiness, the everyday things, and as quirkiness, the everyday things, and as quirkiness, the everyday things, and as you said, a teammate perspective. you said, a teammate perspective. you said, a teammate perspective. Yeah. Right. 1 plus 1 equals three. Yeah. Right. 1 plus 1 equals three. Yeah. Right. 1 plus 1 equals three. There's tremendous value to that. There's tremendous value to that. There's tremendous value to that. Tremendous value. That's in very stark Tremendous value. That's in very stark Tremendous value. That's in very stark contrast to um what I think many people contrast to um what I think many people contrast to um what I think many people experience now where they have their experience now where they have their experience now where they have their relationship, but then they also have relationship, but then they also have relationship, but then they also have visual and movie access to all these visual and movie access to all these visual and movie access to all these other relationships in the form of other relationships in the form of other relationships in the form of social media. They're always being social media. They're always being social media. They're always being presented with other options of at least presented with other options of at least presented with other options of at least how things exist for other people. Yeah. how things exist for other people. Yeah. how things exist for other people. Yeah. And so I believe again the biologist in And so I believe again the biologist in And so I believe again the biologist in me thinks this sets a kind of a yearning me thinks this sets a kind of a yearning me thinks this sets a kind of a yearning for something that one doesn't have for something that one doesn't have for something that one doesn't have because ultimately all the good stuff because ultimately all the good stuff because ultimately all the good stuff we've talked about whether or not it's we've talked about whether or not it's we've talked about whether or not it's dogs or a person or the pizza story, the dogs or a person or the pizza story, the dogs or a person or the pizza story, the creamer story, whatever is about um creamer story, whatever is about um creamer story, whatever is about um basking in the completeness of what one basking in the completeness of what one basking in the completeness of what one already has. Yeah. As opposed to needing already has. Yeah. As opposed to needing already has. Yeah. As opposed to needing more or wanting more. So would you say more or wanting more. So would you say more or wanting more. So would you say that social media um not to I mean I that social media um not to I mean I that social media um not to I mean I teach on social media, you're on social teach on social media, you're on social teach on social media, you're on social media, but let's be honest that it um in media, but let's be honest that it um in media, but let's be honest that it um in some way maybe poisonous to things like some way maybe poisonous to things like some way maybe poisonous to things like appreciation, fidelity, not just because appreciation, fidelity, not just because appreciation, fidelity, not just because you can meet people there, but because you can meet people there, but because you can meet people there, but because of the yearning that it creates. Look, I of the yearning that it creates. Look, I of the yearning that it creates. Look, I you know, you while you were while you know, you while you were while you know, you while you were while you were saying that, all I could you were saying that, all I could you were saying that, all I could reflect on was a prior conversation you reflect on was a prior conversation you reflect on was a prior conversation you had on a podcast about pornography and had on a podcast about pornography and had on a podcast about pornography and the effect that it has on us and our the effect that it has on us and our the effect that it has on us and our perception of sex, our dopamine, all perception of sex, our dopamine, all perception of sex, our dopamine, all these other things. Yeah, because young these other things. Yeah, because young these other things. Yeah, because young guys are writing to me about this all guys are writing to me about this all guys are writing to me about this all the time. Roms are porn. That's all rom the time. Roms are porn. That's all rom the time. Roms are porn. That's all rom listen, I'm not saying that there's not listen, I'm not saying that there's not listen, I'm not saying that there's not a purpose in having an ideal, a purpose in having an ideal, a purpose in having an ideal, a romanticized ideal, but most romanticized ideal, but most romanticized ideal, but most romantic comedies are not true romance. romantic comedies are not true romance. romantic comedies are not true romance. a story about two flawed characters who a story about two flawed characters who a story about two flawed characters who you know like f most romcoms are like an you know like f most romcoms are like an you know like f most romcoms are like an ideal right they're a romanticized ideal right they're a romanticized ideal right they're a romanticized ideal that by the way ends before reality can that by the way ends before reality can that by the way ends before reality can kick in so like if you think Jack I kick in so like if you think Jack I kick in so like if you think Jack I forget what the her charact's character forget what the her charact's character forget what the her charact's character was on Titanic but like if you think was on Titanic but like if you think was on Titanic but like if you think he'd lived at the end of Titanic that a he'd lived at the end of Titanic that a he'd lived at the end of Titanic that a few years later she wouldn't be like all few years later she wouldn't be like all few years later she wouldn't be like all right enough painting the French girls right enough painting the French girls right enough painting the French girls like you got to get a job buddy like you got to get a job buddy like you got to get a job buddy like you're telling me like most of these you're telling me like most of these you're telling me like most of these movies, you know, these romcoms, they movies, you know, these romcoms, they movies, you know, these romcoms, they end at like the high I love you, I've end at like the high I love you, I've end at like the high I love you, I've always loved you, I love you, too. And always loved you, I love you, too. And always loved you, I love you, too. And then it ends. They don't ever have to then it ends. They don't ever have to then it ends. They don't ever have to live together. They don't ever have to live together. They don't ever have to live together. They don't ever have to You don't have to ever see like the You don't have to ever see like the You don't have to ever see like the actual reality of them at Trader Joe's actual reality of them at Trader Joe's actual reality of them at Trader Joe's waiting on the line like arguing over waiting on the line like arguing over waiting on the line like arguing over what, you know, like he doesn't find what, you know, like he doesn't find what, you know, like he doesn't find someone else. He doesn't find somebody someone else. He doesn't find somebody someone else. He doesn't find somebody else. He's not on sitting on the couch else. He's not on sitting on the couch else. He's not on sitting on the couch scrolling when she's trying to talk. So, scrolling when she's trying to talk. So, scrolling when she's trying to talk. So, she would have expired the age limit, she would have expired the age limit, she would have expired the age limit, right? Absolutely. It's like Manudo. He right? Absolutely. It's like Manudo. He right? Absolutely. It's like Manudo. He like you turn 20, you're like you turn 20, you're like you turn 20, you're out. I think it's not public knowledge. out. I think it's not public knowledge. out. I think it's not public knowledge. So, I think at the end of the day, So, I think at the end of the day, So, I think at the end of the day, what's really core here is look, I'm not what's really core here is look, I'm not what's really core here is look, I'm not saying let's get rid of pornography. saying let's get rid of pornography. saying let's get rid of pornography. Like, I have two sons. They're adults Like, I have two sons. They're adults Like, I have two sons. They're adults now, but when they were young, they got now, but when they were young, they got now, but when they were young, they got to a certain age, they had phones, they to a certain age, they had phones, they to a certain age, they had phones, they had iPads, we had the internet, and I had iPads, we had the internet, and I had iPads, we had the internet, and I was like, they're going to encounter was like, they're going to encounter was like, they're going to encounter pornography cuz it's coming at them in a pornography cuz it's coming at them in a pornography cuz it's coming at them in a way that it did not come at me when I way that it did not come at me when I way that it did not come at me when I was that age. Like, I was that age, you was that age. Like, I was that age, you was that age. Like, I was that age, you had to like trade like a bunch of had to like trade like a bunch of had to like trade like a bunch of things. You had to get someone's dad's things. You had to get someone's dad's things. You had to get someone's dad's porn magazine for like a day so that you porn magazine for like a day so that you porn magazine for like a day so that you could look at it. You couldn't just log could look at it. You couldn't just log could look at it. You couldn't just log on to any device and be inundated with on to any device and be inundated with on to any device and be inundated with any kind of kink you wanted to see. any kind of kink you wanted to see. any kind of kink you wanted to see. Yeah, it's inconceivable. It's it's not Yeah, it's inconceivable. It's it's not Yeah, it's inconceivable. It's it's not it's not even fathomable. And I don't it's not even fathomable. And I don't it's not even fathomable. And I don't know what effect I mean, you know better know what effect I mean, you know better know what effect I mean, you know better than I do and you've spoken eloquently than I do and you've spoken eloquently than I do and you've spoken eloquently about it about the effect that has on about it about the effect that has on about it about the effect that has on the organism. But here's what I will the organism. But here's what I will the organism. But here's what I will tell you. It definitely creates in tell you. It definitely creates in tell you. It definitely creates in people a per if sex if your sex people a per if sex if your sex people a per if sex if your sex education is education is education is pornography, you're going to have a pornography, you're going to have a pornography, you're going to have a really hard time navigating an actual really hard time navigating an actual really hard time navigating an actual sexual relationship. And by the way, sexual relationship. And by the way, sexual relationship. And by the way, like I've seen pornography and I've had like I've seen pornography and I've had like I've seen pornography and I've had sex. Sex is not like it is in sex. Sex is not like it is in sex. Sex is not like it is in pornography, but it's great. Like it's pornography, but it's great. Like it's pornography, but it's great. Like it's still so fun. It's like the most fun still so fun. It's like the most fun still so fun. It's like the most fun thing. So I don't know why like thing. So I don't know why like thing. So I don't know why like anybody, oh, we got to make it better. anybody, oh, we got to make it better. anybody, oh, we got to make it better. Like sex is great. Like it's great. Sex Like sex is great. Like it's great. Sex Like sex is great. Like it's great. Sex sells sex. You don't need to put all sells sex. You don't need to put all sells sex. You don't need to put all that on it. Like I understand why. Yes, that on it. Like I understand why. Yes, that on it. Like I understand why. Yes, of course. It's like you want to you of course. It's like you want to you of course. It's like you want to you want it's just like what they do to want it's just like what they do to want it's just like what they do to French fries at a fast food restaurant. French fries at a fast food restaurant. French fries at a fast food restaurant. They figure out ways to make them more They figure out ways to make them more They figure out ways to make them more addictive, you know? I get it. But but addictive, you know? I get it. But but addictive, you know? I get it. But but same thing with romcoms. Like romcoms is same thing with romcoms. Like romcoms is same thing with romcoms. Like romcoms is an idealized stylized version of the an idealized stylized version of the an idealized stylized version of the best part of all of it. Just like porn. best part of all of it. Just like porn. best part of all of it. Just like porn. So like if you make your relationship So like if you make your relationship So like if you make your relationship like your sexual relationship based on like your sexual relationship based on like your sexual relationship based on pornography or what looks good in pornography or what looks good in pornography or what looks good in movies, you're setting yourself up for movies, you're setting yourself up for movies, you're setting yourself up for heartbreak. So same thing with romcoms. heartbreak. So same thing with romcoms. heartbreak. So same thing with romcoms. Same thing with like I've met my Same thing with like I've met my Same thing with like I've met my soulmate and that's my soulmate and then soulmate and that's my soulmate and then soulmate and that's my soulmate and then it's perfect and it stays perfect and if it's perfect and it stays perfect and if it's perfect and it stays perfect and if it's not perfect then they mustn't have it's not perfect then they mustn't have it's not perfect then they mustn't have been my soulmate. Like all that is been my soulmate. Like all that is been my soulmate. Like all that is pornography. All that is taking the pornography. All that is taking the pornography. All that is taking the dream life, the stylized perfect parts, dream life, the stylized perfect parts, dream life, the stylized perfect parts, showing just that and then convincing showing just that and then convincing showing just that and then convincing people that's what it's supposed to look people that's what it's supposed to look people that's what it's supposed to look like. And if it doesn't look like that, like. And if it doesn't look like that, like. And if it doesn't look like that, you're not having a satisfying time. you're not having a satisfying time. you're not having a satisfying time. Like the reality is that people are Like the reality is that people are Like the reality is that people are flawed but we want the same thing. We flawed but we want the same thing. We flawed but we want the same thing. We want love. I don't believe that the path want love. I don't believe that the path want love. I don't believe that the path of like I'm going to own 50 like you and of like I'm going to own 50 like you and of like I'm going to own 50 like you and I both know men who own every car you I both know men who own every car you I both know men who own every car you could ever want and could sleep with any could ever want and could sleep with any could ever want and could sleep with any number of gorgeous women three four at a number of gorgeous women three four at a number of gorgeous women three four at a time if they want to and they're time if they want to and they're time if they want to and they're unhappy. They're desperately unhappy. They're desperately unhappy. They're desperately unhappy. Like I represent people who have a net Like I represent people who have a net Like I represent people who have a net worth of you and I combined times a worth of you and I combined times a worth of you and I combined times a hundred and they're miserable because hundred and they're miserable because hundred and they're miserable because they don't have love. They don't have they don't have love. They don't have they don't have love. They don't have this basic connection with another this basic connection with another this basic connection with another person. They don't have the sense of who person. They don't have the sense of who person. They don't have the sense of who they are as an object of someone's love they are as an object of someone's love they are as an object of someone's love and the worth that comes from which by and the worth that comes from which by and the worth that comes from which by the way is foundational. Like look at a the way is foundational. Like look at a the way is foundational. Like look at a baby. Like look at a baby and look at baby. Like look at a baby and look at baby. Like look at a baby and look at how they look at their mother. Like mom how they look at their mother. Like mom how they look at their mother. Like mom is the name of God on the lips of is the name of God on the lips of is the name of God on the lips of children. Like there's something about children. Like there's something about children. Like there's something about like this thing loves me and wants like this thing loves me and wants like this thing loves me and wants what's best for me. Like we come out what's best for me. Like we come out what's best for me. Like we come out halfformed and there's this person that halfformed and there's this person that halfformed and there's this person that just loves us, right? Like and so of just loves us, right? Like and so of just loves us, right? Like and so of course we're always looking to find that course we're always looking to find that course we're always looking to find that again, that kind of love and that kind again, that kind of love and that kind again, that kind of love and that kind of connection. And there are people that of connection. And there are people that of connection. And there are people that find it, but the way they find it is not find it, but the way they find it is not find it, but the way they find it is not through fairy tales. It's not through fairy tales. It's not through fairy tales. It's not through the romanticized version of pornography. the romanticized version of pornography. the romanticized version of pornography. It's through realism. I think one of the It's through realism. I think one of the It's through realism. I think one of the reasons why, you know, I hear from so reasons why, you know, I hear from so reasons why, you know, I hear from so many young men about their challenges many young men about their challenges many young men about their challenges with pornography, which tells me that with pornography, which tells me that with pornography, which tells me that they've defaulted to pornography or that they've defaulted to pornography or that they've defaulted to pornography or that there are elements of it that have there are elements of it that have there are elements of it that have gotten them quote unquote addicted or at gotten them quote unquote addicted or at gotten them quote unquote addicted or at least in a compulsive way with it. Um, least in a compulsive way with it. Um, least in a compulsive way with it. Um, and I also frankly hear from a lot of and I also frankly hear from a lot of and I also frankly hear from a lot of women that are um frustrated with uh men women that are um frustrated with uh men women that are um frustrated with uh men dating apps and this kind of thing is dating apps and this kind of thing is dating apps and this kind of thing is that uh people are very afraid I think that uh people are very afraid I think that uh people are very afraid I think in large part because of what you're in large part because of what you're in large part because of what you're describing with social media and uh and describing with social media and uh and describing with social media and uh and other forms of media, but also just by other forms of media, but also just by other forms of media, but also just by virtue of the way that everything is um virtue of the way that everything is um virtue of the way that everything is um shared so much now that people are shared so much now that people are shared so much now that people are afraid to reveal any kind of flaws or afraid to reveal any kind of flaws or afraid to reveal any kind of flaws or authenticity in themselves. Unless it's authenticity in themselves. Unless it's authenticity in themselves. Unless it's the kind that they can leverage to make the kind that they can leverage to make the kind that they can leverage to make themselves seem more attractive or themselves seem more attractive or themselves seem more attractive or something because, you know, if they go something because, you know, if they go something because, you know, if they go out on a date or um let's say they share out on a date or um let's say they share out on a date or um let's say they share a first kiss or something that if a first kiss or something that if a first kiss or something that if they're not a great kisser that you they're not a great kisser that you they're not a great kisser that you know, she's going to tell all her know, she's going to tell all her know, she's going to tell all her friends or worse put it on an app or friends or worse put it on an app or friends or worse put it on an app or something that you know where his name something that you know where his name something that you know where his name is named. Um or he's going to sleep with is named. Um or he's going to sleep with is named. Um or he's going to sleep with her and then might even share photos her and then might even share photos her and then might even share photos of it with people covertly. I mean of it with people covertly. I mean of it with people covertly. I mean things that are illegal slash just things that are illegal slash just things that are illegal slash just breaches of trust like the contract breaches of trust like the contract breaches of trust like the contract of trust that is um purely I don't of trust that is um purely I don't of trust that is um purely I don't know for lack of a better word it's kind know for lack of a better word it's kind know for lack of a better word it's kind of a spiritual contract where you say of a spiritual contract where you say of a spiritual contract where you say hey listen like I don't know if this is hey listen like I don't know if this is hey listen like I don't know if this is going to work you don't know if this is going to work you don't know if this is going to work you don't know if this is going to work I'm willing to wager in a going to work I'm willing to wager in a going to work I'm willing to wager in a healthy way some of my own safety by healthy way some of my own safety by healthy way some of my own safety by revealing some things that aren't revealing some things that aren't revealing some things that aren't like super great about myself and maybe like super great about myself and maybe like super great about myself and maybe you'll do the same or maybe you won't you'll do the same or maybe you won't you'll do the same or maybe you won't and I'll just feel okay just with the and I'll just feel okay just with the and I'll just feel okay just with the way it lands. That seems more rare way it lands. That seems more rare way it lands. That seems more rare nowadays. Sure. Um because it's brave. nowadays. Sure. Um because it's brave. nowadays. Sure. Um because it's brave. It's brave. Like I grew up I wanted to It's brave. Like I grew up I wanted to It's brave. Like I grew up I wanted to be brave. Like I aspired to being brave. be brave. Like I aspired to being brave. be brave. Like I aspired to being brave. Like I my heroes growing up were from Like I my heroes growing up were from Like I my heroes growing up were from Last of the Moheakans, right? L Longon Last of the Moheakans, right? L Longon Last of the Moheakans, right? L Longon Caribbean, you know, the like they Caribbean, you know, the like they Caribbean, you know, the like they were samurai like in the films like were samurai like in the films like were samurai like in the films like the Moy Mashi films, you know, all those the Moy Mashi films, you know, all those the Moy Mashi films, you know, all those kinds of films. And so if you're not kinds of films. And so if you're not kinds of films. And so if you're not scared, it's not brave. Like it's only scared, it's not brave. Like it's only scared, it's not brave. Like it's only brave if you're scared and you do it brave if you're scared and you do it brave if you're scared and you do it anyway. Like that's the thing that makes anyway. Like that's the thing that makes anyway. Like that's the thing that makes it brave. Like and that's the thing it brave. Like and that's the thing it brave. Like and that's the thing we're not teaching young men we're not teaching young men we're not teaching young men anymore is it's like, yeah, it's scary. anymore is it's like, yeah, it's scary. anymore is it's like, yeah, it's scary. It's so much easier to just be like, It's so much easier to just be like, It's so much easier to just be like, "Yeah, women don't mean anything. Women "Yeah, women don't mean anything. Women "Yeah, women don't mean anything. Women just they're disposable. They're like just they're disposable. They're like just they're disposable. They're like iPhones. I'll get a new one. It'll have iPhones. I'll get a new one. It'll have iPhones. I'll get a new one. It'll have different features. It'll be great. Like different features. It'll be great. Like different features. It'll be great. Like you think Andrew Tate's brave? Like you think Andrew Tate's brave? Like you think Andrew Tate's brave? Like Andrew Tate's brave because he fights Andrew Tate's brave because he fights Andrew Tate's brave because he fights Muay Thai. That's brave. That's brave. Muay Thai. That's brave. That's brave. Muay Thai. That's brave. That's brave. Like even ground with another man, bare Like even ground with another man, bare Like even ground with another man, bare hands. Let's do this thing. Yeah, that's hands. Let's do this thing. Yeah, that's hands. Let's do this thing. Yeah, that's brave. But having a bunch of women and brave. But having a bunch of women and brave. But having a bunch of women and sort of not committing to any of them, sort of not committing to any of them, sort of not committing to any of them, not having being vulnerable to any of not having being vulnerable to any of not having being vulnerable to any of them. This is what's brave about there's them. This is what's brave about there's them. This is what's brave about there's nothing brave about that. Like what's nothing brave about that. Like what's nothing brave about that. Like what's brave is I'm going to give you the ammo brave is I'm going to give you the ammo brave is I'm going to give you the ammo to hurt me. Like I'm going to give you to hurt me. Like I'm going to give you to hurt me. Like I'm going to give you the ability to hurt me. like and I'm the ability to hurt me. like and I'm the ability to hurt me. like and I'm and I'm gonna do it anyway. Like, and I'm gonna do it anyway. Like, and I'm gonna do it anyway. Like, and I'm scared, but I'm gonna do it I'm scared, but I'm gonna do it I'm scared, but I'm gonna do it anyway. And that's what makes it brave. anyway. And that's what makes it brave. anyway. And that's what makes it brave. And I think that that's the thing we've And I think that that's the thing we've And I think that that's the thing we've just lost in this culture is this. And just lost in this culture is this. And just lost in this culture is this. And and that's where I think it's so and that's where I think it's so and that's where I think it's so backwards like that we go, well, a backwards like that we go, well, a backwards like that we go, well, a prenup a prenup's antithet like it goes prenup a prenup's antithet like it goes prenup a prenup's antithet like it goes to the opposite direction. Like because to the opposite direction. Like because to the opposite direction. Like because a prenup is you're saying, well, I don't a prenup is you're saying, well, I don't a prenup is you're saying, well, I don't believe in this thing. It only works if believe in this thing. It only works if believe in this thing. It only works if you oppon That's insane. That's insane you oppon That's insane. That's insane you oppon That's insane. That's insane to say that, you know, if you don't if to say that, you know, if you don't if to say that, you know, if you don't if you take any precautions at all or give you take any precautions at all or give you take any precautions at all or give anything or by the way, more accurately, anything or by the way, more accurately, anything or by the way, more accurately, that if you don't trust it to the that if you don't trust it to the that if you don't trust it to the legislature of your state that you're legislature of your state that you're legislature of your state that you're not being brave, like that's insane. not being brave, like that's insane. not being brave, like that's insane. It's brave to merge your destiny with It's brave to merge your destiny with It's brave to merge your destiny with that of another person. It's brave to that of another person. It's brave to that of another person. It's brave to let someone see what you're afraid of, let someone see what you're afraid of, let someone see what you're afraid of, what you hope for and aspire to. Those what you hope for and aspire to. Those what you hope for and aspire to. Those are all like divorce is intimacy are all like divorce is intimacy are all like divorce is intimacy weaponized. Like it's and I weaponized. Like it's and I weaponized. Like it's and I say it as someone who's been in the room say it as someone who's been in the room say it as someone who's been in the room with thousands of people going through with thousands of people going through with thousands of people going through it. And I mean the pain and terror of it. And I mean the pain and terror of it. And I mean the pain and terror of this person who in hushed tones you this person who in hushed tones you this person who in hushed tones you whispered to them all the things you're whispered to them all the things you're whispered to them all the things you're most afraid of when you trusted them most afraid of when you trusted them most afraid of when you trusted them more than anyone. And now they're going more than anyone. And now they're going more than anyone. And now they're going to use that against you in a public to use that against you in a public to use that against you in a public forum in a courtroom. Like my god, man. forum in a courtroom. Like my god, man. forum in a courtroom. Like my god, man. I thank God. I have no idea what that I thank God. I have no idea what that I thank God. I have no idea what that feels like to have done to me. Like it feels like to have done to me. Like it feels like to have done to me. Like it must be horrible. But but again, like must be horrible. But but again, like must be horrible. But but again, like it's is it worth it to try? Is it worth it's is it worth it to try? Is it worth it's is it worth it to try? Is it worth it? Yes. But I think having it? Yes. But I think having it? Yes. But I think having conversations from the beginning about conversations from the beginning about conversations from the beginning about listen, we've got to figure out like is listen, we've got to figure out like is listen, we've got to figure out like is this the kind of person who's going to this the kind of person who's going to this the kind of person who's going to hurt? Are you going to hurt if you're hurt? Are you going to hurt if you're hurt? Are you going to hurt if you're mad at me? If I tell you something you mad at me? If I tell you something you mad at me? If I tell you something you don't want to hear, are you going to don't want to hear, are you going to don't want to hear, are you going to throw at me these intimate things I throw at me these intimate things I throw at me these intimate things I shared with you? Because if you are, shared with you? Because if you are, shared with you? Because if you are, pull the rip cord now and get out. Like, pull the rip cord now and get out. Like, pull the rip cord now and get out. Like, get out. Like if you tell I've had guys get out. Like if you tell I've had guys get out. Like if you tell I've had guys come to me, successful people come to me come to me, successful people come to me come to me, successful people come to me and say, "Yeah, I told her I want a and say, "Yeah, I told her I want a and say, "Yeah, I told her I want a prenup." And she was like, you know, prenup." And she was like, you know, prenup." And she was like, you know, "Well, if you have if we have now, I'm "Well, if you have if we have now, I'm "Well, if you have if we have now, I'm leaving. That's it." I'm like, "Okay, leaving. That's it." I'm like, "Okay, leaving. That's it." I'm like, "Okay, then let her leave, man." Like, because then let her leave, man." Like, because then let her leave, man." Like, because if that's all if you're saying, "I if that's all if you're saying, "I if that's all if you're saying, "I love you. I love you more than anyone in love you. I love you more than anyone in love you. I love you more than anyone in the world and I'll love you forever." the world and I'll love you forever." the world and I'll love you forever." Great. Could you we sign this contract? Great. Could you we sign this contract? Great. Could you we sign this contract? Absolutely not. But then that's it. I Absolutely not. But then that's it. I Absolutely not. But then that's it. I don't even want to see you again. Wow, don't even want to see you again. Wow, don't even want to see you again. Wow, that changed fast. Cuz like a minute that changed fast. Cuz like a minute that changed fast. Cuz like a minute ago, you loved me more than anything in ago, you loved me more than anything in ago, you loved me more than anything in the world. and you would never let me go the world. and you would never let me go the world. and you would never let me go under any circumstances and you never under any circumstances and you never under any circumstances and you never hurt me. And now I just told you that hurt me. And now I just told you that hurt me. And now I just told you that there's a financial concern I have about there's a financial concern I have about there's a financial concern I have about letting the legislature make decisions letting the legislature make decisions letting the legislature make decisions about our future and you've now decided about our future and you've now decided about our future and you've now decided you don't even like me anymore and we're you don't even like me anymore and we're you don't even like me anymore and we're out. That's a hell of a jump. Yeah, good out. That's a hell of a jump. Yeah, good out. That's a hell of a jump. Yeah, good data there. Yeah. Real. But but I mean data there. Yeah. Real. But but I mean data there. Yeah. Real. But but I mean that how do you reconcile that? Like if that how do you reconcile that? Like if that how do you reconcile that? Like if they say, "Wow, why are you why do you they say, "Wow, why are you why do you they say, "Wow, why are you why do you want that? Do you not have faith in our want that? Do you not have faith in our want that? Do you not have faith in our relationship?" Now let's have a relationship?" Now let's have a relationship?" Now let's have a conversation. No, of course. Of course I conversation. No, of course. Of course I conversation. No, of course. Of course I have faith in our Why would I want to have faith in our Why would I want to have faith in our Why would I want to marry you otherwise? Like and what is it marry you otherwise? Like and what is it marry you otherwise? Like and what is it you're afraid of? Are you afraid that you're afraid of? Are you afraid that you're afraid of? Are you afraid that the contract will be lopsided? Because the contract will be lopsided? Because the contract will be lopsided? Because here's the thing. I want it to not be here's the thing. I want it to not be here's the thing. I want it to not be like I want to know what you're like, like I want to know what you're like, like I want to know what you're like, you know, I was having a conversation you know, I was having a conversation you know, I was having a conversation with the trusted prenup guys when with the trusted prenup guys when with the trusted prenup guys when we were talking about marketing prenups. we were talking about marketing prenups. we were talking about marketing prenups. Like how do you market prenups to Like how do you market prenups to Like how do you market prenups to people? And they were saying like, you people? And they were saying like, you people? And they were saying like, you know, like yeah, when you talk about it know, like yeah, when you talk about it know, like yeah, when you talk about it deepens the relationship and connection, deepens the relationship and connection, deepens the relationship and connection, okay, that's a very feminine a okay, that's a very feminine a okay, that's a very feminine a aspiration. Like that's a good way to aspiration. Like that's a good way to aspiration. Like that's a good way to sell prenups to women, right? is to say sell prenups to women, right? is to say sell prenups to women, right? is to say it's going to the conversations are it's going to the conversations are it's going to the conversations are going to deepen the connection and going to deepen the connection and going to deepen the connection and there's going to be this sense of like there's going to be this sense of like there's going to be this sense of like hey we're talking about what we expect hey we're talking about what we expect hey we're talking about what we expect of each other what we're afraid of and I of each other what we're afraid of and I of each other what we're afraid of and I was saying well for me I think a was saying well for me I think a was saying well for me I think a great entry point for men in great entry point for men in great entry point for men in heterosexual relationships is to say hey heterosexual relationships is to say hey heterosexual relationships is to say hey you want your woman to feel safe right you want your woman to feel safe right you want your woman to feel safe right like she's with you she's safe you know like she's with you she's safe you know like she's with you she's safe you know her heart is safe her body is safe like her heart is safe her body is safe like her heart is safe her body is safe like you're going to keep her safe yeah you're going to keep her safe yeah you're going to keep her safe yeah provide protector yeah provide protector provide protector yeah provide protector provide protector yeah provide protector right so the one of the best things right so the one of the best things right so the one of the best things about being a man right is the feeling about being a man right is the feeling about being a man right is the feeling of like I love that. Like I you don't of like I love that. Like I you don't of like I love that. Like I you don't test that theory like say to any man, I test that theory like say to any man, I test that theory like say to any man, I can't open this jar. We go, "Okay, give can't open this jar. We go, "Okay, give can't open this jar. We go, "Okay, give me look at that. Here you go." Like, you me look at that. Here you go." Like, you me look at that. Here you go." Like, you know, we're thrilled for that know, we're thrilled for that know, we're thrilled for that opportunity. We all want to provide and opportunity. We all want to provide and opportunity. We all want to provide and protect. So, okay, why do we not turn protect. So, okay, why do we not turn protect. So, okay, why do we not turn the conversation about prenups into how the conversation about prenups into how the conversation about prenups into how can she feel loved if she doesn't feel can she feel loved if she doesn't feel can she feel loved if she doesn't feel safe? So, okay, in that situation where safe? So, okay, in that situation where safe? So, okay, in that situation where he has more resources than her and she he has more resources than her and she he has more resources than her and she says, you know, I'd like to be a mom says, you know, I'd like to be a mom says, you know, I'd like to be a mom someday or there's a good chance I'd be someday or there's a good chance I'd be someday or there's a good chance I'd be a mom someday. So, if I'm going to be a mom someday. So, if I'm going to be a mom someday. So, if I'm going to be the primary caretaker of our children the primary caretaker of our children the primary caretaker of our children and your career is going to stay your and your career is going to stay your and your career is going to stay your focus so you can provide, right? Then focus so you can provide, right? Then focus so you can provide, right? Then you're going to get way ahead of me in you're going to get way ahead of me in you're going to get way ahead of me in the race in terms of economics. So, we the race in terms of economics. So, we the race in terms of economics. So, we need to figure out like how we would need to figure out like how we would need to figure out like how we would deal with that imbalance. deal with that imbalance. deal with that imbalance. Who would say that's not a fair Who would say that's not a fair Who would say that's not a fair conversation? Who would say that? Now, conversation? Who would say that? Now, conversation? Who would say that? Now, look, if you bring it up when we've look, if you bring it up when we've look, if you bring it up when we've decided we hate each other and the decided we hate each other and the decided we hate each other and the relationship is over and I've been relationship is over and I've been relationship is over and I've been sleeping with my secretary. Okay. Yeah, sleeping with my secretary. Okay. Yeah, sleeping with my secretary. Okay. Yeah, now I get why you don't want to have a now I get why you don't want to have a now I get why you don't want to have a fair conversation about that. But at the fair conversation about that. But at the fair conversation about that. But at the beginning, when we're still abundance of beginning, when we're still abundance of beginning, when we're still abundance of optimism, we're still feeling positive optimism, we're still feeling positive optimism, we're still feeling positive about this, would any man say, "Well, about this, would any man say, "Well, about this, would any man say, "Well, you're being greedy. You're being a gold you're being greedy. You're being a gold you're being greedy. You're being a gold digger." No, you'd say, "Hey, listen. Of digger." No, you'd say, "Hey, listen. Of digger." No, you'd say, "Hey, listen. Of course, like you're going to make course, like you're going to make course, like you're going to make certain sacrifices and focus on certain sacrifices and focus on certain sacrifices and focus on certain things." And you know, I rarely have things." And you know, I rarely have things." And you know, I rarely have ever met a couple, a happy couple, that ever met a couple, a happy couple, that ever met a couple, a happy couple, that they go, "We brought the exact same they go, "We brought the exact same they go, "We brought the exact same things to the relationship. She's a things to the relationship. She's a things to the relationship. She's a great provider and I'm a great provider and I'm a great provider and I'm a great provider." No. Complimentarity is what provider." No. Complimentarity is what provider." No. Complimentarity is what it's of course, right? And so say that it's of course, right? And so say that it's of course, right? And so say that out loud to each other. I maybe you out loud to each other. I maybe you out loud to each other. I maybe you don't want to announce it to everybody don't want to announce it to everybody don't want to announce it to everybody and put it on your social media, but you and put it on your social media, but you and put it on your social media, but you can talk to each other privately about, can talk to each other privately about, can talk to each other privately about, hey, what do we owe each other? What do hey, what do we owe each other? What do hey, what do we owe each other? What do we expect of each other? If we split up, we expect of each other? If we split up, we expect of each other? If we split up, what should it look like? What would you what should it look like? What would you what should it look like? What would you need? What would I need? And you can need? What would I need? And you can need? What would I need? And you can talk about that in very practical ways. talk about that in very practical ways. talk about that in very practical ways. And I don't think that I think And I don't think that I think And I don't think that I think that's actually quite romantic because that's actually quite romantic because that's actually quite romantic because what you're saying is I want you to feel what you're saying is I want you to feel what you're saying is I want you to feel safe. I want you to feel safe that even safe. I want you to feel safe that even safe. I want you to feel safe that even if cuz I don't I'll tell you for me even if cuz I don't I'll tell you for me even if cuz I don't I'll tell you for me even just selfishly I don't want you here cuz you selfishly I don't want you here cuz you selfishly I don't want you here cuz you don't know what you're going to do don't know what you're going to do don't know what you're going to do economically if we split up. It's not a economically if we split up. It's not a economically if we split up. It's not a good reason to stay with me. I want you good reason to stay with me. I want you good reason to stay with me. I want you to want me next to you because you like to want me next to you because you like to want me next to you because you like me. You like having me around. your life me. You like having me around. your life me. You like having me around. your life is better for my presence in it on a is better for my presence in it on a is better for my presence in it on a day-to-day basis. Not that well, who's day-to-day basis. Not that well, who's day-to-day basis. Not that well, who's going to pay my rent? You know, I'd want going to pay my rent? You know, I'd want going to pay my rent? You know, I'd want you know what? I'll pay your rent. You you know what? I'll pay your rent. You you know what? I'll pay your rent. You can have your rent paid. Are you still can have your rent paid. Are you still can have your rent paid. Are you still here? Because if someone says if I say, here? Because if someone says if I say, here? Because if someone says if I say, hey, if I paid you, like somebody said hey, if I paid you, like somebody said hey, if I paid you, like somebody said to me the other day, if somebody gave to me the other day, if somebody gave to me the other day, if somebody gave you a $100 million, would you still do you a $100 million, would you still do you a $100 million, would you still do your job? Would you still be a lawyer? your job? Would you still be a lawyer? your job? Would you still be a lawyer? And I was like, absolutely. Absolutely. And I was like, absolutely. Absolutely. And I was like, absolutely. Absolutely. Would I do it at the level I'm doing it Would I do it at the level I'm doing it Would I do it at the level I'm doing it currently, would I be as stressed about currently, would I be as stressed about currently, would I be as stressed about it as I currently am? Probably not. But it as I currently am? Probably not. But it as I currently am? Probably not. But I would still do the job because I love I would still do the job because I love I would still do the job because I love the job, you know. And the answer is if the job, you know. And the answer is if the job, you know. And the answer is if you had hund00 million tomorrow, would you had hund00 million tomorrow, would you had hund00 million tomorrow, would you still do the podcast? If the answer you still do the podcast? If the answer you still do the podcast? If the answer is no, stop. I've said this before, it's is no, stop. I've said this before, it's is no, stop. I've said this before, it's still true. I check in with myself now still true. I check in with myself now still true. I check in with myself now and again. If you offered me a billion and again. If you offered me a billion and again. If you offered me a billion dollars to quit the podcast, no way. No, dollars to quit the podcast, no way. No, dollars to quit the podcast, no way. No, I just love it. I love my team. I love I just love it. I love my team. I love I just love it. I love my team. I love the I love learning. I love teaching. the I love learning. I love teaching. the I love learning. I love teaching. Um, end of story, right? And so, and Um, end of story, right? And so, and Um, end of story, right? And so, and by the way, let's take that further, by the way, let's take that further, by the way, let's take that further, right? You get tremendous value out of right? You get tremendous value out of right? You get tremendous value out of it and the people who are participating it and the people who are participating it and the people who are participating in it, audience and the co-producers of in it, audience and the co-producers of in it, audience and the co-producers of it all get something out of it too. This it all get something out of it too. This it all get something out of it too. This is a totally wonderful economy. is a totally wonderful economy. is a totally wonderful economy. Everyone's getting some advertisers Everyone's getting some advertisers Everyone's getting some advertisers getting something out of it. Everyone's getting something out of it. Everyone's getting something out of it. Everyone's getting something out of it. It's like getting something out of it. It's like getting something out of it. It's like win-winwin for everybody involved, win-winwin for everybody involved, win-winwin for everybody involved, right? Okay. So, in the relationship right? Okay. So, in the relationship right? Okay. So, in the relationship between a man and a woman or a man and between a man and a woman or a man and between a man and a woman or a man and a man and a woman and a woman because of a man and a woman and a woman because of a man and a woman and a woman because of marriage equality, in a in a romantic marriage equality, in a in a romantic marriage equality, in a in a romantic relationship, in a relationship, in a relationship, in a marriage, what if you said to your marriage, what if you said to your marriage, what if you said to your partner, "I'll give you $10 million to partner, "I'll give you $10 million to partner, "I'll give you $10 million to give up this person." If the answer is give up this person." If the answer is give up this person." If the answer is see you, then that's not the person to see you, then that's not the person to see you, then that's not the person to be with. Definitely not. Okay. So, so I be with. Definitely not. Okay. So, so I be with. Definitely not. Okay. So, so I would rather have that would rather have that would rather have that conversation early on. Like if you want conversation early on. Like if you want conversation early on. Like if you want to talk about barriers to exit, by the to talk about barriers to exit, by the to talk about barriers to exit, by the way, you can put anything you want in a way, you can put anything you want in a way, you can put anything you want in a prenup. So you could put in financial prenup. So you could put in financial prenup. So you could put in financial terms in a prenup that will give this terms in a prenup that will give this terms in a prenup that will give this person a financial windfall. I had a person a financial windfall. I had a person a financial windfall. I had a client who was a young man in his 30s. client who was a young man in his 30s. client who was a young man in his 30s. He was a Goldman. I can say that. And uh He was a Goldman. I can say that. And uh He was a Goldman. I can say that. And uh he was worth like 30 40 million bucks at he was worth like 30 40 million bucks at he was worth like 30 40 million bucks at the age of 30. So he was in the age of 30. So he was in the age of 30. So he was in the beginning of his career. I mean he was beginning of his career. I mean he was beginning of his career. I mean he was going to do well in life. That's a lot going to do well in life. That's a lot going to do well in life. That's a lot of money. And he was marrying a yoga of money. And he was marrying a yoga of money. And he was marrying a yoga teacher who made like no money at all. teacher who made like no money at all. teacher who made like no money at all. Stunningly beautiful, funny, brilliant, like just beautiful, funny, brilliant, like just beautiful, funny, brilliant, like just insightful, spiritual. He was very insightful, spiritual. He was very insightful, spiritual. He was very quant, very analytical. And she just quant, very analytical. And she just quant, very analytical. And she just lightened him up and was adventurous and lightened him up and was adventurous and lightened him up and was adventurous and fun. It was very barefoot in the park. fun. It was very barefoot in the park. fun. It was very barefoot in the park. It was very like he kind of reeled her It was very like he kind of reeled her It was very like he kind of reeled her in a little and she pulled him out of in a little and she pulled him out of in a little and she pulled him out of his comfort zone and it was like a his comfort zone and it was like a his comfort zone and it was like a really nice coupling. and they did this really nice coupling. and they did this really nice coupling. and they did this prenup and of course they both lawyered prenup and of course they both lawyered prenup and of course they both lawyered up with good lawyers, right? So he hired up with good lawyers, right? So he hired up with good lawyers, right? So he hired me and she hired a colleague of mine me and she hired a colleague of mine me and she hired a colleague of mine at a great firm in the city who I have a at a great firm in the city who I have a at a great firm in the city who I have a lot of cases with and um the lawyers lot of cases with and um the lawyers lot of cases with and um the lawyers went at our thing, you know, and so I went at our thing, you know, and so I went at our thing, you know, and so I put in a waiver of any alimony, spousal put in a waiver of any alimony, spousal put in a waiver of any alimony, spousal support, and the other side came back support, and the other side came back support, and the other side came back and said, "No, no, if they're married and said, "No, no, if they're married and said, "No, no, if they're married this many years, it's this percent, and this many years, it's this percent, and this many years, it's this percent, and if it's this many years, it's that if it's this many years, it's that if it's this many years, it's that percent." So, I go to my client because this is So, I go to my client because this is So, I go to my client because this is kind of a negotiation, but it's with a kind of a negotiation, but it's with a kind of a negotiation, but it's with a person who he's been going home to every person who he's been going home to every person who he's been going home to every night because they're cohabitating night because they're cohabitating night because they're cohabitating already, you know, and I say to him already, you know, and I say to him already, you know, and I say to him like, "Listen, they want this structure like, "Listen, they want this structure like, "Listen, they want this structure and this amount for and he goes, yeah, and this amount for and he goes, yeah, and this amount for and he goes, yeah, just like put like 5 million bucks." I just like put like 5 million bucks." I just like put like 5 million bucks." I was like, "I'm so wait, what?" And he was like, "I'm so wait, what?" And he was like, "I'm so wait, what?" And he goes, "Yeah, like if we get divorced, goes, "Yeah, like if we get divorced, goes, "Yeah, like if we get divorced, she gets 5 million bucks." I was like, she gets 5 million bucks." I was like, she gets 5 million bucks." I was like, "Wait, if you get divorced in a month "Wait, if you get divorced in a month "Wait, if you get divorced in a month cuz she's sleeping with a her tennis cuz she's sleeping with a her tennis cuz she's sleeping with a her tennis instructor, she gets 5 million bucks." instructor, she gets 5 million bucks." instructor, she gets 5 million bucks." And he's like, "Yeah, you know what? And he's like, "Yeah, you know what? And he's like, "Yeah, you know what? ific if we get divorced, I got bigger ific if we get divorced, I got bigger ific if we get divorced, I got bigger problems. Like just, you know, like, problems. Like just, you know, like, problems. Like just, you know, like, yeah, just like, you know, I'll know yeah, just like, you know, I'll know yeah, just like, you know, I'll know that if she's staying, I'll know she that if she's staying, I'll know she that if she's staying, I'll know she likes me more than 5 million bucks, so likes me more than 5 million bucks, so likes me more than 5 million bucks, so that's good. Good for him. And I that's good. Good for him. And I that's good. Good for him. And I thought, you know what? Like, that is thought, you know what? Like, that is thought, you know what? Like, that is gangster in a good way. Like, I loved gangster in a good way. Like, I loved gangster in a good way. Like, I loved that. And they're still married. Like, that. And they're still married. Like, that. And they're still married. Like, and that was probably 10 years ago, you and that was probably 10 years ago, you and that was probably 10 years ago, you know, and they're tra they got a know, and they're tra they got a know, and they're tra they got a couple kids now. Like, and I when in couple kids now. Like, and I when in couple kids now. Like, and I when in that moment, I remember thinking, "Yeah, that moment, I remember thinking, "Yeah, that moment, I remember thinking, "Yeah, they're going to be fine probably these they're going to be fine probably these they're going to be fine probably these two." Yeah. You know, it never hurts and two." Yeah. You know, it never hurts and two." Yeah. You know, it never hurts and it often helps to be generous. I mean, I it often helps to be generous. I mean, I it often helps to be generous. I mean, I mean, sometimes generosity, people will mean, sometimes generosity, people will mean, sometimes generosity, people will look back on their generosity and look back on their generosity and look back on their generosity and actually no, I can't think of a single actually no, I can't think of a single actually no, I can't think of a single instance where, you know, I was maybe instance where, you know, I was maybe instance where, you know, I was maybe even pushed myself to be a bit more even pushed myself to be a bit more even pushed myself to be a bit more generous than I my impulse at the time generous than I my impulse at the time generous than I my impulse at the time would have had me be and didn't would have had me be and didn't would have had me be and didn't think like in retrospect that was the think like in retrospect that was the think like in retrospect that was the right thing to do. I mean, I I've uh you right thing to do. I mean, I I've uh you right thing to do. I mean, I I've uh you know, haven't dealt with circumstances know, haven't dealt with circumstances know, haven't dealt with circumstances of a having that much money or b uh of a having that much money or b uh of a having that much money or b uh doing a prenup. Um, well, if you have doing a prenup. Um, well, if you have doing a prenup. Um, well, if you have that much money, it doesn't really mean that much money, it doesn't really mean that much money, it doesn't really mean anything anymore. Like I represent I anything anymore. Like I represent I anything anymore. Like I represent I have a couple of billionaire clients. have a couple of billionaire clients. have a couple of billionaire clients. Like one of my clients worth eight Like one of my clients worth eight Like one of my clients worth eight billion dollars. You know, it's like billion dollars. You know, it's like billion dollars. You know, it's like Stalin said, "The death of one is a Stalin said, "The death of one is a Stalin said, "The death of one is a tragedy. The death of a million is a tragedy. The death of a million is a tragedy. The death of a million is a statistic." Like I think if I said to statistic." Like I think if I said to statistic." Like I think if I said to you, Andrew, great news. You've won $150 you, Andrew, great news. You've won $150 you, Andrew, great news. You've won $150 million. I'm sorry, $130 million. You million. I'm sorry, $130 million. You million. I'm sorry, $130 million. You wouldn't go, "Ah, wouldn't go, "Ah, wouldn't go, "Ah, like the numbers on a page are numbers like the numbers on a page are numbers like the numbers on a page are numbers on a page." Start to feel like a drop in on a page." Start to feel like a drop in on a page." Start to feel like a drop in the ocean. There's just no, you couldn't the ocean. There's just no, you couldn't the ocean. There's just no, you couldn't possibly spend that amount of money, possibly spend that amount of money, possibly spend that amount of money, right? The the amount of money that right? The the amount of money that right? The the amount of money that money makes on an annual basis just in money makes on an annual basis just in money makes on an annual basis just in interest alone is insane. So, well, the interest alone is insane. So, well, the interest alone is insane. So, well, the joy in being generous is the joy in being generous is the joy in being generous is the opportunity, at least in this instance, opportunity, at least in this instance, opportunity, at least in this instance, or something parallel to it is the or something parallel to it is the or something parallel to it is the opportunity to do something that for opportunity to do something that for opportunity to do something that for someone else would be quite meaningful someone else would be quite meaningful someone else would be quite meaningful and for you just feels good to do. Yeah. and for you just feels good to do. Yeah. and for you just feels good to do. Yeah. You know, one would hope that he didn't You know, one would hope that he didn't You know, one would hope that he didn't say give her five because five didn't say give her five because five didn't say give her five because five didn't feel like anything. I mean, if he's got feel like anything. I mean, if he's got feel like anything. I mean, if he's got I think he felt he felt that was not his I think he felt he felt that was not his I think he felt he felt that was not his roomion. This is not a man who did not roomion. This is not a man who did not roomion. This is not a man who did not take money seriously. He he made his take money seriously. He he made his take money seriously. He he made his bones in it. But I think what he was bones in it. But I think what he was bones in it. But I think what he was saying is, well, there's no way that $5 saying is, well, there's no way that $5 saying is, well, there's no way that $5 million isn't enough for her to be okay. million isn't enough for her to be okay. million isn't enough for her to be okay. And I want her to be okay. I want her to And I want her to be okay. I want her to And I want her to be okay. I want her to be safe. I want her to feel right. And be safe. I want her to feel right. And be safe. I want her to feel right. And he was saying, you know, cuz he was saying, you know, cuz he was saying, you know, cuz look, when you marry someone the right look, when you marry someone the right look, when you marry someone the right way or even cohabitate with someone or way or even cohabitate with someone or way or even cohabitate with someone or even get in a relationship with someone, even get in a relationship with someone, even get in a relationship with someone, you're kind of handing them a dagger and you're kind of handing them a dagger and you're kind of handing them a dagger and saying, "Okay, here you saying, "Okay, here you saying, "Okay, here you go. Here you go." Like, you can if you go. Here you go." Like, you can if you go. Here you go." Like, you can if you want to. It's yours. Like, if you want to. It's yours. Like, if you want to. It's yours. Like, if you want to stab me with that, you got here it to stab me with that, you got here it to stab me with that, you got here it is. Here's my soft spots. I'm going to is. Here's my soft spots. I'm going to is. Here's my soft spots. I'm going to show you where they all are. Like, and show you where they all are. Like, and show you where they all are. Like, and I'm giving you that. And again, I think I'm giving you that. And again, I think I'm giving you that. And again, I think that's the bravest thing in the world. that's the bravest thing in the world. that's the bravest thing in the world. And I think it's the coolest thing in And I think it's the coolest thing in And I think it's the coolest thing in the world. Oh man, I've done it a number the world. Oh man, I've done it a number the world. Oh man, I've done it a number of times. Sometimes it ends well, of times. Sometimes it ends well, of times. Sometimes it ends well, sometimes it doesn't end well. But I'll sometimes it doesn't end well. But I'll sometimes it doesn't end well. But I'll tell you, um, and by the way, with tell you, um, and by the way, with tell you, um, and by the way, with enough time, both of those, there's enough time, both of those, there's enough time, both of those, there's something really like beautiful about something really like beautiful about something really like beautiful about that. I mean, look, I'm I I've been that. I mean, look, I'm I I've been that. I mean, look, I'm I I've been reflecting on this a lot lately, and I reflecting on this a lot lately, and I reflecting on this a lot lately, and I don't want to pivot to my unique don't want to pivot to my unique don't want to pivot to my unique circumstances, but you know, since I was circumstances, but you know, since I was circumstances, but you know, since I was um probably since I was an embryo, but um probably since I was an embryo, but um probably since I was an embryo, but since I was old enough to remember, I'm since I was old enough to remember, I'm since I was old enough to remember, I'm interested and on the adventure of life. interested and on the adventure of life. interested and on the adventure of life. Yeah. And you and you're a romantic at Yeah. And you and you're a romantic at Yeah. And you and you're a romantic at heart. I mean, that's a function of our heart. I mean, that's a function of our heart. I mean, that's a function of our like our friendship is born of the fact like our friendship is born of the fact like our friendship is born of the fact that I think you're a romantic at heart. that I think you're a romantic at heart. that I think you're a romantic at heart. And I think you're I think the people And I think you're I think the people And I think you're I think the people who have had their ass kicked by love who have had their ass kicked by love who have had their ass kicked by love and still go, "Yeah, I'm going to do it and still go, "Yeah, I'm going to do it and still go, "Yeah, I'm going to do it again. Let's do it. Put me back in." again. Let's do it. Put me back in." again. Let's do it. Put me back in." Like I love that. Put me back in. I love Like I love that. Put me back in. I love Like I love that. Put me back in. I love that. And by the way, that's the that. And by the way, that's the that. And by the way, that's the statistic that everybody forgets. Which statistic that everybody forgets. Which statistic that everybody forgets. Which is 56% of marriages end in divorce. And is 56% of marriages end in divorce. And is 56% of marriages end in divorce. And 85% of people who get divorced are 85% of people who get divorced are 85% of people who get divorced are remarried within 5 years. That's an remarried within 5 years. That's an remarried within 5 years. That's an incredible statistic. And it's an incredible statistic. And it's an incredible statistic. And it's an incredible statistic. And I And I And incredible statistic. And I And I And incredible statistic. And I And I And I've usually I do their prenup. I tell I've usually I do their prenup. I tell I've usually I do their prenup. I tell all of my clients, by the way, that if I all of my clients, by the way, that if I all of my clients, by the way, that if I did your litigated divorce, I will do did your litigated divorce, I will do did your litigated divorce, I will do any prenup for you for any subsequent any prenup for you for any subsequent any prenup for you for any subsequent marriage for free. And I've only had marriage for free. And I've only had marriage for free. And I've only had three clients take me up on it. So three clients take me up on it. So three clients take me up on it. So people are braver than one might think, people are braver than one might think, people are braver than one might think, I think. So I think, look, I think. So I think, look, I think. So I think, look, I think discretion is the better part of think discretion is the better part of think discretion is the better part of all valor. So I think I'm a fan of all valor. So I think I'm a fan of all valor. So I think I'm a fan of bravery but I'm also a pragmatic human bravery but I'm also a pragmatic human bravery but I'm also a pragmatic human being and I think there is value in being and I think there is value in being and I think there is value in saying okay let's dive into this thing saying okay let's dive into this thing saying okay let's dive into this thing let's do it brave let's do it but see let's do it brave let's do it but see let's do it brave let's do it but see again I think bravery on the front end again I think bravery on the front end again I think bravery on the front end which is bravely having a conversation which is bravely having a conversation which is bravely having a conversation about what does this look like if we about what does this look like if we about what does this look like if we hurt each other what if we end up like hurt each other what if we end up like hurt each other what if we end up like the majority of people what do we do the majority of people what do we do the majority of people what do we do like what do we You know, and there's like what do we You know, and there's like what do we You know, and there's value in that conversation. Come there's value in that conversation. Come there's value in that conversation. Come on. Any heterosexual man is going to on. Any heterosexual man is going to on. Any heterosexual man is going to tell you they've been in a conversation tell you they've been in a conversation tell you they've been in a conversation with the woman in their life where she with the woman in their life where she with the woman in their life where she goes, "If I was missing a leg, would you goes, "If I was missing a leg, would you goes, "If I was missing a leg, would you still love me?" And you're like, "What? still love me?" And you're like, "What? still love me?" And you're like, "What? Where did that come from?" Like, you Where did that come from?" Like, you Where did that come from?" Like, you know, like, cuz what's the person know, like, cuz what's the person know, like, cuz what's the person saying? They're saying, "Hey, you know, saying? They're saying, "Hey, you know, saying? They're saying, "Hey, you know, like if I wasn't exactly who I am, like if I wasn't exactly who I am, like if I wasn't exactly who I am, like what parts of me would you have to lose what parts of me would you have to lose what parts of me would you have to lose for me to you to not love me for me to you to not love me for me to you to not love me anymore?" Like, I understand that anymore?" Like, I understand that anymore?" Like, I understand that question for what it is. I mean, to some question for what it is. I mean, to some question for what it is. I mean, to some degree, it's a thought exercise. It's degree, it's a thought exercise. It's degree, it's a thought exercise. It's anecdotal. It's funny, you know, and my anecdotal. It's funny, you know, and my anecdotal. It's funny, you know, and my response to it is always like, "A whole response to it is always like, "A whole response to it is always like, "A whole leg? Forget it." Like, you break a nail leg? Forget it." Like, you break a nail leg? Forget it." Like, you break a nail amount. You know, my response? Yeah. I'd amount. You know, my response? Yeah. I'd amount. You know, my response? Yeah. I'd love you more. Yeah. And then they love you more. Yeah. And then they love you more. Yeah. And then they go, "Wait, what are you what are you go, "Wait, what are you what are you go, "Wait, what are you what are you into?" Yeah. You be like, into?" Yeah. You be like, into?" Yeah. You be like, "Well, we play hopscotch. I don't "Well, we play hopscotch. I don't "Well, we play hopscotch. I don't know." No, I just The idea is I mean, I know." No, I just The idea is I mean, I know." No, I just The idea is I mean, I think the question is such a think the question is such a think the question is such a beautiful one because it's a it's a beautiful one because it's a it's a beautiful one because it's a it's a question of vulnerability, right? It's question of vulnerability, right? It's question of vulnerability, right? It's saying if I were cuz generally people saying if I were cuz generally people saying if I were cuz generally people aren't asking hey if I um you know aren't asking hey if I um you know aren't asking hey if I um you know gained 50 lb would you still love me? gained 50 lb would you still love me? gained 50 lb would you still love me? Yeah. You know a missing leg is more Yeah. You know a missing leg is more Yeah. You know a missing leg is more dramatic but at the same time it it's so dramatic but at the same time it it's so dramatic but at the same time it it's so it preserves certain things while it um it preserves certain things while it um it preserves certain things while it um while it removes a certain thing. It's while it removes a certain thing. It's while it removes a certain thing. It's very it's very well defined. I think very it's very well defined. I think very it's very well defined. I think that there's another way to look at it. that there's another way to look at it. that there's another way to look at it. You know there was a so I grew up You know there was a so I grew up You know there was a so I grew up watching LA Law. I think it's part of watching LA Law. I think it's part of watching LA Law. I think it's part of the reason why I became a lawyer is I the reason why I became a lawyer is I the reason why I became a lawyer is I loved that show. I tried watching it loved that show. I tried watching it loved that show. I tried watching it recently. It's up on one of the recently. It's up on one of the recently. It's up on one of the streaming services and it didn't age streaming services and it didn't age streaming services and it didn't age well. Um, but I grew up watching like well. Um, but I grew up watching like well. Um, but I grew up watching like because of a lack of political because of a lack of political because of a lack of political correctness by today's and also like correctness by today's and also like correctness by today's and also like some of the plots like there's gender some of the plots like there's gender some of the plots like there's gender stuff in there that you're like, "Oh my stuff in there that you're like, "Oh my stuff in there that you're like, "Oh my god." You know, and it's also as a god." You know, and it's also as a god." You know, and it's also as a lawyer. I It's very hard as a lawyer to lawyer. I It's very hard as a lawyer to lawyer. I It's very hard as a lawyer to watch lawyer shows cuz you're like, watch lawyer shows cuz you're like, watch lawyer shows cuz you're like, "That would never happen." Objection "That would never happen." Objection "That would never happen." Objection leading like you find yourself going leading like you find yourself going leading like you find yourself going like this. None of my friends that were like this. None of my friends that were like this. None of my friends that were in a special operations can watch a in a special operations can watch a in a special operations can watch a movie that they just you can't movie that they just you can't movie that they just you can't physically painful to do it. But but I physically painful to do it. But but I physically painful to do it. But but I grew up watching it and I wanted to be grew up watching it and I wanted to be grew up watching it and I wanted to be Jimmy Smiths played this really cool Jimmy Smiths played this really cool Jimmy Smiths played this really cool criminal defense attorney called Victor criminal defense attorney called Victor criminal defense attorney called Victor Sephuentes and he had an earring and I Sephuentes and he had an earring and I Sephuentes and he had an earring and I was like I'm going to be him. Instead I was like I'm going to be him. Instead I was like I'm going to be him. Instead I ended up becoming Arie Becker which was ended up becoming Arie Becker which was ended up becoming Arie Becker which was the divorce lawyer on the show that you the divorce lawyer on the show that you the divorce lawyer on the show that you know like no Corbin Bernson played him know like no Corbin Bernson played him know like no Corbin Bernson played him and uh I'd never imagined that's who I and uh I'd never imagined that's who I and uh I'd never imagined that's who I would grow up to be but it definitely would grow up to be but it definitely would grow up to be but it definitely created in me this love of the law. But created in me this love of the law. But created in me this love of the law. But there was a character on the show named there was a character on the show named there was a character on the show named Benny and he was developmentally Benny and he was developmentally Benny and he was developmentally disabled and he worked in like the copy disabled and he worked in like the copy disabled and he worked in like the copy room and he um has a crush on this room and he um has a crush on this room and he um has a crush on this secretary and she says something to him secretary and she says something to him secretary and she says something to him about well I'm trying like she's about well I'm trying like she's about well I'm trying like she's eating a salad and he says why are you eating a salad and he says why are you eating a salad and he says why are you eating that for lunch like you know eating that for lunch like you know eating that for lunch like you know that's doesn't look very good and she that's doesn't look very good and she that's doesn't look very good and she says well I want to be skinnier and he says well I want to be skinnier and he says well I want to be skinnier and he says why do you want to be skinnier and says why do you want to be skinnier and says why do you want to be skinnier and she says well because if you know if she says well because if you know if she says well because if you know if I lost 20 pounds you know I'd be I lost 20 pounds you know I'd be I lost 20 pounds you know I'd be prettier and he says no you'd just be prettier and he says no you'd just be prettier and he says no you'd just be smaller. And there's a simplicity to smaller. And there's a simplicity to smaller. And there's a simplicity to that that's completely honest. Like, no, that that's completely honest. Like, no, that that's completely honest. Like, no, there'd just be less of you. You know, there'd just be less of you. You know, there'd just be less of you. You know, like when someone says, "If I gained 50 like when someone says, "If I gained 50 like when someone says, "If I gained 50 pounds, would you still love me?" I hear pounds, would you still love me?" I hear pounds, would you still love me?" I hear that as both a thought experiment, b that as both a thought experiment, b that as both a thought experiment, b uh you're looking for me to reassure you uh you're looking for me to reassure you uh you're looking for me to reassure you how much I love you. But also, what how much I love you. But also, what how much I love you. But also, what you're saying is if something changed, you're saying is if something changed, you're saying is if something changed, like what about me can change and what like what about me can change and what like what about me can change and what about me can't? Like what would be the about me can't? Like what would be the about me can't? Like what would be the things about me that could change? Cuz things about me that could change? Cuz things about me that could change? Cuz by the way, sometimes things change by the way, sometimes things change by the way, sometimes things change totally beyond our control. You know totally beyond our control. You know totally beyond our control. You know that the tumor is what made you gain that the tumor is what made you gain that the tumor is what made you gain weight. It wasn't that you liked Big weight. It wasn't that you liked Big weight. It wasn't that you liked Big Macs. Like so if it if you gained Macs. Like so if it if you gained Macs. Like so if it if you gained weight because you were irresponsible in weight because you were irresponsible in weight because you were irresponsible in your eating habits versus you gained your eating habits versus you gained your eating habits versus you gained weight because of the tumor. These are weight because of the tumor. These are weight because of the tumor. These are two very different circumstance. But if two very different circumstance. But if two very different circumstance. But if what the person is saying is what do you what the person is saying is what do you what the person is saying is what do you love about me and what about me could love about me and what about me could love about me and what about me could change and I would lose your love change and I would lose your love change and I would lose your love potentially. Again, what is that potentially. Again, what is that potentially. Again, what is that conversation but the prenup conversation but the prenup conversation but the prenup conversation? It's what do we mean to conversation? It's what do we mean to conversation? It's what do we mean to each other? What do we owe to each other? What do we owe to each other? What do we owe to each other? Where do we store value in this other? Where do we store value in this other? Where do we store value in this relationship? And when it changes, not relationship? And when it changes, not relationship? And when it changes, not if, when it if, when it if, when it changes, what changes, can we communi changes, what changes, can we communi changes, what changes, can we communi how can we communicate about what those how can we communicate about what those how can we communicate about what those changes feel like? Because here's the changes feel like? Because here's the changes feel like? Because here's the thing. If we're having less sex 10 years thing. If we're having less sex 10 years thing. If we're having less sex 10 years into the relationship, I don't think into the relationship, I don't think into the relationship, I don't think that's abnormal. that's abnormal. that's abnormal. Like when you're first dating, the Like when you're first dating, the Like when you're first dating, the amount of sex you're having and the amount of sex you're having and the amount of sex you're having and the amount of sex you're having 10 years amount of sex you're having 10 years amount of sex you're having 10 years later with two kids is probably going to later with two kids is probably going to later with two kids is probably going to be different and probably less. Does be different and probably less. Does be different and probably less. Does that mean something's wrong in your that mean something's wrong in your that mean something's wrong in your relationship? Not necessarily. Like relationship? Not necessarily. Like relationship? Not necessarily. Like you're also aging. That might change. you're also aging. That might change. you're also aging. That might change. Your testosterone levels change. Maybe Your testosterone levels change. Maybe Your testosterone levels change. Maybe her body changes when you had kids. Who her body changes when you had kids. Who her body changes when you had kids. Who knows? By the way, if you're having more knows? By the way, if you're having more knows? By the way, if you're having more sex, does it mean your relationship's sex, does it mean your relationship's sex, does it mean your relationship's healthy? Not necessarily. Right? So the healthy? Not necessarily. Right? So the healthy? Not necessarily. Right? So the question becomes is when things change, question becomes is when things change, question becomes is when things change, how will we check in about it? Because I how will we check in about it? Because I how will we check in about it? Because I don't think let's just pretend don't think let's just pretend don't think let's just pretend everything's exactly the same and it's everything's exactly the same and it's everything's exactly the same and it's fine. It's fine. It's fine. I don't fine. It's fine. It's fine. I don't fine. It's fine. It's fine. I don't think that's the answer. I think that's think that's the answer. I think that's think that's the answer. I think that's what gets us a 56% divorce rate. I've what gets us a 56% divorce rate. I've what gets us a 56% divorce rate. I've heard it said that um men marry women heard it said that um men marry women heard it said that um men marry women thinking that they're not going to thinking that they're not going to thinking that they're not going to change. Women marry men thinking they change. Women marry men thinking they change. Women marry men thinking they will change. And there in lies the will change. And there in lies the will change. And there in lies the challenge. I think there's a saying, challenge. I think there's a saying, challenge. I think there's a saying, but yeah, I mean, there's a lot of good but yeah, I mean, there's a lot of good but yeah, I mean, there's a lot of good axioms. The one I've heard before that I axioms. The one I've heard before that I axioms. The one I've heard before that I think is similar is that um women think is similar is that um women think is similar is that um women marry the man they want to spend the marry the man they want to spend the marry the man they want to spend the rest of their life with and men marry rest of their life with and men marry rest of their life with and men marry the woman they don't want to imagine the woman they don't want to imagine the woman they don't want to imagine the rest of their life without. That's a rest of their life without. That's a rest of their life without. That's a more romantic version. Women are women more romantic version. Women are women more romantic version. Women are women are parsing it in the imagined future are parsing it in the imagined future are parsing it in the imagined future with this person and men are thinking with this person and men are thinking with this person and men are thinking about the imagined future loss. I've about the imagined future loss. I've about the imagined future loss. I've spent a lot of time in the room with spent a lot of time in the room with spent a lot of time in the room with people who have recently been caught or people who have recently been caught or people who have recently been caught or caught their spouse caught their spouse caught their spouse cheating. And the most common question cheating. And the most common question cheating. And the most common question the man wants to know is, "Did you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the man wants to know is, "Did you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the man wants to know is, "Did you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] him?" And the most common question the him?" And the most common question the him?" And the most common question the women want to know is, "Do you love women want to know is, "Do you love women want to know is, "Do you love her?" And that says something about her?" And that says something about her?" And that says something about value for those two people. Because for value for those two people. Because for value for those two people. Because for the man it's like the did the man it's like the did the man it's like the did you like did you betray me did you like did you betray me did you like did you betray me physically, right? And for the woman physically, right? And for the woman physically, right? And for the woman it's like do you not do I have no value it's like do you not do I have no value it's like do you not do I have no value to you anymore? Do you not love me? Do to you anymore? Do you not love me? Do to you anymore? Do you not love me? Do you want this person more than you want you want this person more than you want you want this person more than you want me? It's more about the value than me? It's more about the value than me? It's more about the value than the sex necessarily. Right? And again, the sex necessarily. Right? And again, the sex necessarily. Right? And again, I'm not saying all men. I'm not saying I'm not saying all men. I'm not saying I'm not saying all men. I'm not saying all women, but I think there is a all women, but I think there is a all women, but I think there is a sense in men, a lot of the men, I say sense in men, a lot of the men, I say sense in men, a lot of the men, I say this even my personal relationships with this even my personal relationships with this even my personal relationships with male friends that they're like, with male friends that they're like, with male friends that they're like, "Yeah, like they once they find someone "Yeah, like they once they find someone "Yeah, like they once they find someone that they're like, "Yeah, I just can't that they're like, "Yeah, I just can't that they're like, "Yeah, I just can't imagine like her not being here." And imagine like her not being here." And imagine like her not being here." And they marry because they're like, "I they marry because they're like, "I they marry because they're like, "I got to marry her or else I'm going to got to marry her or else I'm going to got to marry her or else I'm going to lose her." You know, like I never met a lose her." You know, like I never met a lose her." You know, like I never met a guy who's like, "I can't wait for my guy who's like, "I can't wait for my guy who's like, "I can't wait for my wedding day and I've imagined my tux and wedding day and I've imagined my tux and wedding day and I've imagined my tux and I just can't wait." Like that's not it's I just can't wait." Like that's not it's I just can't wait." Like that's not it's just not something men I don't know a just not something men I don't know a just not something men I don't know a lot of men that like could dreaming of lot of men that like could dreaming of lot of men that like could dreaming of their wedding day. Whereas I know a lot their wedding day. Whereas I know a lot their wedding day. Whereas I know a lot of women again some of that's cultural of women again some of that's cultural of women again some of that's cultural that we've been shoving weddings down that we've been shoving weddings down that we've been shoving weddings down women's throats and you get to be a women's throats and you get to be a women's throats and you get to be a princess for a day and wear the dress princess for a day and wear the dress princess for a day and wear the dress and everyone's paying attention to you and everyone's paying attention to you and everyone's paying attention to you because the bride's the star of the because the bride's the star of the because the bride's the star of the show. You know I get it. But but there show. You know I get it. But but there show. You know I get it. But but there is also something about the idea that is also something about the idea that is also something about the idea that like you know most of the men I know like you know most of the men I know like you know most of the men I know they're like yeah we got married cuz they're like yeah we got married cuz they're like yeah we got married cuz like you know like that's what you do like you know like that's what you do like you know like that's what you do like you make an honest woman of her you like you make an honest woman of her you like you make an honest woman of her you know like that's her parents would have know like that's her parents would have know like that's her parents would have killed me if we didn't get married her killed me if we didn't get married her killed me if we didn't get married her friends were all getting married so it friends were all getting married so it friends were all getting married so it was like you know all of her friends was like you know all of her friends was like you know all of her friends she's been a bridesmaid eight times like she's been a bridesmaid eight times like she's been a bridesmaid eight times like I was like it's about time you know I was like it's about time you know I was like it's about time you know whereas women very often it's like where whereas women very often it's like where whereas women very often it's like where is this going where is this going are we is this going where is this going are we is this going where is this going are we moving and again there's probably a moving and again there's probably a moving and again there's probably a myriad of reasons evolutionary myriad of reasons evolutionary myriad of reasons evolutionary biological having to do with procreation biological having to do with procreation biological having to do with procreation There's lots of cultural, religious, There's lots of cultural, religious, There's lots of cultural, religious, there's all kinds of but at the end we there's all kinds of but at the end we there's all kinds of but at the end we are where we are in that equation. And I are where we are in that equation. And I are where we are in that equation. And I think marriage is something most men are think marriage is something most men are think marriage is something most men are like, okay, if that's the price, like if like, okay, if that's the price, like if like, okay, if that's the price, like if I got to buy that ticket to take the I got to buy that ticket to take the I got to buy that ticket to take the ride, I like the ride. I don't want to ride, I like the ride. I don't want to ride, I like the ride. I don't want to lose the ride. I don't want to lose this lose the ride. I don't want to lose this lose the ride. I don't want to lose this person. Oh man, I'm just uh I'm not I'm person. Oh man, I'm just uh I'm not I'm person. Oh man, I'm just uh I'm not I'm not necess sorry I'm not necessarily not necess sorry I'm not necessarily not necess sorry I'm not necessarily agreeing with you, but like I can just agreeing with you, but like I can just agreeing with you, but like I can just hear the voices in people's heads hear the voices in people's heads hear the voices in people's heads about the really is that passive for about the really is that passive for about the really is that passive for men? You know, this sort of like it men? You know, this sort of like it men? You know, this sort of like it sounds like almost like a passive sounds like almost like a passive sounds like almost like a passive response like yeah, I guess there's response like yeah, I guess there's response like yeah, I guess there's really no other path here, right? I've really no other path here, right? I've really no other path here, right? I've had a lot Let me tell you something. had a lot Let me tell you something. had a lot Let me tell you something. People lie to their therapist. They People lie to their therapist. They People lie to their therapist. They don't lie to their divorce lawyer. Like don't lie to their divorce lawyer. Like don't lie to their divorce lawyer. Like I have had 25 years of conversations I have had 25 years of conversations I have had 25 years of conversations with men who are ending a marriage or with men who are ending a marriage or with men who are ending a marriage or starting a marriage and getting a prenup starting a marriage and getting a prenup starting a marriage and getting a prenup or thinking about getting a prenup, but or thinking about getting a prenup, but or thinking about getting a prenup, but they're too afraid to say anything to they're too afraid to say anything to they're too afraid to say anything to her about it. I've had those same things her about it. I've had those same things her about it. I've had those same things with women. I've represented roughly with women. I've represented roughly with women. I've represented roughly half men, half women. And and I'm half men, half women. And and I'm half men, half women. And and I'm telling you, like you don't have to like telling you, like you don't have to like telling you, like you don't have to like the truth. The truth is the truth. Like the truth. The truth is the truth. Like the truth. The truth is the truth. Like you don't have to like I get it, you don't have to like I get it, you don't have to like I get it, man. Like don't shoot the messenger. man. Like don't shoot the messenger. man. Like don't shoot the messenger. Like that's how it is, you know? And Like that's how it is, you know? And Like that's how it is, you know? And every time I speak about these things every time I speak about these things every time I speak about these things because they're so tied in with gender because they're so tied in with gender because they're so tied in with gender stuff and they're so I know I'm stuff and they're so I know I'm stuff and they're so I know I'm putting a huge target and everyone's putting a huge target and everyone's putting a huge target and everyone's like, "Oh, this guy I don't care like, "Oh, this guy I don't care like, "Oh, this guy I don't care because here's the thing. Sit in my because here's the thing. Sit in my because here's the thing. Sit in my office for a week." Well, you're an office for a week." Well, you're an office for a week." Well, you're an equal opportunity assassin when it comes equal opportunity assassin when it comes equal opportunity assassin when it comes to these conversations. I mean, sure. to these conversations. I mean, sure. to these conversations. I mean, sure. Sure. What you just said kind of puts a Sure. What you just said kind of puts a Sure. What you just said kind of puts a target on men in the sense that it makes target on men in the sense that it makes target on men in the sense that it makes them sound like, well, they kind of went them sound like, well, they kind of went them sound like, well, they kind of went into it cuz there really wasn't another into it cuz there really wasn't another into it cuz there really wasn't another like trail on the on the mountain. Sure. like trail on the on the mountain. Sure. like trail on the on the mountain. Sure. On the other hand, there's something On the other hand, there's something On the other hand, there's something kind of um both romantic and uh and kind of um both romantic and uh and kind of um both romantic and uh and actually very honorable about yeah, actually very honorable about yeah, actually very honorable about yeah, look, there might be other options, but look, there might be other options, but look, there might be other options, but this is the one I like and she really this is the one I like and she really this is the one I like and she really wanted this and I wanted her and so wanted this and I wanted her and so wanted this and I wanted her and so that's the contract. I mean, there's that's the contract. I mean, there's that's the contract. I mean, there's something pretty nice. How is there's something pretty nice. How is there's something pretty nice. How is that passive? How is that passive? that passive? How is that passive? that passive? How is that passive? That's love. It's it's love economy of That's love. It's it's love economy of That's love. It's it's love economy of love. What you like going to antique love. What you like going to antique love. What you like going to antique shows? I don't. But you know what? if shows? I don't. But you know what? if shows? I don't. But you know what? if she wants to go to if that's something she wants to go to if that's something she wants to go to if that's something she enjoys. You think she enjoys she enjoys. You think she enjoys she enjoys. You think she enjoys Brazilian jiu-jitsu tournaments? Have Brazilian jiu-jitsu tournaments? Have Brazilian jiu-jitsu tournaments? Have you smelled one? Like, trust me, that's you smelled one? Like, trust me, that's you smelled one? Like, trust me, that's not But she, you know what? I love it. not But she, you know what? I love it. not But she, you know what? I love it. And she's excited to see me be so And she's excited to see me be so And she's excited to see me be so excited. One. I've never been to one, excited. One. I've never been to one, excited. One. I've never been to one, but I can imagine. Trust me, you can but I can imagine. Trust me, you can but I can imagine. Trust me, you can smell it from here. It's unbelievable. smell it from here. It's unbelievable. smell it from here. It's unbelievable. The funk is like you'd never believe in The funk is like you'd never believe in The funk is like you'd never believe in your whole life. The only other thing is your whole life. The only other thing is your whole life. The only other thing is like equestrian is maybe the only other like equestrian is maybe the only other like equestrian is maybe the only other habit that could smell as bad as that. habit that could smell as bad as that. habit that could smell as bad as that. But the truth is part of love is you But the truth is part of love is you But the truth is part of love is you know, yeah, you want that slice of know, yeah, you want that slice of know, yeah, you want that slice of pizza more than I do. Like part of it is pizza more than I do. Like part of it is pizza more than I do. Like part of it is like the okay like this is important to like the okay like this is important to like the okay like this is important to you. Yeah. The pleasure and sacrifice, you. Yeah. The pleasure and sacrifice, you. Yeah. The pleasure and sacrifice, right? Well, because listen, if it's right? Well, because listen, if it's right? Well, because listen, if it's important to me and it's important to important to me and it's important to important to me and it's important to you, am I doing it for you or am I doing you, am I doing it for you or am I doing you, am I doing it for you or am I doing it for me or both of us? Like what's it for me or both of us? Like what's it for me or both of us? Like what's beautiful is when you're not sacrificing beautiful is when you're not sacrificing beautiful is when you're not sacrificing to give, you know, when there's this to give, you know, when there's this to give, you know, when there's this feeling of like if this is important to feeling of like if this is important to feeling of like if this is important to you, it just became important to me. you, it just became important to me. you, it just became important to me. Like, and that but that's at the core of Like, and that but that's at the core of Like, and that but that's at the core of any healthy relationship. You know, if any healthy relationship. You know, if any healthy relationship. You know, if you say to me as my friend like, "Jim, you say to me as my friend like, "Jim, you say to me as my friend like, "Jim, this upsets me." Okay. Or I'm scared of this upsets me." Okay. Or I'm scared of this upsets me." Okay. Or I'm scared of this. If I go, "Well, I'm not scared of this. If I go, "Well, I'm not scared of this. If I go, "Well, I'm not scared of that." You know, like, "Thanks. That that." You know, like, "Thanks. That that." You know, like, "Thanks. That didn't do anything for me." Yeah. It didn't do anything for me." Yeah. It didn't do anything for me." Yeah. It sort of ceases to be a friendship at sort of ceases to be a friendship at sort of ceases to be a friendship at that point, right? When you say to that point, right? When you say to that point, right? When you say to someone like, "Hey, I get that, man. You someone like, "Hey, I get that, man. You someone like, "Hey, I get that, man. You know what? Honestly, like I understand know what? Honestly, like I understand know what? Honestly, like I understand that. Like, I don't I'm not afraid of that. Like, I don't I'm not afraid of that. Like, I don't I'm not afraid of that. And here's how I think that. And here's how I think that. And here's how I think about it, which is why I'm not afraid of about it, which is why I'm not afraid of about it, which is why I'm not afraid of it." like and I hope that maybe helps, it." like and I hope that maybe helps, it." like and I hope that maybe helps, you know, like and that's what or you know, like and that's what or you know, like and that's what or just hearing the person and going like, just hearing the person and going like, just hearing the person and going like, "Yeah, I get that, man. Hey, that's "Yeah, I get that, man. Hey, that's "Yeah, I get that, man. Hey, that's fair. Like people are afraid of I got fair. Like people are afraid of I got fair. Like people are afraid of I got some stuff I'm afraid of that you're some stuff I'm afraid of that you're some stuff I'm afraid of that you're probably not afraid of. Like that's probably not afraid of. Like that's probably not afraid of. Like that's okay." So why is it I don't think okay." So why is it I don't think okay." So why is it I don't think there's something passive about a man there's something passive about a man there's something passive about a man saying, "Yeah, marriage was not that saying, "Yeah, marriage was not that saying, "Yeah, marriage was not that important to me, but it was important to important to me, but it was important to important to me, but it was important to her, and what's important to her becomes her, and what's important to her becomes her, and what's important to her becomes important to me because she's important to me because she's important to me because she's important to me." Like that's beautiful. Yeah. I to me." Like that's beautiful. Yeah. I to me." Like that's beautiful. Yeah. I didn't want to imply it was it was didn't want to imply it was it was didn't want to imply it was it was passive. I want to be very clear. I passive. I want to be very clear. I passive. I want to be very clear. I think that some people might be think that some people might be think that some people might be surprised to learn that many men, surprised to learn that many men, surprised to learn that many men, because I agree with you, by the way. because I agree with you, by the way. because I agree with you, by the way. Yeah. Uh will agree to do things um not Yeah. Uh will agree to do things um not Yeah. Uh will agree to do things um not out of the sheer joy and delight of the out of the sheer joy and delight of the out of the sheer joy and delight of the thing, but the deeper delight of making thing, but the deeper delight of making thing, but the deeper delight of making the person that they care about happy. I the person that they care about happy. I the person that they care about happy. I feel like that's love. Like that's a big feel like that's love. Like that's a big feel like that's love. Like that's a big piece of love. And so I think marriage piece of love. And so I think marriage piece of love. And so I think marriage can be one of those things where just can be one of those things where just can be one of those things where just look whether you wanted it or the other look whether you wanted it or the other look whether you wanted it or the other person wanted it. Like there's something person wanted it. Like there's something person wanted it. Like there's something wonderful about you're excited about wonderful about you're excited about wonderful about you're excited about this. Okay, let's do it. But get a this. Okay, let's do it. But get a this. Okay, let's do it. But get a prenup. Of course get a prenup. Why prenup. Of course get a prenup. Why prenup. Of course get a prenup. Why would you not get a prenup? Listen, man. would you not get a prenup? Listen, man. would you not get a prenup? Listen, man. I love you and I trust you're a good I love you and I trust you're a good I love you and I trust you're a good driver. We get in the car. I'm putting driver. We get in the car. I'm putting driver. We get in the car. I'm putting on a seat belt. Putting on a seat belt. on a seat belt. Putting on a seat belt. on a seat belt. Putting on a seat belt. Why wouldn't I? Cuz there are other Why wouldn't I? Cuz there are other Why wouldn't I? Cuz there are other drivers on the road. There's other drivers on the road. There's other drivers on the road. There's other drivers on the road. You're damn right. drivers on the road. You're damn right. drivers on the road. You're damn right. There's other drivers on the road. And There's other drivers on the road. And There's other drivers on the road. And by the way, like again, this is a by the way, like again, this is a by the way, like again, this is a situation where there are rules in place situation where there are rules in place situation where there are rules in place whether you accept it or not. Like whether you accept it or not. Like whether you accept it or not. Like that's the thing about the truth, right? that's the thing about the truth, right? that's the thing about the truth, right? Like my beliefs don't require you to Like my beliefs don't require you to Like my beliefs don't require you to believe them. Like this is the you don't believe them. Like this is the you don't believe them. Like this is the you don't have to believe the truth if it's the have to believe the truth if it's the have to believe the truth if it's the truth. It's the truth. Like the there is truth. It's the truth. Like the there is truth. It's the truth. Like the there is a rule set governing every single a rule set governing every single a rule set governing every single marriage. It was written by the state marriage. It was written by the state marriage. It was written by the state legislature. Period. I want to discuss legislature. Period. I want to discuss legislature. Period. I want to discuss relationships that start earlier in life relationships that start earlier in life relationships that start earlier in life versus later in life. When I was an versus later in life. When I was an versus later in life. When I was an undergraduate, I took a course uh undergraduate, I took a course uh undergraduate, I took a course uh several courses actually from a several courses actually from a several courses actually from a professor um who was just phenomenal. professor um who was just phenomenal. professor um who was just phenomenal. Learned neuro anatomy from him, Learned neuro anatomy from him, Learned neuro anatomy from him, developmental neurobiology, gave me the developmental neurobiology, gave me the developmental neurobiology, gave me the only B+ after my freshman year. That's only B+ after my freshman year. That's only B+ after my freshman year. That's not to boast about my other grades, but not to boast about my other grades, but not to boast about my other grades, but that's the course that I learned the that's the course that I learned the that's the course that I learned the most from. Um I still remember the most from. Um I still remember the most from. Um I still remember the questions I got wrong. I still remember questions I got wrong. I still remember questions I got wrong. I still remember him explaining exactly why I got it him explaining exactly why I got it him explaining exactly why I got it wrong. was the best learning, right? wrong. was the best learning, right? wrong. was the best learning, right? Yeah. It was amazing. Um, years later, I Yeah. It was amazing. Um, years later, I Yeah. It was amazing. Um, years later, I went back to visit him just for social went back to visit him just for social went back to visit him just for social reasons and he had kids now. He was reasons and he had kids now. He was reasons and he had kids now. He was married. He had a new baby. And he said married. He had a new baby. And he said married. He had a new baby. And he said to me something. I don't know why he to me something. I don't know why he to me something. I don't know why he felt compelled to tell me um stuff about felt compelled to tell me um stuff about felt compelled to tell me um stuff about um his personal life and giving me um his personal life and giving me um his personal life and giving me advice, but he did. Uh because he was advice, but he did. Uh because he was advice, but he did. Uh because he was known for being a pretty rigid guy, very known for being a pretty rigid guy, very known for being a pretty rigid guy, very particular, which is part of what made particular, which is part of what made particular, which is part of what made him such an excellent neuroanatomist. him such an excellent neuroanatomist. him such an excellent neuroanatomist. Sure. And he said to me, "You know, I Sure. And he said to me, "You know, I Sure. And he said to me, "You know, I don't know what your personal life is don't know what your personal life is don't know what your personal life is like, but you should get married as like, but you should get married as like, but you should get married as young as possible within reason." And I young as possible within reason." And I young as possible within reason." And I said, "Oh, yeah. Why?" And he said, "Oh, yeah. Why?" And he said, "Oh, yeah. Why?" And he said, "Because there's this thing that happens "Because there's this thing that happens "Because there's this thing that happens when you reach a certain age that you when you reach a certain age that you when you reach a certain age that you need to have the toothpaste on the right need to have the toothpaste on the right need to have the toothpaste on the right hand side of the sink." And when the hand side of the sink." And when the hand side of the sink." And when the toothpaste isn't on the right hand side toothpaste isn't on the right hand side toothpaste isn't on the right hand side of the sink, then you it irritates you. of the sink, then you it irritates you. of the sink, then you it irritates you. and but if you get married and but if you get married and but if you get married and kind of merge lives with somebody early, kind of merge lives with somebody early, kind of merge lives with somebody early, you develop a flexibility and you go you develop a flexibility and you go you develop a flexibility and you go through a lot of developmental through a lot of developmental through a lot of developmental milestones with them. And um I found it milestones with them. And um I found it milestones with them. And um I found it both amusing and interesting both amusing and interesting both amusing and interesting that he would share that. I know that he would share that. I know that he would share that. I know examples uh of people who merged lives examples uh of people who merged lives examples uh of people who merged lives early and are still together. I know early and are still together. I know early and are still together. I know some that merged life early lives some that merged life early lives some that merged life early lives early, excuse me, and diverged later, early, excuse me, and diverged later, early, excuse me, and diverged later, got divorced. Um I know people that get got divorced. Um I know people that get got divorced. Um I know people that get married, have kids later in life. Um I'm married, have kids later in life. Um I'm married, have kids later in life. Um I'm almost 50 in September, so this question almost 50 in September, so this question almost 50 in September, so this question isn't about me, but um certainly isn't about me, but um certainly isn't about me, but um certainly pertains to me in some sense. pertains to me in some sense. pertains to me in some sense. In your observation of successful versus In your observation of successful versus In your observation of successful versus unsuccessful marriages, unsuccessful marriages, unsuccessful marriages, is there a tendency for people who marry is there a tendency for people who marry is there a tendency for people who marry younger, Yeah. to despite the fact that younger, Yeah. to despite the fact that younger, Yeah. to despite the fact that they quote unquote might not know they quote unquote might not know they quote unquote might not know themselves as well, etc. for those themselves as well, etc. for those themselves as well, etc. for those marriages to be more successful because marriages to be more successful because marriages to be more successful because they go through a lot of these life they go through a lot of these life they go through a lot of these life milestones together. um setting aside milestones together. um setting aside milestones together. um setting aside here whether the toothpaste is on the here whether the toothpaste is on the here whether the toothpaste is on the right hand side or the left hand side of right hand side or the left hand side of right hand side or the left hand side of the so I've given this a lot of thought the so I've given this a lot of thought the so I've given this a lot of thought because the nature of my constitution is because the nature of my constitution is because the nature of my constitution is to look at patterns and look for to look at patterns and look for to look at patterns and look for patterns we're similar in that regard patterns we're similar in that regard patterns we're similar in that regard and so I'm always looking at that for 25 and so I'm always looking at that for 25 and so I'm always looking at that for 25 years I've been looking at like same years I've been looking at like same years I've been looking at like same religion different religion cohabitated religion different religion cohabitated religion different religion cohabitated before marriage didn't cohabitate before marriage didn't cohabitate before marriage didn't cohabitate before marriage age gap no age gap female age marriage age gap no age gap female age marriage age gap no age gap female age gap like she's older he's younger versus gap like she's older he's younger versus gap like she's older he's younger versus the other way like I try to find the other way like I try to find the other way like I try to find patterns And I try to the patterns that can't be And I try to the patterns that can't be And I try to the patterns that can't be tracked by the government in a tracked by the government in a tracked by the government in a certificate of dissolution of marriage. certificate of dissolution of marriage. certificate of dissolution of marriage. The patterns that can only be tracked by The patterns that can only be tracked by The patterns that can only be tracked by someone who's observing this, right? And someone who's observing this, right? And someone who's observing this, right? And I I've really tried to look at that I I've really tried to look at that I I've really tried to look at that from every angle, including the angle from every angle, including the angle from every angle, including the angle that you just said, which is people that you just said, which is people that you just said, which is people that connect in the romantic setting or enter connect in the romantic setting or enter connect in the romantic setting or enter a monogous relationship or make a monogous relationship or make a monogous relationship or make a romantic connection even if it doesn't romantic connection even if it doesn't romantic connection even if it doesn't stay monogous throughout that whole stay monogous throughout that whole stay monogous throughout that whole journey. So, like they met in high journey. So, like they met in high journey. So, like they met in high school, dated in high school, or dated school, dated in high school, or dated school, dated in high school, or dated and then went off to college, dated and then went off to college, dated and then went off to college, dated other people, and then they reconnect to other people, and then they reconnect to other people, and then they reconnect to each other, you know, after they played each other, you know, after they played each other, you know, after they played in the other fields, and then they go, in the other fields, and then they go, in the other fields, and then they go, "Okay, now we're going to be together." "Okay, now we're going to be together." "Okay, now we're going to be together." Um, I've looked at all of that, and what Um, I've looked at all of that, and what Um, I've looked at all of that, and what I will tell you is in my experience, in I will tell you is in my experience, in I will tell you is in my experience, in my observation, what he said is certainly observation, what he said is certainly observation, what he said is certainly true, but it also ignores the true, but it also ignores the true, but it also ignores the negative, which is also true. So yes, negative, which is also true. So yes, negative, which is also true. So yes, there is a scenario where people meet at there is a scenario where people meet at there is a scenario where people meet at a relatively young age, teens, 20s, a relatively young age, teens, 20s, a relatively young age, teens, 20s, whatever it might be. They marry or they whatever it might be. They marry or they whatever it might be. They marry or they become monogous with each other and then become monogous with each other and then become monogous with each other and then they eventually marry or stay in a they eventually marry or stay in a they eventually marry or stay in a romantic relationship together and they romantic relationship together and they romantic relationship together and they grow in that like tree that the roots grow in that like tree that the roots grow in that like tree that the roots become intertwined and they just become intertwined and they just become intertwined and they just know each and they build a history know each and they build a history know each and they build a history together that is just irreplaceable, you together that is just irreplaceable, you together that is just irreplaceable, you know, because who like you were there know, because who like you were there know, because who like you were there when my mom was still alive, you know, when my mom was still alive, you know, when my mom was still alive, you know, like you were there when I, you know, like you were there when I, you know, like you were there when I, you know, got into law school, you know, like not got into law school, you know, like not got into law school, you know, like not just when I passed the bar, not just when I passed the bar, not just when I passed the bar, not just when I built like you were here for this when I built like you were here for this when I built like you were here for this whole trajectory and there's this shared whole trajectory and there's this shared whole trajectory and there's this shared history. I mean, you have old friends. I history. I mean, you have old friends. I history. I mean, you have old friends. I have old friends. There's something have old friends. There's something have old friends. There's something about someone who was with you when about someone who was with you when about someone who was with you when there was just no like no I have some there was just no like no I have some there was just no like no I have some friends that it's like dude there was no friends that it's like dude there was no friends that it's like dude there was no reason to be friends with me other than reason to be friends with me other than reason to be friends with me other than like I had nothing to offer you. I had like I had nothing to offer you. I had like I had nothing to offer you. I had no money. I had no status. I was a C no money. I had no status. I was a C no money. I had no status. I was a C student like and something about you student like and something about you student like and something about you still was like no that's my buddy you still was like no that's my buddy you still was like no that's my buddy you know and I love that. So there is a know and I love that. So there is a know and I love that. So there is a tremendous beauty in that and when it tremendous beauty in that and when it tremendous beauty in that and when it works there is also works there is also works there is also that people who have known each other that people who have known each other that people who have known each other since the beginning as they grow and age since the beginning as they grow and age since the beginning as they grow and age and mature and they reach the stage in and mature and they reach the stage in and mature and they reach the stage in life where they start to as we can call life where they start to as we can call life where they start to as we can call it a midlife crisis which by the way is it a midlife crisis which by the way is it a midlife crisis which by the way is not reserved for men like men and women not reserved for men like men and women not reserved for men like men and women both have a form of both have a form of both have a form of that they start to say hey like that they start to say hey like that they start to say hey like have I really felt everything there is have I really felt everything there is have I really felt everything there is to feel. Have I I've only slept with to feel. Have I I've only slept with to feel. Have I I've only slept with this person for the last 15 years? Like this person for the last 15 years? Like this person for the last 15 years? Like there's so many other things out there. there's so many other things out there. there's so many other things out there. There's so many other experiences out There's so many other experiences out There's so many other experiences out there and I haven't had them. So there's there and I haven't had them. So there's there and I haven't had them. So there's a sense and by the way there's also a sense and by the way there's also a sense and by the way there's also a uh you know mistaking correlation for uh you know mistaking correlation for uh you know mistaking correlation for causation in the sense of saying you causation in the sense of saying you causation in the sense of saying you know I'm dissatisfied with my life and know I'm dissatisfied with my life and know I'm dissatisfied with my life and you've been here for the whole thing. you've been here for the whole thing. you've been here for the whole thing. So, it must be you that I'm unhappy with So, it must be you that I'm unhappy with So, it must be you that I'm unhappy with as opposed to the choices I've made and as opposed to the choices I've made and as opposed to the choices I've made and where they've led me or the person who where they've led me or the person who where they've led me or the person who I've become rather than who you be. It's I've become rather than who you be. It's I've become rather than who you be. It's much easier to point to the other person much easier to point to the other person much easier to point to the other person and say, "Oh, you're the reason why I'm and say, "Oh, you're the reason why I'm and say, "Oh, you're the reason why I'm so unhappy. I gave you my skinny years, so unhappy. I gave you my skinny years, so unhappy. I gave you my skinny years, you know, like it's over now, you know, you know, like it's over now, you know, you know, like it's over now, you know, like." And so, I think it ignores that. like." And so, I think it ignores that. like." And so, I think it ignores that. I have not found, and if believe me, I have not found, and if believe me, I have not found, and if believe me, I'd be the first to say it. If I could I'd be the first to say it. If I could I'd be the first to say it. If I could find a pattern where I would say, okay, find a pattern where I would say, okay, find a pattern where I would say, okay, live together or don't live together or live together or don't live together or live together or don't live together or like these are ways to prevent like these are ways to prevent like these are ways to prevent divorce is like this is what you should divorce is like this is what you should divorce is like this is what you should be looking for in a partner. Same be looking for in a partner. Same be looking for in a partner. Same religious structure, same whatever. You religious structure, same whatever. You religious structure, same whatever. You were both raised in households with were both raised in households with were both raised in households with alcoholics or you were neither of you alcoholics or you were neither of you alcoholics or you were neither of you whatever. I don't see it. I don't see whatever. I don't see it. I don't see whatever. I don't see it. I don't see it. I think everything that's virtue can it. I think everything that's virtue can it. I think everything that's virtue can be vice. I think that there's lots be vice. I think that there's lots be vice. I think that there's lots of ways that being together from an of ways that being together from an of ways that being together from an early age can add depth and beauty to early age can add depth and beauty to early age can add depth and beauty to your relationship and there are ways your relationship and there are ways your relationship and there are ways that it can cause people to not value that it can cause people to not value that it can cause people to not value each other the same way or view each other the same way or view each other the same way or view each other the same way. I think familiarity other the same way. I think familiarity other the same way. I think familiarity can breed contempt can breed contempt can breed contempt and I think that you know no man is a and I think that you know no man is a and I think that you know no man is a hero to his butler. Like I think that hero to his butler. Like I think that hero to his butler. Like I think that when people have been together through a when people have been together through a when people have been together through a lot of those things sometimes there is a lot of those things sometimes there is a lot of those things sometimes there is a familiarity that comes whereas again I familiarity that comes whereas again I familiarity that comes whereas again I think the opposite is true also which is think the opposite is true also which is think the opposite is true also which is having had someone who's in your corner having had someone who's in your corner having had someone who's in your corner for an extended period of time for an extended period of time for an extended period of time solidifies and deepens that solidifies and deepens that solidifies and deepens that relationship. There is no simple answer relationship. There is no simple answer relationship. There is no simple answer to that. I think there are a lot of to that. I think there are a lot of to that. I think there are a lot of things people can do in the things people can do in the things people can do in the relationship to heighten the bonds relationship to heighten the bonds relationship to heighten the bonds created by a long shared history and created by a long shared history and created by a long shared history and keep everyone's eye on that ball than to keep everyone's eye on that ball than to keep everyone's eye on that ball than to have them distracted by novelty. I also have them distracted by novelty. I also have them distracted by novelty. I also think realism becomes really important think realism becomes really important think realism becomes really important like looking at it and saying like you like looking at it and saying like you like looking at it and saying like you know if you've been with the same know if you've been with the same know if you've been with the same partner for 15 20 years that the fact partner for 15 20 years that the fact partner for 15 20 years that the fact your eye might wander to a shiny object your eye might wander to a shiny object your eye might wander to a shiny object like not being afraid to admit that and like not being afraid to admit that and like not being afraid to admit that and figure out ways to like hey I feel this figure out ways to like hey I feel this figure out ways to like hey I feel this now it's a human way to feel that's okay now it's a human way to feel that's okay now it's a human way to feel that's okay you know like how do we deal with that you know like how do we deal with that you know like how do we deal with that like what do we do with that is it an like what do we do with that is it an like what do we do with that is it an ethical non- monogamy which is what a ethical non- monogamy which is what a ethical non- monogamy which is what a lot of like younger I don't want to say lot of like younger I don't want to say lot of like younger I don't want to say younger but like a modern generation is younger but like a modern generation is younger but like a modern generation is certainly there are people coming up certainly there are people coming up certainly there are people coming up with different permutations of with different permutations of with different permutations of relationships where there's ethical relationships where there's ethical relationships where there's ethical nominogamy where there's a sense of okay nominogamy where there's a sense of okay nominogamy where there's a sense of okay we're going to have certain open things we're going to have certain open things we're going to have certain open things in our relationship like a lot of my gay in our relationship like a lot of my gay in our relationship like a lot of my gay male friends have been doing that for male friends have been doing that for male friends have been doing that for years where they had you know because years where they had you know because years where they had you know because again a societ like a culture that has again a societ like a culture that has again a societ like a culture that has been ostracized and told that what been ostracized and told that what been ostracized and told that what you're doing is an aberration and you're doing is an aberration and you're doing is an aberration and you're not like which is what it was when I was not like which is what it was when I was not like which is what it was when I was growing up like the gay community was growing up like the gay community was growing up like the gay community was like had to hide to some degree because like had to hide to some degree because like had to hide to some degree because you could be literally killed for you could be literally killed for you could be literally killed for expressing your sexual for expressing your sexual for expressing your sexual orientation. So, what did that do? Well, orientation. So, what did that do? Well, orientation. So, what did that do? Well, there's a freedom that comes with that there's a freedom that comes with that there's a freedom that comes with that to some degree. If you're on the to some degree. If you're on the to some degree. If you're on the outskirts of society, you're like, "All outskirts of society, you're like, "All outskirts of society, you're like, "All right, well, we just make up our own right, well, we just make up our own right, well, we just make up our own rules." I guess they're like rules." I guess they're like rules." I guess they're like relationship outlaws. Yeah, they really relationship outlaws. Yeah, they really relationship outlaws. Yeah, they really are. They're like, "Listen, like we're are. They're like, "Listen, like we're are. They're like, "Listen, like we're already told we're awful, terrible already told we're awful, terrible already told we're awful, terrible people for being who we are. So, we people for being who we are. So, we people for being who we are. So, we might as well come up with our own ways might as well come up with our own ways might as well come up with our own ways of doing stuff." So, I knew lots of doing stuff." So, I knew lots of doing stuff." So, I knew lots of gay men from the 80s on who, you know, gay men from the 80s on who, you know, gay men from the 80s on who, you know, were like, "Yeah, like we have certain were like, "Yeah, like we have certain were like, "Yeah, like we have certain rules in the relationship. Like, we can rules in the relationship. Like, we can rules in the relationship. Like, we can hook up, but the other person has to be hook up, but the other person has to be hook up, but the other person has to be transparent about it or there's certain transparent about it or there's certain transparent about it or there's certain boundaries you can't cross in terms of, boundaries you can't cross in terms of, boundaries you can't cross in terms of, you know, how sexually you interact with you know, how sexually you interact with you know, how sexually you interact with this person or it's something that we'll this person or it's something that we'll this person or it's something that we'll only do together in the form of a only do together in the form of a only do together in the form of a threesome." Well, again, I it's a threesome." Well, again, I it's a threesome." Well, again, I it's a permutation of relationship that is permutation of relationship that is permutation of relationship that is between those two people. It's up to between those two people. It's up to between those two people. It's up to them. That's their that's the them. That's their that's the them. That's their that's the conversation the two of them can have. conversation the two of them can have. conversation the two of them can have. So I think there are things any couple So I think there are things any couple So I think there are things any couple can do to feed what's good in the can do to feed what's good in the can do to feed what's good in the relationship and dampen the negative relationship and dampen the negative relationship and dampen the negative impact of the things that are impact of the things that are impact of the things that are challenging in a relationship. I don't challenging in a relationship. I don't challenging in a relationship. I don't think there's anything but again the think there's anything but again the think there's anything but again the solution to that problem is not just solution to that problem is not just solution to that problem is not just pretend we don't have a problem. Just pretend we don't have a problem. Just pretend we don't have a problem. Just shut your mouth because if you say it shut your mouth because if you say it shut your mouth because if you say it out loud it's going to make it real. out loud it's going to make it real. out loud it's going to make it real. It's real. Living in the delusion. Yeah. It's real. Living in the delusion. Yeah. It's real. Living in the delusion. Yeah. The living in the illusion is should The living in the illusion is should The living in the illusion is should really be called living in the delusion. really be called living in the delusion. really be called living in the delusion. Delusion. Yeah. Because I think these Delusion. Yeah. Because I think these Delusion. Yeah. Because I think these are precious illusions that people have are precious illusions that people have are precious illusions that people have and they cling to them and I understand and they cling to them and I understand and they cling to them and I understand why. Like it's nice to pretend why. Like it's nice to pretend why. Like it's nice to pretend everything's fine, you know, but it's everything's fine, you know, but it's everything's fine, you know, but it's not honest. And and I think there's not honest. And and I think there's not honest. And and I think there's tremendous value in saying these things tremendous value in saying these things tremendous value in saying these things to your partner, sharing them, hearing to your partner, sharing them, hearing to your partner, sharing them, hearing them, which by the way, that's a two-way them, which by the way, that's a two-way them, which by the way, that's a two-way transaction. Like if you're going to be transaction. Like if you're going to be transaction. Like if you're going to be in a relationship where you're able to in a relationship where you're able to in a relationship where you're able to say things that might be hard for your say things that might be hard for your say things that might be hard for your partner to hear but are important for partner to hear but are important for partner to hear but are important for them to hear, you have to be prepared to them to hear, you have to be prepared to them to hear, you have to be prepared to let them do the same thing. So again, let them do the same thing. So again, let them do the same thing. So again, that's why it's brave because there's that's why it's brave because there's that's why it's brave because there's this sense of I would like an this sense of I would like an this sense of I would like an uncomfortable truth more than a uncomfortable truth more than a uncomfortable truth more than a comfortable lie. I realize you've comfortable lie. I realize you've comfortable lie. I realize you've examined every permutation of the examined every permutation of the examined every permutation of the relationship structure and tried to relationship structure and tried to relationship structure and tried to correlate that with outcome whether or correlate that with outcome whether or correlate that with outcome whether or not the relationship survives happily or not the relationship survives happily or not the relationship survives happily or not you know divorce etc amicably or not you know divorce etc amicably or not you know divorce etc amicably or not there is one question that um I do think there is one question that um I do think there is one question that um I do think might fall into a distinct category. might fall into a distinct category. might fall into a distinct category. Sure. U which is the amount of time that Sure. U which is the amount of time that Sure. U which is the amount of time that people know one another before they people know one another before they people know one another before they decide to get engaged. Yeah. We hear decide to get engaged. Yeah. We hear decide to get engaged. Yeah. We hear about and it's been romanticized about and it's been romanticized about and it's been romanticized somewhat. you know, people, you know, somewhat. you know, people, you know, somewhat. you know, people, you know, met on vacation. I mean, you still see met on vacation. I mean, you still see met on vacation. I mean, you still see these in like in uh traditional media. I these in like in uh traditional media. I these in like in uh traditional media. I don't look at traditional media too much don't look at traditional media too much don't look at traditional media too much anymore, but um you'll see, you know, anymore, but um you'll see, you know, anymore, but um you'll see, you know, they met in Cabo for 4 days, went back, they met in Cabo for 4 days, went back, they met in Cabo for 4 days, went back, realized, and then there they are realized, and then there they are realized, and then there they are married or um but they might have been married or um but they might have been married or um but they might have been together 50 years, you know, or um you together 50 years, you know, or um you together 50 years, you know, or um you know, people were together a very long know, people were together a very long know, people were together a very long time. I mean, to me, nothing sadder. time. I mean, to me, nothing sadder. time. I mean, to me, nothing sadder. Here's the kind of like the Disney Here's the kind of like the Disney Here's the kind of like the Disney thing, right? When you hear about a thing, right? When you hear about a thing, right? When you hear about a couple like in their late 70s having couple like in their late 70s having couple like in their late 70s having been married very long time been married very long time been married very long time grandchildren, you know, they decide to grandchildren, you know, they decide to grandchildren, you know, they decide to get divorced and we all reflexively go a get divorced and we all reflexively go a get divorced and we all reflexively go a like there because we have the and like there because we have the and like there because we have the and everyone romanticizes the couple sitting everyone romanticizes the couple sitting everyone romanticizes the couple sitting together is all over Instagram, right? together is all over Instagram, right? together is all over Instagram, right? The old couple he still does this for The old couple he still does this for The old couple he still does this for her, she still adores him, he adores her, she still adores him, he adores her, she still adores him, he adores her. Um, her. Um, her. Um, so amount of time that people have known so amount of time that people have known so amount of time that people have known one another prior to engagement, any one another prior to engagement, any one another prior to engagement, any correlation with outcome? Yeah. So, what correlation with outcome? Yeah. So, what correlation with outcome? Yeah. So, what I'll say is a couple of things. Again, I'll say is a couple of things. Again, I'll say is a couple of things. Again, not a clear correlation. Like, we all not a clear correlation. Like, we all not a clear correlation. Like, we all have anecdotal stories we can tell of have anecdotal stories we can tell of have anecdotal stories we can tell of people who were together for extended people who were together for extended people who were together for extended periods of time and then split up. And periods of time and then split up. And periods of time and then split up. And we all have a couple of stories of we all have a couple of stories of we all have a couple of stories of people who like I have a dear friend who people who like I have a dear friend who people who like I have a dear friend who got a woman pregnant on the first got a woman pregnant on the first got a woman pregnant on the first date, like first date, like they went to date, like first date, like they went to date, like first date, like they went to movie and dinner and then they had sex movie and dinner and then they had sex movie and dinner and then they had sex and she got pregnant and she called him and she got pregnant and she called him and she got pregnant and she called him like a couple of weeks later and was like a couple of weeks later and was like a couple of weeks later and was like, "I'm pregnant. And he was like, "I'm pregnant. And he was like, "I'm pregnant. And he was like, "I'm marrying her." And I was like, "I'm marrying her." And I was like, "I'm marrying her." And I was like, "I'm sorry. Is it 1950?" Like, "What? No. sorry. Is it 1950?" Like, "What? No. sorry. Is it 1950?" Like, "What? No. Like, you don't even know her. You went Like, you don't even know her. You went Like, you don't even know her. You went on one date with her." And he's like, on one date with her." And he's like, on one date with her." And he's like, "Nope. I'm going to do the right thing." "Nope. I'm going to do the right thing." "Nope. I'm going to do the right thing." I'm like, "The right thing is to marry a I'm like, "The right thing is to marry a I'm like, "The right thing is to marry a stranger because you had sex with her stranger because you had sex with her stranger because you had sex with her and got her pregnant." Like, are you and got her pregnant." Like, are you and got her pregnant." Like, are you serious? You know, they've been married serious? You know, they've been married serious? You know, they've been married 28 years. 28 years, three kids. Happily. 28 years. 28 years, three kids. Happily. 28 years. 28 years, three kids. Happily. Yeah. 28 years, three kids. That's Yeah. 28 years, three kids. That's Yeah. 28 years, three kids. That's wonderful to hear. It's a warming story. wonderful to hear. It's a warming story. wonderful to hear. It's a warming story. Yeah. It's a warming story. It's an it's Yeah. It's a warming story. It's an it's Yeah. It's a warming story. It's an it's an anecdotal, you know, it's not it's an anecdotal, you know, it's not it's an anecdotal, you know, it's not it's not proof of anything. It's not a not proof of anything. It's not a not proof of anything. It's not a playbook. I'm not suggesting people go playbook. I'm not suggesting people go playbook. I'm not suggesting people go out and knock somebody up on the first out and knock somebody up on the first out and knock somebody up on the first date and then just take the take the date and then just take the take the date and then just take the take the chances. If you do, get a prenup. That's chances. If you do, get a prenup. That's chances. If you do, get a prenup. That's all I'm going to say. But, you know, I all I'm going to say. But, you know, I all I'm going to say. But, you know, I think that again, it depends on what think that again, it depends on what think that again, it depends on what like if I said to you, I go to the gym like if I said to you, I go to the gym like if I said to you, I go to the gym for an hour every day. Is that good for an hour every day. Is that good for an hour every day. Is that good for me? If your answer is anything other me? If your answer is anything other me? If your answer is anything other than, I don't know, what do you do than, I don't know, what do you do than, I don't know, what do you do there? Because if what I do is I walk on there? Because if what I do is I walk on there? Because if what I do is I walk on the treadmill for three minutes and then the treadmill for three minutes and then the treadmill for three minutes and then I sit in the steam room for a half an I sit in the steam room for a half an I sit in the steam room for a half an hour and then the rest of the time I'm hour and then the rest of the time I'm hour and then the rest of the time I'm on my phone, then I might as well have on my phone, then I might as well have on my phone, then I might as well have stayed home probably, right? Whereas if stayed home probably, right? Whereas if stayed home probably, right? Whereas if I say, "Oh, I never go to the gym." Does I say, "Oh, I never go to the gym." Does I say, "Oh, I never go to the gym." Does that mean that's bad? No. Maybe I do that mean that's bad? No. Maybe I do that mean that's bad? No. Maybe I do bodyweight workouts at home all the time bodyweight workouts at home all the time bodyweight workouts at home all the time and I never set foot in a gym. Like, so and I never set foot in a gym. Like, so and I never set foot in a gym. Like, so I don't think it tells the story. So I don't think it tells the story. So I don't think it tells the story. So the truth is a couple that's together the truth is a couple that's together the truth is a couple that's together for an extended period of time and has for an extended period of time and has for an extended period of time and has the kind of relationship where they're the kind of relationship where they're the kind of relationship where they're learning about each other through that learning about each other through that learning about each other through that process. Like practice doesn't make process. Like practice doesn't make process. Like practice doesn't make perfect. Perfect. Practice makes perfect. Perfect. Practice makes perfect. Perfect. Practice makes perfect. Look, time is good. Time is perfect. Look, time is good. Time is perfect. Look, time is good. Time is good in the sense that you're going to good in the sense that you're going to good in the sense that you're going to see some good things and some bad see some good things and some bad see some good things and some bad things. You're going to see this person things. You're going to see this person things. You're going to see this person at their best and at their worst. You're at their best and at their worst. You're at their best and at their worst. You're going to see them through some difficult going to see them through some difficult going to see them through some difficult times. They're going to see you in some times. They're going to see you in some times. They're going to see you in some difficult times. And difficult times. And difficult times. And hopefully you'll know what you're hopefully you'll know what you're hopefully you'll know what you're like. If you got to drive a car for 6 like. If you got to drive a car for 6 like. If you got to drive a car for 6 months before you decided if you were months before you decided if you were months before you decided if you were going to buy it or not, like you know, going to buy it or not, like you know, going to buy it or not, like you know, you would know, you'd make a much more you would know, you'd make a much more you would know, you'd make a much more informed choice. Why do you think they informed choice. Why do you think they informed choice. Why do you think they don't let you drive a car for 6 months don't let you drive a car for 6 months don't let you drive a car for 6 months before you buy it? Like there's a reason before you buy it? Like there's a reason before you buy it? Like there's a reason for that cuz you'd see the whole thing. for that cuz you'd see the whole thing. for that cuz you'd see the whole thing. Like that's again I think it's a Like that's again I think it's a Like that's again I think it's a great idea. Like but you drive test great idea. Like but you drive test great idea. Like but you drive test drive any car. It's going to be fun, you drive any car. It's going to be fun, you drive any car. It's going to be fun, you know? I mean maybe you'll see like oh know? I mean maybe you'll see like oh know? I mean maybe you'll see like oh this is boxy. I don't really like it. this is boxy. I don't really like it. this is boxy. I don't really like it. Look, I've seen again successful and Look, I've seen again successful and Look, I've seen again successful and unsuccessful, brief pairings, long what unsuccessful, brief pairings, long what unsuccessful, brief pairings, long what I will say is when people have had a I will say is when people have had a I will say is when people have had a long court, I'll call it courtship long court, I'll call it courtship long court, I'll call it courtship period or pre-marital period that they period or pre-marital period that they period or pre-marital period that they used to deepen their connection to each used to deepen their connection to each used to deepen their connection to each other and get to know the good and bad other and get to know the good and bad other and get to know the good and bad of each other and see each other in good of each other and see each other in good of each other and see each other in good circumstances and bad circumstances and circumstances and bad circumstances and circumstances and bad circumstances and with and without makeup. And when you're with and without makeup. And when you're with and without makeup. And when you're mad and got cut off in traffic and when mad and got cut off in traffic and when mad and got cut off in traffic and when you're happy and blissed out. Yeah. you're happy and blissed out. Yeah. you're happy and blissed out. Yeah. They're making an informed choice. Like They're making an informed choice. Like They're making an informed choice. Like they're buying something that they they're buying something that they they're buying something that they understand what it's like. You know, understand what it's like. You know, understand what it's like. You know, like friends of mine say to me all the like friends of mine say to me all the like friends of mine say to me all the time like, "I'm thinking about getting a time like, "I'm thinking about getting a time like, "I'm thinking about getting a dog." Like, sorry to make this analogy dog." Like, sorry to make this analogy dog." Like, sorry to make this analogy for romance and dogs, but it works for romance and dogs, but it works for romance and dogs, but it works for me. Somebody says they want to get a for me. Somebody says they want to get a for me. Somebody says they want to get a dog. Well, it's a beautiful day out and dog. Well, it's a beautiful day out and dog. Well, it's a beautiful day out and I want to go running with the dog in the I want to go running with the dog in the I want to go running with the dog in the park. Who wouldn't? park. Who wouldn't? park. Who wouldn't? But if you're not ready to have the dog But if you're not ready to have the dog But if you're not ready to have the dog when it ate something and now has when it ate something and now has when it ate something and now has diarrhea and it's raining outside and diarrhea and it's raining outside and diarrhea and it's raining outside and you've got to keep taking it outside and you've got to keep taking it outside and you've got to keep taking it outside and you've got to keep washing your c, then you've got to keep washing your c, then you've got to keep washing your c, then don't get a dog, man. Cuz you know what? don't get a dog, man. Cuz you know what? don't get a dog, man. Cuz you know what? It's not playing in the park all day It's not playing in the park all day It's not playing in the park all day long. It's I've got to get home. Why? long. It's I've got to get home. Why? long. It's I've got to get home. Why? Cuz the dog's been alone for 4 and 1/2 Cuz the dog's been alone for 4 and 1/2 Cuz the dog's been alone for 4 and 1/2 hours and I don't want the dog to be hours and I don't want the dog to be hours and I don't want the dog to be alone for that long. Like you've got to alone for that long. Like you've got to alone for that long. Like you've got to you got to change your life for this you got to change your life for this you got to change your life for this thing. So again, is it worth it? 100%. thing. So again, is it worth it? 100%. thing. So again, is it worth it? 100%. 200%. Are you kidding me? Because one of 200%. Are you kidding me? Because one of 200%. Are you kidding me? Because one of those sunny days is worth everything. those sunny days is worth everything. those sunny days is worth everything. And by the way, if you love it enough, And by the way, if you love it enough, And by the way, if you love it enough, even that stupid part with the like it's even that stupid part with the like it's even that stupid part with the like it's an act of love. It's like I don't care. an act of love. It's like I don't care. an act of love. It's like I don't care. Like I don't care. I'll clean up after Like I don't care. I'll clean up after Like I don't care. I'll clean up after this thing. I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] love it. Dogs the this thing. I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] love it. Dogs the this thing. I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] love it. Dogs the diarrhea. They they have this they feel diarrhea. They they have this they feel diarrhea. They they have this they feel bad about it. They feel bad cuz they're bad about it. They feel bad cuz they're bad about it. They feel bad cuz they're out of And by the way, you love them so out of And by the way, you love them so out of And by the way, you love them so much that all you care about is like, much that all you care about is like, much that all you care about is like, "It's okay, buddy. It's okay. You're "It's okay, buddy. It's okay. You're "It's okay, buddy. It's okay. You're like my dog throws up and I'm like, like my dog throws up and I'm like, like my dog throws up and I'm like, "It's okay. Get it out. It's okay. Get "It's okay. Get it out. It's okay. Get "It's okay. Get it out. It's okay. Get it out." And I'd give my entire left it out." And I'd give my entire left it out." And I'd give my entire left hand to have like one more week with hand to have like one more week with hand to have like one more week with diarrhea. Except that would Yeah. One diarrhea. Except that would Yeah. One diarrhea. Except that would Yeah. One more week. And you know what? Like I more week. And you know what? Like I more week. And you know what? Like I think that a romantic relationship think that a romantic relationship think that a romantic relationship there is no reason why you can't use the there is no reason why you can't use the there is no reason why you can't use the courtship period to sort of test all courtship period to sort of test all courtship period to sort of test all those permutations. And I don't think, those permutations. And I don't think, those permutations. And I don't think, by the way, that people would just stop by the way, that people would just stop by the way, that people would just stop buying cars if you had a six-month trial buying cars if you had a six-month trial buying cars if you had a six-month trial period on the vehicle. I think there's period on the vehicle. I think there's period on the vehicle. I think there's something really okay like you would something really okay like you would something really okay like you would still find maybe you would when you made still find maybe you would when you made still find maybe you would when you made a choice you would really be picking one a choice you would really be picking one a choice you would really be picking one that you really like. So what I will say that you really like. So what I will say that you really like. So what I will say in response to the question I made a in response to the question I made a in response to the question I made a long answer is I don't think that a long answer is I don't think that a long answer is I don't think that a long courtship period if for example if the courtship period if for example if the courtship period if for example if the courtship period the length of it is a courtship period the length of it is a courtship period the length of it is a function of one of them being super function of one of them being super function of one of them being super reluctant to commit to the other person reluctant to commit to the other person reluctant to commit to the other person that might not be a good indicator. But that might not be a good indicator. But that might not be a good indicator. But if the purpose of that courtship if the purpose of that courtship if the purpose of that courtship period, that extended engagement or that period, that extended engagement or that period, that extended engagement or that extended dating period is to really get extended dating period is to really get extended dating period is to really get a feel of each other in a variety of a feel of each other in a variety of a feel of each other in a variety of conditions, you know, like to know a conditions, you know, like to know a conditions, you know, like to know a thing, know its limits. When it's pushed thing, know its limits. When it's pushed thing, know its limits. When it's pushed beyond its tolerances, its nature beyond its tolerances, its nature beyond its tolerances, its nature emerges. So, I think there's value in emerges. So, I think there's value in emerges. So, I think there's value in seeing like I don't want to just see you seeing like I don't want to just see you seeing like I don't want to just see you with makeup on like because you're going with makeup on like because you're going with makeup on like because you're going to not be wearing makeup for a lot of to not be wearing makeup for a lot of to not be wearing makeup for a lot of this relationship. I want to see what this relationship. I want to see what this relationship. I want to see what you look like coming out of the shower, you look like coming out of the shower, you look like coming out of the shower, you know? And and by the way, like you know? And and by the way, like you know? And and by the way, like you should want that. You should want that, should want that. You should want that, should want that. You should want that, too. You want me to look at you with no too. You want me to look at you with no too. You want me to look at you with no makeup on and go, "Oh, you're beautiful. makeup on and go, "Oh, you're beautiful. makeup on and go, "Oh, you're beautiful. You look great." Like, do I love it when You look great." Like, do I love it when You look great." Like, do I love it when you put on makeup? Of course. But do I you put on makeup? Of course. But do I you put on makeup? Of course. But do I love it when you've got the flu and like love it when you've got the flu and like love it when you've got the flu and like I can take care of you? Yeah, I love I can take care of you? Yeah, I love I can take care of you? Yeah, I love that, too. That's beautiful in a that, too. That's beautiful in a that, too. That's beautiful in a different way. So, I think that if you different way. So, I think that if you different way. So, I think that if you use the time the right way, there's use the time the right way, there's use the time the right way, there's tremendous value in that. Much better tremendous value in that. Much better tremendous value in that. Much better than just throwing a dart at the board. than just throwing a dart at the board. than just throwing a dart at the board. Like, I find this person attractive, Like, I find this person attractive, Like, I find this person attractive, they find me attractive. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it. let's they find me attractive. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it. let's they find me attractive. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it. let's do this thing. Like I don't think that do this thing. Like I don't think that do this thing. Like I don't think that is a good recipe. I've seen a lot that is a good recipe. I've seen a lot that is a good recipe. I've seen a lot of divorces that come from a very brief of divorces that come from a very brief of divorces that come from a very brief courtship. But is that the death? No. courtship. But is that the death? No. courtship. But is that the death? No. I think sometimes people just get it No. I think sometimes people just get it No. I think sometimes people just get it right. I mean, listen, you and I both right. I mean, listen, you and I both right. I mean, listen, you and I both know people take it out of the romantic know people take it out of the romantic know people take it out of the romantic context who just get rich quick. Like context who just get rich quick. Like context who just get rich quick. Like they make one cool decision and it just they make one cool decision and it just they make one cool decision and it just pays off. They make one good bet and it pays off. They make one good bet and it pays off. They make one good bet and it pays off. And I know other people, man, pays off. And I know other people, man, pays off. And I know other people, man, they had to take the stairs. like they had to take the stairs. like they had to take the stairs. like they had to take they 15 versions of it and had to take they 15 versions of it and had to take they 15 versions of it and it went bankrupt three times and then it went bankrupt three times and then it went bankrupt three times and then one of the things hit and that was the one of the things hit and that was the one of the things hit and that was the one and then everybody goes I always one and then everybody goes I always one and then everybody goes I always knew you were going to be successful you knew you were going to be successful you knew you were going to be successful you know I always knew that really cuz I know I always knew that really cuz I know I always knew that really cuz I didn't like it was a series of near didn't like it was a series of near didn't like it was a series of near misses until I hit so I think it's the misses until I hit so I think it's the misses until I hit so I think it's the same thing I think there how you use the same thing I think there how you use the same thing I think there how you use the time is what really matters love it last time is what really matters love it last time is what really matters love it last question oh question oh question oh boy some people listening to this are in boy some people listening to this are in boy some people listening to this are in relationships some are married some are relationships some are married some are relationships some are married some are divorced some are not in divorced some are not in divorced some are not in relationships. Is there such a thing as relationships. Is there such a thing as relationships. Is there such a thing as a postnup for the people who have a postnup for the people who have a postnup for the people who have already been married? And what are the already been married? And what are the already been married? And what are the pros and cons of opening up that pros and cons of opening up that pros and cons of opening up that conversation and um the contract conversation and um the contract conversation and um the contract itself? And for people who are still in itself? And for people who are still in itself? And for people who are still in the you know looking for partner the you know looking for partner the you know looking for partner exploring a relationship uh or exploring a relationship uh or exploring a relationship uh or relationships what whatever their life relationships what whatever their life relationships what whatever their life structure happens to be. um what do you structure happens to be. um what do you structure happens to be. um what do you think are the questions that they might think are the questions that they might think are the questions that they might ask themselves and the other person that ask themselves and the other person that ask themselves and the other person that would give some insight into um would give some insight into um would give some insight into um into not necessarily like should there into not necessarily like should there into not necessarily like should there be a prenup for the dating um period be a prenup for the dating um period be a prenup for the dating um period but you know a lot of the things you're but you know a lot of the things you're but you know a lot of the things you're talking about are in the circles of talking about are in the circles of talking about are in the circles of like close intimacy like what are your like close intimacy like what are your like close intimacy like what are your real flaws what are you afraid of what real flaws what are you afraid of what real flaws what are you afraid of what are you afraid I'm going to do that's are you afraid I'm going to do that's are you afraid I'm going to do that's not the kind of conversation maybe not the kind of conversation maybe not the kind of conversation maybe nowadays people do that typically nowadays people do that typically nowadays people do that typically people will have on their you know uh people will have on their you know uh people will have on their you know uh fifth date or sixth date, but at some fifth date or sixth date, but at some fifth date or sixth date, but at some point it makes sense to have real point it makes sense to have real point it makes sense to have real conversation with somebody to try and conversation with somebody to try and conversation with somebody to try and make sense of whether or not you go make sense of whether or not you go make sense of whether or not you go forward. So, I just threw a lot at you. forward. So, I just threw a lot at you. forward. So, I just threw a lot at you. I realiz shot. No, but those are all realiz shot. No, but those are all realiz shot. No, but those are all really important questions, but for the really important questions, but for the really important questions, but for the for the uh committed and non-committed for the uh committed and non-committed for the uh committed and non-committed folks out there. Yeah. I mean, I I'm folks out there. Yeah. I mean, I I'm folks out there. Yeah. I mean, I I'm paraphrasing Jung when I say that the paraphrasing Jung when I say that the paraphrasing Jung when I say that the thing you seek most is in the place you thing you seek most is in the place you thing you seek most is in the place you least want to look. least want to look. least want to look. So, I think So, I think So, I think that, you know, a friend of mine once that, you know, a friend of mine once that, you know, a friend of mine once said to me that um the most said to me that um the most said to me that um the most important or really the only question important or really the only question important or really the only question that therapy is designed to answer is that therapy is designed to answer is that therapy is designed to answer is what is it that you're afraid to what is it that you're afraid to what is it that you're afraid to feel? And so, I think that there's feel? And so, I think that there's feel? And so, I think that there's tremendous value in sharing with a tremendous value in sharing with a tremendous value in sharing with a partner and learning about a partner and learning about a partner and learning about a partner what it is they're afraid to what it is they're afraid to what it is they're afraid to feel. and looking at the things feel. and looking at the things feel. and looking at the things about yourself that you're afraid to yourself that you're afraid to yourself that you're afraid to share. I think in my own experience share. I think in my own experience share. I think in my own experience and I think in that of most of my and I think in that of most of my and I think in that of most of my clients, you know, I'm not religious clients, you know, I'm not religious clients, you know, I'm not religious like I'm not religious anymore. I was like I'm not religious anymore. I was like I'm not religious anymore. I was raised religious, so I don't really raised religious, so I don't really raised religious, so I don't really believe in the devil. Like I don't I believe in the devil. Like I don't I believe in the devil. Like I don't I don't think that there's like this don't think that there's like this don't think that there's like this malevolent creature that's out there malevolent creature that's out there malevolent creature that's out there trying to convince people to be evil. trying to convince people to be evil. trying to convince people to be evil. But if there was a devil, I think the But if there was a devil, I think the But if there was a devil, I think the principal function of the devil would be principal function of the devil would be principal function of the devil would be to convince us that we're so beastial to convince us that we're so beastial to convince us that we're so beastial that God couldn't possibly love us. Like that God couldn't possibly love us. Like that God couldn't possibly love us. Like I think I think the greatest I think I think the greatest I think I think the greatest mistakes of my life I always made. And mistakes of my life I always made. And mistakes of my life I always made. And the most selfish awful decisions I made, the most selfish awful decisions I made, the most selfish awful decisions I made, I made because I convinced myself that I made because I convinced myself that I made because I convinced myself that I wasn't good. Like I convinced myself wasn't good. Like I convinced myself wasn't good. Like I convinced myself that what does it matter? like nothing that what does it matter? like nothing that what does it matter? like nothing means anything like just do whatever who means anything like just do whatever who means anything like just do whatever who cares no one's looking just do it cares no one's looking just do it cares no one's looking just do it doesn't matter and when I when I look at doesn't matter and when I when I look at doesn't matter and when I when I look at whether you want to call it the presence whether you want to call it the presence whether you want to call it the presence of God in me Buddha nature call it of God in me Buddha nature call it of God in me Buddha nature call it anything you want to call it but when I anything you want to call it but when I anything you want to call it but when I when I hold to the angels of my when I hold to the angels of my when I hold to the angels of my better nature like the part of my heart better nature like the part of my heart better nature like the part of my heart that is good and loving and that is good and loving and that is good and loving and compassionate and I let that be my compassionate and I let that be my compassionate and I let that be my compass right that's when the greatest compass right that's when the greatest compass right that's when the greatest victories the greatest joys like the victories the greatest joys like the victories the greatest joys like the best things happen. And I'm not best things happen. And I'm not best things happen. And I'm not suggesting being like ignorant and being suggesting being like ignorant and being suggesting being like ignorant and being like, "Oh, the whole world's full of like, "Oh, the whole world's full of like, "Oh, the whole world's full of like puppies and sunshine." It's listen, like puppies and sunshine." It's listen, like puppies and sunshine." It's listen, I I'm a divorce lawyer, man. I live in I I'm a divorce lawyer, man. I live in I I'm a divorce lawyer, man. I live in the world of misery. But it has not the world of misery. But it has not the world of misery. But it has not robbed me of the belief in the good and robbed me of the belief in the good and robbed me of the belief in the good and the depth of the power of love, and the depth of the power of love, and the depth of the power of love, right? And how badly I want it and how right? And how badly I want it and how right? And how badly I want it and how bad we all want it. And so I think the bad we all want it. And so I think the bad we all want it. And so I think the most valuable thing that people can do most valuable thing that people can do most valuable thing that people can do is when you're not in a relationship or is when you're not in a relationship or is when you're not in a relationship or whether you're in a whether you're in a whether you're in a relationship is when do you feel the relationship is when do you feel the relationship is when do you feel the most loved and when do you feel the most loved and when do you feel the most loved and when do you feel the most loving, right? And then when you connect loving, right? And then when you connect loving, right? And then when you connect to another person, find out the answer to another person, find out the answer to another person, find out the answer for them cuz it's probably different. for them cuz it's probably different. for them cuz it's probably different. Like it might be some things that are Like it might be some things that are Like it might be some things that are the same, but there might be some things the same, but there might be some things the same, but there might be some things that are completely different. You know, that are completely different. You know, that are completely different. You know, there's a good possibility if you told there's a good possibility if you told there's a good possibility if you told the creamer story that she would be the creamer story that she would be the creamer story that she would be like, "Oh my god, I don't even remember like, "Oh my god, I don't even remember like, "Oh my god, I don't even remember that." Like, "I don't even remember that that." Like, "I don't even remember that that." Like, "I don't even remember that happening." And yet for you was such a happening." And yet for you was such a happening." And yet for you was such a So I think there's a lot of those So I think there's a lot of those So I think there's a lot of those things. Like sometimes when you ask things. Like sometimes when you ask things. Like sometimes when you ask somebody, "What's your favorite memory somebody, "What's your favorite memory somebody, "What's your favorite memory of me?" Like the thing they'll tell you, of me?" Like the thing they'll tell you, of me?" Like the thing they'll tell you, you'll go, "I don't even remember saying you'll go, "I don't even remember saying you'll go, "I don't even remember saying that." Like I've had people say to me that." Like I've had people say to me that." Like I've had people say to me like, "Oh my god, you said this thing on like, "Oh my god, you said this thing on like, "Oh my god, you said this thing on this podcast." And I'm like, "What? What this podcast." And I'm like, "What? What this podcast." And I'm like, "What? What was it?" And they say it. I'm like, "I was it?" And they say it. I'm like, "I was it?" And they say it. I'm like, "I said that?" I'm like, I mean, it sounds said that?" I'm like, I mean, it sounds said that?" I'm like, I mean, it sounds like I agree with it. Like, I have like I agree with it. Like, I have like I agree with it. Like, I have absolutely no recollection of saying. I absolutely no recollection of saying. I absolutely no recollection of saying. I mean, partly I talk so much it's hard to mean, partly I talk so much it's hard to mean, partly I talk so much it's hard to remember what's important. But I remember what's important. But I remember what's important. But I really think that there's tremendous really think that there's tremendous really think that there's tremendous value in being brave in the value in being brave in the value in being brave in the conversations we have with ourselves conversations we have with ourselves conversations we have with ourselves about love. I think that lying to love. I think that lying to love. I think that lying to yourself, because here's the thing, if yourself, because here's the thing, if yourself, because here's the thing, if you can be authentically yourself with you can be authentically yourself with you can be authentically yourself with another person, then you're going to another person, then you're going to another person, then you're going to feel their love. Like that's what I mean feel their love. Like that's what I mean feel their love. Like that's what I mean about the devil is the idea that like if about the devil is the idea that like if about the devil is the idea that like if I just show my partner the best parts of I just show my partner the best parts of I just show my partner the best parts of myself and I don't admit to them or myself and I don't admit to them or myself and I don't admit to them or let share with them the things I'm or let share with them the things I'm or let share with them the things I'm afraid of the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I need to work on all afraid of the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I need to work on all afraid of the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I need to work on all that kind of stuff then I'm never going that kind of stuff then I'm never going that kind of stuff then I'm never going to feel their love because they don't to feel their love because they don't to feel their love because they don't love me like they love the character I'm love me like they love the character I'm love me like they love the character I'm playing like they love the persona that playing like they love the persona that playing like they love the persona that I've developed in this relationship and I've developed in this relationship and I've developed in this relationship and I'll never feel their love you know I'll never feel their love you know I'll never feel their love you know whereas if I if I'm brave enough to whereas if I if I'm brave enough to whereas if I if I'm brave enough to share with this person, the parts of me share with this person, the parts of me share with this person, the parts of me that I don't understand, I'm afraid of, that I don't understand, I'm afraid of, that I don't understand, I'm afraid of, I'm unhappy with, I'm unhappy with, I'm unhappy with, I'm ashamed of and they love me anyway, like ashamed of and they love me anyway, like ashamed of and they love me anyway, like then I'm going to really feel that love then I'm going to really feel that love then I'm going to really feel that love and that love can be a transformative and that love can be a transformative and that love can be a transformative kind of love. Like that's a love worth kind of love. Like that's a love worth kind of love. Like that's a love worth having, you know? So I think anything having, you know? So I think anything having, you know? So I think anything that deepens your ability to know that deepens your ability to know that deepens your ability to know yourself and deepens your ability to yourself and deepens your ability to yourself and deepens your ability to know your partner and let your partner know your partner and let your partner know your partner and let your partner know that you want to know them. Like know that you want to know them. Like know that you want to know them. Like the whole thing like I want to know what the whole thing like I want to know what the whole thing like I want to know what you need to work on. I want to be here you need to work on. I want to be here you need to work on. I want to be here to help. Like I'm here for you. I'm to help. Like I'm here for you. I'm to help. Like I'm here for you. I'm here. It's just like friendship. here. It's just like friendship. here. It's just like friendship. Friendship's easier. You know, Friendship's easier. You know, Friendship's easier. You know, friendship's easier than romantic love. friendship's easier than romantic love. friendship's easier than romantic love. Like it's super easy to say like, "Hey Like it's super easy to say like, "Hey Like it's super easy to say like, "Hey man, I you know I'm cheering for you. man, I you know I'm cheering for you. man, I you know I'm cheering for you. You know I am. I wouldn't be here. I You know I am. I wouldn't be here. I You know I am. I wouldn't be here. I don't have to be here. Like, I don't have to be here. Like, I don't have to be here. Like, I don't have to be. That's part of why I like have to be. That's part of why I like have to be. That's part of why I like prenups. Like, I don't want you here cuz prenups. Like, I don't want you here cuz prenups. Like, I don't want you here cuz you have to be here. I want you here cuz you have to be here. I want you here cuz you have to be here. I want you here cuz you want to be here. Cuz you're in, man. you want to be here. Cuz you're in, man. you want to be here. Cuz you're in, man. Like, there was a time where we were in Like, there was a time where we were in Like, there was a time where we were in and we decided to do this thing. And and we decided to do this thing. And and we decided to do this thing. And that to me, like that's the whole thing. that to me, like that's the whole thing. that to me, like that's the whole thing. So I think that's the secret in terms So I think that's the secret in terms So I think that's the secret in terms of a if you're already in a of a if you're already in a of a if you're already in a relationship and you go okay like relationship and you go okay like relationship and you go okay like postnups there's problems with postnups there's problems with postnups there's problems with postnups because from a contractual legal because from a contractual legal because from a contractual legal standpoint contracts fail for what's standpoint contracts fail for what's standpoint contracts fail for what's called want of consideration meaning called want of consideration meaning called want of consideration meaning that in every contract there has to that in every contract there has to that in every contract there has to be an exchange of value like so to use be an exchange of value like so to use be an exchange of value like so to use the car thing again I'm giving you money the car thing again I'm giving you money the car thing again I'm giving you money you're giving me a car like we're each you're giving me a car like we're each you're giving me a car like we're each exchanging we're each giving and exchanging we're each giving and exchanging we're each giving and receiving value the The consideration receiving value the The consideration receiving value the The consideration for a for a for a prenup is we don't have to get married prenup is we don't have to get married prenup is we don't have to get married but I'm willing to marry you if we amend but I'm willing to marry you if we amend but I'm willing to marry you if we amend the rule set in the following way. So the rule set in the following way. So the rule set in the following way. So that has a mutuality of consideration. that has a mutuality of consideration. that has a mutuality of consideration. There are some courts that have held There are some courts that have held There are some courts that have held that a postnup there is no consideration that a postnup there is no consideration that a postnup there is no consideration and it fails as a contract because and it fails as a contract because and it fails as a contract because staying married is not consideration. staying married is not consideration. staying married is not consideration. It's assumed that you would stay married It's assumed that you would stay married It's assumed that you would stay married legally. So that's why postnups can legally. So that's why postnups can legally. So that's why postnups can fail. Now that being said, do I think fail. Now that being said, do I think fail. Now that being said, do I think the message that I have about connection the message that I have about connection the message that I have about connection and how to interact with your partner and how to interact with your partner and how to interact with your partner and the things I wrote in my book, like and the things I wrote in my book, like and the things I wrote in my book, like you know, my book, How to Stay in Love: you know, my book, How to Stay in Love: you know, my book, How to Stay in Love: Practical Wisdom from an Unlikely Practical Wisdom from an Unlikely Practical Wisdom from an Unlikely Source, the Source, the Source, the idea was not to just talk about idea was not to just talk about idea was not to just talk about people in troubled relationships or to people in troubled relationships or to people in troubled relationships or to approach people who were not yet in approach people who were not yet in approach people who were not yet in relationships and give them a rule set relationships and give them a rule set relationships and give them a rule set to start with Like I trained Brazilian to start with Like I trained Brazilian to start with Like I trained Brazilian jiu-jitsu for many years and people will jiu-jitsu for many years and people will jiu-jitsu for many years and people will often say because you know people are 30 often say because you know people are 30 often say because you know people are 30 40 50 and they want to get into 40 50 and they want to get into 40 50 and they want to get into Brazilian jiu-jitsu and you know there's an old jiu-jitsu and you know there's an old jiu-jitsu and you know there's an old joke I don't know it was one of the joke I don't know it was one of the joke I don't know it was one of the Gracies who first said it I don't I Gracies who first said it I don't I Gracies who first said it I don't I don't want to offend Her or I think don't want to offend Her or I think don't want to offend Her or I think it was Hiler but I'm not sure might have it was Hiler but I'm not sure might have it was Hiler but I'm not sure might have been Hixon where someone said um what's been Hixon where someone said um what's been Hixon where someone said um what's the best age to start the best age to start the best age to start jiu-jitsu and he said five or jiu-jitsu and he said five or jiu-jitsu and he said five or now. And I think that's the answer. now. And I think that's the answer. now. And I think that's the answer. Like, so all these techniques, all these Like, so all these techniques, all these Like, so all these techniques, all these things we're talking about, what's the things we're talking about, what's the things we're talking about, what's the best time to implement them? The day you best time to implement them? The day you best time to implement them? The day you meet this person or now. Like, I don't meet this person or now. Like, I don't meet this person or now. Like, I don't care if you're married 10 years, 20 care if you're married 10 years, 20 care if you're married 10 years, 20 years, 30 years. You're you're telling years, 30 years. You're you're telling years, 30 years. You're you're telling me that right now there wouldn't be me that right now there wouldn't be me that right now there wouldn't be value in seeing your partner, allowing value in seeing your partner, allowing value in seeing your partner, allowing yourself to be seen by your partner. yourself to be seen by your partner. yourself to be seen by your partner. like a lot of the practical wisdom I like a lot of the practical wisdom I like a lot of the practical wisdom I think that's so simple of like in think that's so simple of like in think that's so simple of like in my book there's a chapter where I just my book there's a chapter where I just my book there's a chapter where I just talk about it's called leave a note and talk about it's called leave a note and talk about it's called leave a note and it basically just says like leave your it basically just says like leave your it basically just says like leave your partner a note like when you leave for partner a note like when you leave for partner a note like when you leave for the office in the morning leave a note the office in the morning leave a note the office in the morning leave a note like hey you know it's so fun on the like hey you know it's so fun on the like hey you know it's so fun on the couch with you last night watching TV I couch with you last night watching TV I couch with you last night watching TV I married the prettiest girl in the I married the prettiest girl in the I married the prettiest girl in the world can't wait to see you again what world can't wait to see you again what world can't wait to see you again what does that take 30 seconds 30 seconds does that take 30 seconds 30 seconds does that take 30 seconds 30 seconds right nothing such a minimal investment right nothing such a minimal investment right nothing such a minimal investment didn't cost you anything. You That's why didn't cost you anything. You That's why didn't cost you anything. You That's why you won't see it on TV advertised, by you won't see it on TV advertised, by you won't see it on TV advertised, by the way, because it didn't cost the way, because it didn't cost the way, because it didn't cost anything. You don't have to buy anything. You don't have to buy anything. You don't have to buy anything. You don't need anything to do anything. You don't need anything to do anything. You don't need anything to do that thing. But what does it say to your that thing. But what does it say to your that thing. But what does it say to your partner? I see you. You're important to partner? I see you. You're important to partner? I see you. You're important to me. I took the time in the middle of the me. I took the time in the middle of the me. I took the time in the middle of the things I'm doing to let you things I'm doing to let you things I'm doing to let you know you're important to me. Like, and know you're important to me. Like, and know you're important to me. Like, and who wouldn't want that? Who wouldn't who wouldn't want that? Who wouldn't who wouldn't want that? Who wouldn't want their partner, even after 20 years want their partner, even after 20 years want their partner, even after 20 years of marriage, especially after 20 years of marriage, especially after 20 years of marriage, especially after 20 years of marriage, to say, "God, you're of marriage, to say, "God, you're of marriage, to say, "God, you're handsome. Hey, like I'm just I don't know Hey, like I'm just I don't know Hey, like I'm just I don't know something about you. Like who wouldn't something about you. Like who wouldn't something about you. Like who wouldn't want to hear that? Like who wouldn't want to hear that? Like who wouldn't want to hear that? Like who wouldn't have their day brightened by that a have their day brightened by that a have their day brightened by that a little bit? And again, maybe at first little bit? And again, maybe at first little bit? And again, maybe at first your partner would go, "Are you all your partner would go, "Are you all your partner would go, "Are you all right? What what are you doing?" right? What what are you doing?" right? What what are you doing?" Like I had a buddy who actually did the Like I had a buddy who actually did the Like I had a buddy who actually did the note thing and he said he was like, note thing and he said he was like, note thing and he said he was like, "Yeah, for like the first week she was "Yeah, for like the first week she was "Yeah, for like the first week she was like, "What's going on? Are you having like, "What's going on? Are you having like, "What's going on? Are you having an affair? Like are you dying? What's an affair? Like are you dying? What's an affair? Like are you dying? What's going on?" And he said, "But after like going on?" And he said, "But after like going on?" And he said, "But after like and I just said,"No, I, you know, I just and I just said,"No, I, you know, I just and I just said,"No, I, you know, I just I want to make more of a point of like I want to make more of a point of like I want to make more of a point of like being present, you know, and he said being present, you know, and he said being present, you know, and he said after like three weeks, four weeks, he after like three weeks, four weeks, he after like three weeks, four weeks, he was like, "Dude, I'm having like we're was like, "Dude, I'm having like we're was like, "Dude, I'm having like we're like having the best chapter. Like we're like having the best chapter. Like we're like having the best chapter. Like we're having more sex. We're having more fun." having more sex. We're having more fun." having more sex. We're having more fun." Like he's like, "And now she's like Like he's like, "And now she's like Like he's like, "And now she's like texting me in the middle of the day." texting me in the middle of the day." texting me in the middle of the day." Like, by the way, like again, not to Like, by the way, like again, not to Like, by the way, like again, not to gender things, but like leaving a note gender things, but like leaving a note gender things, but like leaving a note or sending a text in the middle of the or sending a text in the middle of the or sending a text in the middle of the day that just goes, "I was just thinking day that just goes, "I was just thinking day that just goes, "I was just thinking of you." Like I just wanted you to know of you." Like I just wanted you to know of you." Like I just wanted you to know I was thinking of you. I was thinking of you. I was thinking of you. It's the equivalent of sending a man It's the equivalent of sending a man It's the equivalent of sending a man nudes. Like it because what does it nudes. Like it because what does it nudes. Like it because what does it say? It says, "Hey, like I know that the say? It says, "Hey, like I know that the say? It says, "Hey, like I know that the world's crazy and everything's kind of world's crazy and everything's kind of world's crazy and everything's kind of but like it's you and me. It's you and but like it's you and me. It's you and but like it's you and me. It's you and me and you're this special person that me and you're this special person that me and you're this special person that gets to hear these things from me or see gets to hear these things from me or see gets to hear these things from me or see these things of me that other people these things of me that other people these things of me that other people don't get to see cuz I'm yours and don't get to see cuz I'm yours and don't get to see cuz I'm yours and you're mine." Like and that what is you're mine." Like and that what is you're mine." Like and that what is better than that? And what is the better than that? And what is the better than that? And what is the downside to trying to giving that downside to trying to giving that downside to trying to giving that because worst case you spent 30 seconds because worst case you spent 30 seconds because worst case you spent 30 seconds of your life and you didn't get a return of your life and you didn't get a return of your life and you didn't get a return on your investment. Okay, you're no on your investment. Okay, you're no on your investment. Okay, you're no worse off than you were. worse off than you were. worse off than you were. So even though you may not be able to So even though you may not be able to So even though you may not be able to avail yourself of the rule set concept avail yourself of the rule set concept avail yourself of the rule set concept that can happen when you haven't married that can happen when you haven't married that can happen when you haven't married yet and you have a prenup and you have yet and you have a prenup and you have yet and you have a prenup and you have that discussion, I think you can still that discussion, I think you can still that discussion, I think you can still have that core conversation. Again, not have that core conversation. Again, not have that core conversation. Again, not about if we split up, how do we divide about if we split up, how do we divide about if we split up, how do we divide our assets? That's not what this is our assets? That's not what this is our assets? That's not what this is about. It's about what do we owe each about. It's about what do we owe each about. It's about what do we owe each other? What do we bring to this economy, other? What do we bring to this economy, other? What do we bring to this economy, this relationship of the two of us, this relationship of the two of us, this relationship of the two of us, this exchange of value? What what I have a I exchange of value? What what I have a I exchange of value? What what I have a I have a friend who's been married have a friend who's been married have a friend who's been married probably about 10 years, happily, really probably about 10 years, happily, really probably about 10 years, happily, really happily. And he was telling me how they happily. And he was telling me how they happily. And he was telling me how they call it a walk and talk that once a they call it a walk and talk that once a they call it a walk and talk that once a week they just go for a walk, like a week they just go for a walk, like a week they just go for a walk, like a hike together. They live in Colorado and hike together. They live in Colorado and hike together. They live in Colorado and they made a practice of telling each they made a practice of telling each they made a practice of telling each other like two or three things that they other like two or three things that they other like two or three things that they did that week that like were a big win, did that week that like were a big win, did that week that like were a big win, like two or three things that like made like two or three things that like made like two or three things that like made them feel loved or whatever it might be. them feel loved or whatever it might be. them feel loved or whatever it might be. And then they try to have at least one And then they try to have at least one And then they try to have at least one or two things that they could have done or two things that they could have done or two things that they could have done better or where they might have crossed better or where they might have crossed better or where they might have crossed wires and they kind of do a praise wires and they kind of do a praise wires and they kind of do a praise sandwich, you know, like so they do the sandwich, you know, like so they do the sandwich, you know, like so they do the good and then a few of the bad and then good and then a few of the bad and then good and then a few of the bad and then back to the good again. And I said to back to the good again. And I said to back to the good again. And I said to him like, "Is there a discernable him like, "Is there a discernable him like, "Is there a discernable impact?" And he's like, "It's like the impact?" And he's like, "It's like the impact?" And he's like, "It's like the best thing we do." He's like, "Because best thing we do." He's like, "Because best thing we do." He's like, "Because it really helps us course correct in it really helps us course correct in it really helps us course correct in real time." But the most valuable part real time." But the most valuable part real time." But the most valuable part is actually not the here's what you got is actually not the here's what you got is actually not the here's what you got wrong. It's the here's what you did wrong. It's the here's what you did wrong. It's the here's what you did right. Like here's the stuff that made right. Like here's the stuff that made right. Like here's the stuff that made me feel loved. And and cuz that death me feel loved. And and cuz that death me feel loved. And and cuz that death spiral that people get into in spiral that people get into in spiral that people get into in relationships where it's like, well, I'm relationships where it's like, well, I'm relationships where it's like, well, I'm not happy. Why should they be happy? And not happy. Why should they be happy? And not happy. Why should they be happy? And like, well, I didn't get to go out with like, well, I didn't get to go out with like, well, I didn't get to go out with my friends. Why should she get to go out my friends. Why should she get to go out my friends. Why should she get to go out with her friends? You know, and why I with her friends? You know, and why I with her friends? You know, and why I had a miserable day. Well, I had a had a miserable day. Well, I had a had a miserable day. Well, I had a miserable day, too. Well, it's like, miserable day, too. Well, it's like, miserable day, too. Well, it's like, well, why is your miserable day more well, why is your miserable day more well, why is your miserable day more important than my miserable day? You important than my miserable day? You important than my miserable day? You know, like that death spiral. You can know, like that death spiral. You can know, like that death spiral. You can reverse that. It can it can work the reverse that. It can it can work the reverse that. It can it can work the other way which is like just keep other way which is like just keep other way which is like just keep meeting this with an abundance of love, meeting this with an abundance of love, meeting this with an abundance of love, affection, compassion, positive affection, compassion, positive affection, compassion, positive reinforcement. It can and again not reinforcement. It can and again not reinforcement. It can and again not always like there are believe me I always like there are believe me I always like there are believe me I work in the clay of domestic violence, work in the clay of domestic violence, work in the clay of domestic violence, intimate partner abuse. Like I've seen intimate partner abuse. Like I've seen intimate partner abuse. Like I've seen it up close and personal. I know there it up close and personal. I know there it up close and personal. I know there are toxic awful people who are just not are toxic awful people who are just not are toxic awful people who are just not going to be able to have a functional going to be able to have a functional going to be able to have a functional relationship. But find that out sooner relationship. But find that out sooner relationship. But find that out sooner rather than later and then cut your rather than later and then cut your rather than later and then cut your losses and get out. Like cuz I have to losses and get out. Like cuz I have to losses and get out. Like cuz I have to tell you something. I you say how tell you something. I you say how tell you something. I you say how you know you see like a couple that's 70 you know you see like a couple that's 70 you know you see like a couple that's 70 or 80 and they're getting divorced and or 80 and they're getting divorced and or 80 and they're getting divorced and it's the saddest thing. It is. But it it's the saddest thing. It is. But it it's the saddest thing. It is. But it also begs the question like what would also begs the question like what would also begs the question like what would have happened if they were ills suited have happened if they were ills suited have happened if they were ills suited for each other. How long did they hold for each other. How long did they hold for each other. How long did they hold on? Cuz I got to tell you man, I'm not on? Cuz I got to tell you man, I'm not on? Cuz I got to tell you man, I'm not impressed when somebody says, "Oh, we impressed when somebody says, "Oh, we impressed when somebody says, "Oh, we were married for 60 years. We were married for 60 years. We were married for 60 years. We were miserable for 45 of them, but we did miserable for 45 of them, but we did miserable for 45 of them, but we did it." Like, oh great. Like great. Like I it." Like, oh great. Like great. Like I it." Like, oh great. Like great. Like I don't that's like that race they run in don't that's like that race they run in don't that's like that race they run in Death Valley where it's like I ran 150 Death Valley where it's like I ran 150 Death Valley where it's like I ran 150 miles in a okay like what do you that's miles in a okay like what do you that's miles in a okay like what do you that's great that's insane like but okay like great that's insane like but okay like great that's insane like but okay like congratulations you did something that congratulations you did something that congratulations you did something that sounds horribly painful and in no way sounds horribly painful and in no way sounds horribly painful and in no way positive like but if you feel good about positive like but if you feel good about positive like but if you feel good about it cool like that's not to me a it cool like that's not to me a it cool like that's not to me a successful marriage. A successful marriage. A successful marriage. A successful marriage to me is we made each other's marriage to me is we made each other's marriage to me is we made each other's lives better. We made our own lives better. We made our own lives better. We made our own lives and each other's lives better for lives and each other's lives better for lives and each other's lives better for our coupling for the fact that we were our coupling for the fact that we were our coupling for the fact that we were together. Maybe we created life and together. Maybe we created life and together. Maybe we created life and cultivated life together by birth or cultivated life together by birth or cultivated life together by birth or adoption. Or maybe we just radiated joy adoption. Or maybe we just radiated joy adoption. Or maybe we just radiated joy to the people around us, you know, or to the people around us, you know, or to the people around us, you know, or maybe we had pets and we gave them a maybe we had pets and we gave them a maybe we had pets and we gave them a wonderful existence together. Or maybe wonderful existence together. Or maybe wonderful existence together. Or maybe some combination of all those wonderful some combination of all those wonderful some combination of all those wonderful things like but do I think that the things like but do I think that the things like but do I think that the solution is like longevity and say no solution is like longevity and say no solution is like longevity and say no because I don't think that the because I don't think that the because I don't think that the duration of something is the success or duration of something is the success or duration of something is the success or failure of it. Listen, if you make a failure of it. Listen, if you make a failure of it. Listen, if you make a six-hour shitty movie, I'm not going to six-hour shitty movie, I'm not going to six-hour shitty movie, I'm not going to be like, "Well, but it was six full be like, "Well, but it was six full be like, "Well, but it was six full hours. That is pretty good." Like, no. hours. That is pretty good." Like, no. hours. That is pretty good." Like, no. Whereas, if you if you make a six-hour Whereas, if you if you make a six-hour Whereas, if you if you make a six-hour movie that holds my attention the entire movie that holds my attention the entire movie that holds my attention the entire six hours, that's a damn good movie. six hours, that's a damn good movie. six hours, that's a damn good movie. That's a that's a movie worth making, That's a that's a movie worth making, That's a that's a movie worth making, you know? Like, I'll watch Casino or you know? Like, I'll watch Casino or you know? Like, I'll watch Casino or Good Fellas every time it's on and it's Good Fellas every time it's on and it's Good Fellas every time it's on and it's like a full three hours almost, you like a full three hours almost, you like a full three hours almost, you know, and I don't care because it's that know, and I don't care because it's that know, and I don't care because it's that good. So, I think that longevity, like good. So, I think that longevity, like good. So, I think that longevity, like endings and how relationships end, the endings and how relationships end, the endings and how relationships end, the fact that something ends does not mean fact that something ends does not mean fact that something ends does not mean that it wasn't valuable, like at all. I that it wasn't valuable, like at all. I that it wasn't valuable, like at all. I think that's a really crazy thing. Like, think that's a really crazy thing. Like, think that's a really crazy thing. Like, every movie I've ever enjoyed ended. And every movie I've ever enjoyed ended. And every movie I've ever enjoyed ended. And if somebody said to me threequarters way if somebody said to me threequarters way if somebody said to me threequarters way through it, you know, this is going to through it, you know, this is going to through it, you know, this is going to end, I wouldn't be like, what's the end, I wouldn't be like, what's the end, I wouldn't be like, what's the point, you know? No, I want to watch the point, you know? No, I want to watch the point, you know? No, I want to watch the whole thing. I want to And knowing that whole thing. I want to And knowing that whole thing. I want to And knowing that it's going to end is part of what makes it's going to end is part of what makes it's going to end is part of what makes it beautiful. So, I think it beautiful. So, I think it beautiful. So, I think that protections are really important. that protections are really important. that protections are really important. Prenups are really important. It's ideal Prenups are really important. It's ideal Prenups are really important. It's ideal as early in a relationship as possible as early in a relationship as possible as early in a relationship as possible to have some of these conversations to have some of these conversations to have some of these conversations about the painful things that I have to about the painful things that I have to about the painful things that I have to help people wrestle with every single help people wrestle with every single help people wrestle with every single day. But I think the value received day. But I think the value received day. But I think the value received from that conversation is immeasurable. from that conversation is immeasurable. from that conversation is immeasurable. Jim, what I love about you so much is Jim, what I love about you so much is Jim, what I love about you so much is that you're willing to and maybe you that you're willing to and maybe you that you're willing to and maybe you just reflexively look at things through just reflexively look at things through just reflexively look at things through every possible every possible every possible lens. So if it's something dark like lens. So if it's something dark like lens. So if it's something dark like divorce, you look at it through the lens divorce, you look at it through the lens divorce, you look at it through the lens of that, but also does it always have to of that, but also does it always have to of that, but also does it always have to be dark? You look at it through the lens be dark? You look at it through the lens be dark? You look at it through the lens of a lawyer's eyes. Well, I think of a lawyer's eyes. Well, I think of a lawyer's eyes. Well, I think that's part of lawyering is you have to that's part of lawyering is you have to that's part of lawyering is you have to argue both sides of everything. But I argue both sides of everything. But I argue both sides of everything. But I would also say that, you know, if ever would also say that, you know, if ever would also say that, you know, if ever uh, you know, people had the stereotype uh, you know, people had the stereotype uh, you know, people had the stereotype in mind that all lawyers are heartless in mind that all lawyers are heartless in mind that all lawyers are heartless and cutthroat and it's all just about and cutthroat and it's all just about and cutthroat and it's all just about money, I mean, you clearly shatter that money, I mean, you clearly shatter that money, I mean, you clearly shatter that because I mean, so much of what we because I mean, so much of what we because I mean, so much of what we talked about today wasn't about divorce. talked about today wasn't about divorce. talked about today wasn't about divorce. It was about contracts. And it wasn't It was about contracts. And it wasn't It was about contracts. And it wasn't just about contracts. You know, really just about contracts. You know, really just about contracts. You know, really what I kept hearing over and over is what I kept hearing over and over is what I kept hearing over and over is that by asking what at first are that by asking what at first are that by asking what at first are practical questions, you can really get practical questions, you can really get practical questions, you can really get to the emotional layers underneath those to the emotional layers underneath those to the emotional layers underneath those that really speak to what people need that really speak to what people need that really speak to what people need most in order to make things work, even most in order to make things work, even most in order to make things work, even if the relationship doesn't last if the relationship doesn't last if the relationship doesn't last forever. And I think that's such a an forever. And I think that's such a an forever. And I think that's such a an important lens on, you know, the kind of important lens on, you know, the kind of important lens on, you know, the kind of overwhelming thing that we call overwhelming thing that we call overwhelming thing that we call relationships and marriage and prenups relationships and marriage and prenups relationships and marriage and prenups and divorces. And, you know, I think and divorces. And, you know, I think and divorces. And, you know, I think it's enough to make anyone terrified. it's enough to make anyone terrified. it's enough to make anyone terrified. It's also enough um as you said to make It's also enough um as you said to make It's also enough um as you said to make some people bitter and I think we didn't some people bitter and I think we didn't some people bitter and I think we didn't talk about it too much because it's such talk about it too much because it's such talk about it too much because it's such a potent word didn't have to but this a potent word didn't have to but this a potent word didn't have to but this notion of bitterness is really the thing notion of bitterness is really the thing notion of bitterness is really the thing to avoid most right because it to avoid most right because it to avoid most right because it contaminates the thing that uh that you contaminates the thing that uh that you contaminates the thing that uh that you embody so much which is you just have embody so much which is you just have embody so much which is you just have such a huge forward center of mass such a huge forward center of mass such a huge forward center of mass full tilt arms around all of it love of full tilt arms around all of it love of full tilt arms around all of it love of life and people and dogs and it's of life and people and dogs and it's of life and people and dogs and it's it just comes through over and over it just comes through over and over it just comes through over and over in everything you do. And in every way in everything you do. And in every way in everything you do. And in every way that you describe it. So I see you as a that you describe it. So I see you as a that you describe it. So I see you as a Yes. a lawyer. Sure. Um not just a Yes. a lawyer. Sure. Um not just a Yes. a lawyer. Sure. Um not just a divorce, but a lawyer. You're certainly divorce, but a lawyer. You're certainly divorce, but a lawyer. You're certainly a psychologist. a psychologist. a psychologist. You're definitely on the adventure of You're definitely on the adventure of You're definitely on the adventure of life. There's no question about that. life. There's no question about that. life. There's no question about that. For sure. You're an anthropologist, For sure. You're an anthropologist, For sure. You're an anthropologist, which reflects some of your prior which reflects some of your prior which reflects some of your prior training. And you're just a really training. And you're just a really training. And you're just a really amazing human being in the way that amazing human being in the way that amazing human being in the way that you're willing to just launch yourself you're willing to just launch yourself you're willing to just launch yourself into all of it and consider all of this. into all of it and consider all of this. into all of it and consider all of this. And like you said, you see some really And like you said, you see some really And like you said, you see some really unfortunate things, but it's clear that unfortunate things, but it's clear that unfortunate things, but it's clear that you also see a lot of really wonderful you also see a lot of really wonderful you also see a lot of really wonderful and beautiful things. And I think some and beautiful things. And I think some and beautiful things. And I think some of the awful things are really of the awful things are really of the awful things are really beautiful. There's a line from U. beautiful. There's a line from U. beautiful. There's a line from U. Hemingway from uh a farewell to arms Hemingway from uh a farewell to arms Hemingway from uh a farewell to arms where he says the world breaks everyone where he says the world breaks everyone where he says the world breaks everyone and some are stronger in the broken and some are stronger in the broken and some are stronger in the broken places. And I think divorce and places. And I think divorce and places. And I think divorce and heartbreak like heartbreak is like that. heartbreak like heartbreak is like that. heartbreak like heartbreak is like that. Like it heartbreak breaks everyone. And Like it heartbreak breaks everyone. And Like it heartbreak breaks everyone. And and sometimes we're stronger in the and sometimes we're stronger in the and sometimes we're stronger in the broken places. Like I think I've broken places. Like I think I've broken places. Like I think I've learned so much through love and I've learned so much through love and I've learned so much through love and I've learned so much through loss. learned so much through loss. learned so much through loss. And I don't want my love of love to make And I don't want my love of love to make And I don't want my love of love to make me forget that loss exists. And I don't me forget that loss exists. And I don't me forget that loss exists. And I don't want the pain of loss to make me forget want the pain of loss to make me forget want the pain of loss to make me forget that love exists. that love exists. that love exists. Well, I and everyone listening uh really Well, I and everyone listening uh really Well, I and everyone listening uh really appreciate you taking the time to come appreciate you taking the time to come appreciate you taking the time to come here. Look, you make a living doing here. Look, you make a living doing here. Look, you make a living doing something else. You make a you know, a something else. You make a you know, a something else. You make a you know, a fulltime day job. Yeah. You don't need fulltime day job. Yeah. You don't need fulltime day job. Yeah. You don't need to do this. um traveling across country. to do this. um traveling across country. to do this. um traveling across country. I Well, I so appreciate it on I love I Well, I so appreciate it on I love I Well, I so appreciate it on I love talking to you in general, but we've talking to you in general, but we've talking to you in general, but we've never done it on mic, which is really never done it on mic, which is really never done it on mic, which is really funny. You know, we had some good funny. You know, we had some good funny. You know, we had some good conversations and you've been a conversations and you've been a conversations and you've been a wonderful uh and trusted friend to me. I wonderful uh and trusted friend to me. I wonderful uh and trusted friend to me. I also trust that if I'm going to make a also trust that if I'm going to make a also trust that if I'm going to make a dumb decision or if uh um or if I've dumb decision or if uh um or if I've dumb decision or if uh um or if I've made a dumb decision that you'll let me made a dumb decision that you'll let me made a dumb decision that you'll let me know. I'm there. I promise. Right back know. I'm there. I promise. Right back know. I'm there. I promise. Right back at you. I will in the future. Yeah. at you. I will in the future. Yeah. at you. I will in the future. Yeah. Well, you have for me. I don't have your Well, you have for me. I don't have your Well, you have for me. I don't have your legal wisdom, but right back at Well, I legal wisdom, but right back at Well, I legal wisdom, but right back at Well, I haven't yet. You have plenty of wisdom. haven't yet. You have plenty of wisdom. haven't yet. You have plenty of wisdom. a trusted and amazing friend and uh a trusted and amazing friend and uh a trusted and amazing friend and uh you just have so much wisdom to share. you just have so much wisdom to share. you just have so much wisdom to share. You know, my dad has this saying uh that You know, my dad has this saying uh that You know, my dad has this saying uh that you know some people when they speak you know some people when they speak you know some people when they speak they just might as well have exhaled. they just might as well have exhaled. they just might as well have exhaled. He's Argentine. He's a little cynical He's Argentine. He's a little cynical He's Argentine. He's a little cynical but he also says but some people when but he also says but some people when but he also says but some people when they speak just wisdom falls out of they speak just wisdom falls out of they speak just wisdom falls out of them. And that's how I feel every time them. And that's how I feel every time them. And that's how I feel every time I'm in your presence or I hear you on a I'm in your presence or I hear you on a I'm in your presence or I hear you on a podcast or even a short clip. I podcast or even a short clip. I podcast or even a short clip. I prepared a lot for today's uh episode by prepared a lot for today's uh episode by prepared a lot for today's uh episode by just watching as much content of yours just watching as much content of yours just watching as much content of yours as I could possibly consume and I was as I could possibly consume and I was as I could possibly consume and I was like, "Wow, the density of value per like, "Wow, the density of value per like, "Wow, the density of value per unit time for your for your speech is it unit time for your for your speech is it unit time for your for your speech is it is unbelievably high." So that was the is unbelievably high." So that was the is unbelievably high." So that was the most humor description of me. I love it. most humor description of me. I love it. most humor description of me. I love it. So the density of value within the I So the density of value within the I So the density of value within the I love your uh the scientific lens love your uh the scientific lens love your uh the scientific lens through which you even look at the un through which you even look at the un through which you even look at the un unscientific although I guess everything unscientific although I guess everything unscientific although I guess everything is scientific in some ways. So, but no, is scientific in some ways. So, but no, is scientific in some ways. So, but no, man. I I'm really glad we had a chance man. I I'm really glad we had a chance man. I I'm really glad we had a chance to do this and uh um you know, I love to do this and uh um you know, I love to do this and uh um you know, I love all of our conversations and I thought all of our conversations and I thought all of our conversations and I thought to myself, it's going to be interesting to myself, it's going to be interesting to myself, it's going to be interesting and odd to have one, but I sort of and odd to have one, but I sort of and odd to have one, but I sort of immediately forgot that the microphone's immediately forgot that the microphone's immediately forgot that the microphone's here and the camera's here and here and the camera's here and here and the camera's here and that's really lovely. Like that's the that's really lovely. Like that's the that's really lovely. Like that's the best thing, you know, is when um like best thing, you know, is when um like best thing, you know, is when um like if you said to me, "How long have we if you said to me, "How long have we if you said to me, "How long have we been talking?" I would imagine it's like been talking?" I would imagine it's like been talking?" I would imagine it's like an hour, but I know it's way longer than an hour, but I know it's way longer than an hour, but I know it's way longer than that. I have no idea, though. I've that. I have no idea, though. I've that. I have no idea, though. I've completely and that's that flow state, completely and that's that flow state, completely and that's that flow state, you know, that happens when we're you know, that happens when we're you know, that happens when we're wrestling with these ideas that are the wrestling with these ideas that are the wrestling with these ideas that are the most human ideas. And and I love um I most human ideas. And and I love um I most human ideas. And and I love um I want to pay you a compliment. want to pay you a compliment. want to pay you a compliment. Um, you know, I've before we were Um, you know, I've before we were Um, you know, I've before we were friends, I listened to your friends, I listened to your friends, I listened to your program in the earlier days of it and I program in the earlier days of it and I program in the earlier days of it and I love how the journey of becoming fully love how the journey of becoming fully love how the journey of becoming fully human and exploring the depth of our human and exploring the depth of our human and exploring the depth of our full humanity has become like because full humanity has become like because full humanity has become like because something that was always very something that was always very something that was always very science-based tools and it's very easy science-based tools and it's very easy science-based tools and it's very easy to sort of just keep yourself in that to sort of just keep yourself in that to sort of just keep yourself in that box. you've really stepped out of your box. you've really stepped out of your box. you've really stepped out of your comfort zone, especially in recent years comfort zone, especially in recent years comfort zone, especially in recent years and brought in these things that really and brought in these things that really and brought in these things that really are the totality of the human are the totality of the human are the totality of the human experience. All these relationship experience. All these relationship experience. All these relationship things, the pet thing I just listened things, the pet thing I just listened things, the pet thing I just listened to, I loved. Like, and I think that to, I loved. Like, and I think that to, I loved. Like, and I think that um we're coming to a time where we um we're coming to a time where we um we're coming to a time where we realize that like, you know, we're realize that like, you know, we're realize that like, you know, we're what's the old saying that we're uh you what's the old saying that we're uh you what's the old saying that we're uh you know, we're not uh thinking machines know, we're not uh thinking machines know, we're not uh thinking machines that sometimes feel. We're feeling that sometimes feel. We're feeling that sometimes feel. We're feeling machines that sometimes think. You know, machines that sometimes think. You know, machines that sometimes think. You know, I think that you're really starting to I think that you're really starting to I think that you're really starting to get deeply into the totality of our get deeply into the totality of our get deeply into the totality of our humanity, the physical state, the humanity, the physical state, the humanity, the physical state, the emotional, spiritual, all of those emotional, spiritual, all of those emotional, spiritual, all of those things. And I think that's what we need things. And I think that's what we need things. And I think that's what we need that if there is a cure to the ailment that if there is a cure to the ailment that if there is a cure to the ailment of our time, the partisan hyperartisan of our time, the partisan hyperartisan of our time, the partisan hyperartisan environment, the misery and anxiety that environment, the misery and anxiety that environment, the misery and anxiety that so many people are feeling and the so many people are feeling and the so many people are feeling and the yearning, the spiritual hunger that has yearning, the spiritual hunger that has yearning, the spiritual hunger that has people consuming opinions and podcasts people consuming opinions and podcasts people consuming opinions and podcasts like deeply. I mean, who would have ever like deeply. I mean, who would have ever like deeply. I mean, who would have ever thought podcasts would be what it is, thought podcasts would be what it is, thought podcasts would be what it is, right? like long form audio right? like long form audio right? like long form audio conversations like we would go back to conversations like we would go back to conversations like we would go back to the radio like when we have when we can the radio like when we have when we can the radio like when we have when we can world build with AI now and make world build with AI now and make world build with AI now and make anything visual for us that we would go anything visual for us that we would go anything visual for us that we would go back to finding wisdom in this and the back to finding wisdom in this and the back to finding wisdom in this and the fact that like we that hunger is being fact that like we that hunger is being fact that like we that hunger is being fed by people like you who are saying fed by people like you who are saying fed by people like you who are saying hey like this isn't science won't save hey like this isn't science won't save hey like this isn't science won't save us spirituality won't save us. Love us spirituality won't save us. Love us spirituality won't save us. Love won't save us. Anger won't save us. All won't save us. Anger won't save us. All won't save us. Anger won't save us. All of it. We need all of it. And we need to of it. We need all of it. And we need to of it. We need all of it. And we need to try to wrestle with it and figure it try to wrestle with it and figure it try to wrestle with it and figure it out. And and no one is necessarily out. And and no one is necessarily out. And and no one is necessarily better at this. Like you can whatever better at this. Like you can whatever better at this. Like you can whatever car you drive, whatever profession, how car you drive, whatever profession, how car you drive, whatever profession, how much money you have in the bank, you may much money you have in the bank, you may much money you have in the bank, you may not be better or worse at this. So I not be better or worse at this. So I not be better or worse at this. So I think it's really beautiful that you're think it's really beautiful that you're think it's really beautiful that you're the pallet of things that you're the pallet of things that you're the pallet of things that you're discussing has become so broad, you're discussing has become so broad, you're discussing has become so broad, but you have remained very much you and but you have remained very much you and but you have remained very much you and very able to like bring it to a lens very able to like bring it to a lens very able to like bring it to a lens that is authentically yourself and I that is authentically yourself and I that is authentically yourself and I love that about the show. I like I love that about the show. I like I love that about the show. I like I remain a friend, but I also remain a remain a friend, but I also remain a remain a friend, but I also remain a fan. So thank you. I'll take that in and fan. So thank you. I'll take that in and fan. So thank you. I'll take that in and right back at you. Thanks, man. And right back at you. Thanks, man. And right back at you. Thanks, man. And please come back again. you have a very please come back again. you have a very please come back again. you have a very exciting project that we didn't get to exciting project that we didn't get to exciting project that we didn't get to today. So save that for a future today. So save that for a future today. So save that for a future episode. It's super cool. It's episode. It's super cool. It's episode. It's super cool. It's completely different than this. And um completely different than this. And um completely different than this. And um like everything you touch, it turns to like everything you touch, it turns to like everything you touch, it turns to platinum. So thanks, brother. Thank you platinum. So thanks, brother. Thank you platinum. So thanks, brother. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion for joining me for today's discussion for joining me for today's discussion with James Ston. To learn more about with James Ston. To learn more about with James Ston. To learn more about James' work and to find links to his James' work and to find links to his James' work and to find links to his book and other resources, please see the book and other resources, please see the book and other resources, please see the show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, from and or enjoying this podcast, from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to That's a terrific zerocost way to That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can up to a five-star review. And you can up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social not already following me on social not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools. Some of which and science related tools. Some of which and science related tools. Some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with James Ston. And today's discussion with James Ston. And today's discussion with James Ston. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]