Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science [music] and where we discuss science [music] and where we discuss science [music] and science-based tools for everyday life. science-based tools for everyday life. science-based tools for everyday life. [music] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing the lymphatic system. For are discussing the lymphatic system. For are discussing the lymphatic system. For many of you, the lymphatic system many of you, the lymphatic system many of you, the lymphatic system probably sounds a little bit esoteric. probably sounds a little bit esoteric. probably sounds a little bit esoteric. And for many of you, the lymphatic And for many of you, the lymphatic And for many of you, the lymphatic system may even drop notions of people system may even drop notions of people system may even drop notions of people talking about lymphatic clearance or talking about lymphatic clearance or talking about lymphatic clearance or doing bizarre seeming types of very doing bizarre seeming types of very doing bizarre seeming types of very light massage or jade rollers or light massage or jade rollers or light massage or jade rollers or bouncing on trampolines. And I must say, bouncing on trampolines. And I must say, bouncing on trampolines. And I must say, in researching this episode, I came to in researching this episode, I came to in researching this episode, I came to three general conclusions that I think three general conclusions that I think three general conclusions that I think are important to point out right now. are important to point out right now. are important to point out right now. First of all, your lymphatic system is First of all, your lymphatic system is First of all, your lymphatic system is absolutely essential to your immediate absolutely essential to your immediate absolutely essential to your immediate and long-term health. It's an incredible and long-term health. It's an incredible and long-term health. It's an incredible system that is serving you right now as system that is serving you right now as system that is serving you right now as you listen to this and it's a system you listen to this and it's a system you listen to this and it's a system that you need to support. The second that you need to support. The second that you need to support. The second conclusion is that the lymphatic system conclusion is that the lymphatic system conclusion is that the lymphatic system is somewhat cryptic and it doesn't get is somewhat cryptic and it doesn't get is somewhat cryptic and it doesn't get as much attention as say the as much attention as say the as much attention as say the cardiovascular system or your brain and cardiovascular system or your brain and cardiovascular system or your brain and nervous system or even the gut nervous system or even the gut nervous system or even the gut microbiome. And then the third microbiome. And then the third microbiome. And then the third conclusion is that the lymphatic system conclusion is that the lymphatic system conclusion is that the lymphatic system and what is sometimes just generally and what is sometimes just generally and what is sometimes just generally referred to as lymphatics often get kind referred to as lymphatics often get kind referred to as lymphatics often get kind of a bad rap. And the reason is that a of a bad rap. And the reason is that a of a bad rap. And the reason is that a lot of the practices that are out there lot of the practices that are out there lot of the practices that are out there in the wellness space and health space in the wellness space and health space in the wellness space and health space that relate to lymphatics can often seem that relate to lymphatics can often seem that relate to lymphatics can often seem a little bit goofy or odd or kind of a little bit goofy or odd or kind of a little bit goofy or odd or kind of newagy or woo things like rebounding newagy or woo things like rebounding newagy or woo things like rebounding like bouncing on a trampoline or shaking like bouncing on a trampoline or shaking like bouncing on a trampoline or shaking things of that sort. And to some extent things of that sort. And to some extent things of that sort. And to some extent they look odd because typically those they look odd because typically those they look odd because typically those aren't behaviors that most people engage aren't behaviors that most people engage aren't behaviors that most people engage in every day. But once you understand in every day. But once you understand in every day. But once you understand the structure and function of the structure and function of the structure and function of the lymphatic system, which you soon will, lymphatic system, which you soon will, lymphatic system, which you soon will, you'll realize why things like you'll realize why things like you'll realize why things like rebounding, things like treading water, rebounding, things like treading water, rebounding, things like treading water, things like specific ways of breathing things like specific ways of breathing things like specific ways of breathing actually serve the lymphatic system actually serve the lymphatic system actually serve the lymphatic system quite well. And there's a real basis for quite well. And there's a real basis for quite well. And there's a real basis for why those practices actually work. So why those practices actually work. So why those practices actually work. So those are three general points about the those are three general points about the those are three general points about the lymphatic system to keep in mind today lymphatic system to keep in mind today lymphatic system to keep in mind today as we move forward. Another thing to as we move forward. Another thing to as we move forward. Another thing to keep in mind is that the lymphatic keep in mind is that the lymphatic keep in mind is that the lymphatic system is directly related to your system is directly related to your system is directly related to your appearance. Later, you'll learn why if appearance. Later, you'll learn why if appearance. Later, you'll learn why if you were to stay up for one night and you were to stay up for one night and you were to stay up for one night and not get any sleep or even just get a not get any sleep or even just get a not get any sleep or even just get a poor night's sleep and you look at your poor night's sleep and you look at your poor night's sleep and you look at your face in the morning, you look very face in the morning, you look very face in the morning, you look very different after a poor night's sleep different after a poor night's sleep different after a poor night's sleep than you do after a great night's sleep. than you do after a great night's sleep. than you do after a great night's sleep. Sometimes you even look very different Sometimes you even look very different Sometimes you even look very different immediately upon waking after a great immediately upon waking after a great immediately upon waking after a great night's sleep as opposed to a couple of night's sleep as opposed to a couple of night's sleep as opposed to a couple of hours later. Many people wake up with hours later. Many people wake up with hours later. Many people wake up with kind of bags under their eyes. They look kind of bags under their eyes. They look kind of bags under their eyes. They look kind of groggy. they look much older and kind of groggy. they look much older and kind of groggy. they look much older and then a couple of hours later they look then a couple of hours later they look then a couple of hours later they look fresh and that stuff is all um cleared fresh and that stuff is all um cleared fresh and that stuff is all um cleared away and certainly not by doing anything away and certainly not by doing anything away and certainly not by doing anything cosmetic in terms of makeup or anything. cosmetic in terms of makeup or anything. cosmetic in terms of makeup or anything. That transition from bags under the eyes That transition from bags under the eyes That transition from bags under the eyes feeling you know a heaviness in the feeling you know a heaviness in the feeling you know a heaviness in the face, the eyes tired, a sort of lack of face, the eyes tired, a sort of lack of face, the eyes tired, a sort of lack of life in the face and eyes and then later life in the face and eyes and then later life in the face and eyes and then later just a couple of hours looking vibrant, just a couple of hours looking vibrant, just a couple of hours looking vibrant, the face looking very uh fresh and the face looking very uh fresh and the face looking very uh fresh and uh ready for the day. that has uh ready for the day. that has uh ready for the day. that has everything to do with what's called everything to do with what's called everything to do with what's called lymphatic clearance and the lymphatic clearance and the lymphatic clearance and the lymphatic system of the face and neck. So today system of the face and neck. So today system of the face and neck. So today you're going to learn how the lymphatic you're going to learn how the lymphatic you're going to learn how the lymphatic system works. You're going to learn how system works. You're going to learn how system works. You're going to learn how to support your lymphatic system for to support your lymphatic system for to support your lymphatic system for your immediate and long-term health as your immediate and long-term health as your immediate and long-term health as well as for appearance. And you're going well as for appearance. And you're going well as for appearance. And you're going to learn about if you were to have say to learn about if you were to have say to learn about if you were to have say an injury to the body or god forbid if an injury to the body or god forbid if an injury to the body or god forbid if you were suffering from cancer how you were suffering from cancer how you were suffering from cancer how you could support your lymphatic system. And could support your lymphatic system. And could support your lymphatic system. And in talking about all of this, you'll be in talking about all of this, you'll be in talking about all of this, you'll be able to make sense of why it is that able to make sense of why it is that able to make sense of why it is that things like lymphatic massage or the things like lymphatic massage or the things like lymphatic massage or the various tools and treatments that are various tools and treatments that are various tools and treatments that are out there may actually work and why some out there may actually work and why some out there may actually work and why some of them perhaps should be avoided. And of them perhaps should be avoided. And of them perhaps should be avoided. And as a final point, you're also going to as a final point, you're also going to as a final point, you're also going to realize by the end of today's episode realize by the end of today's episode realize by the end of today's episode that the lymphatic system is one of the that the lymphatic system is one of the that the lymphatic system is one of the major reasons why exercise supports major reasons why exercise supports major reasons why exercise supports longevity and heart health and brain longevity and heart health and brain longevity and heart health and brain health and all the other things that health and all the other things that health and all the other things that we've heard that exercise can provide. we've heard that exercise can provide. we've heard that exercise can provide. The point here is that your lymphatic The point here is that your lymphatic The point here is that your lymphatic system sits central to everything we system sits central to everything we system sits central to everything we care about in terms of immediate and care about in terms of immediate and care about in terms of immediate and long-term health. And as you'll soon long-term health. And as you'll soon long-term health. And as you'll soon see, it's also just a really cool see, it's also just a really cool see, it's also just a really cool system. Before we begin, I'd like to system. Before we begin, I'd like to system. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science related tools to the general science related tools to the general science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. Okay, let's get into the lymphatic Okay, let's get into the lymphatic Okay, let's get into the lymphatic system. But in order to get into the system. But in order to get into the system. But in order to get into the lymphatic system, we need to talk lymphatic system, we need to talk lymphatic system, we need to talk briefly about the circulatory system for briefly about the circulatory system for briefly about the circulatory system for blood. Now, everybody knows what the blood. Now, everybody knows what the blood. Now, everybody knows what the heart is. The heart is this organ that heart is. The heart is this organ that heart is. The heart is this organ that pumps blood. Many of you are probably pumps blood. Many of you are probably pumps blood. Many of you are probably familiar with the fact that the heart familiar with the fact that the heart familiar with the fact that the heart has different chambers, different has different chambers, different has different chambers, different compartments. But the heart also has two compartments. But the heart also has two compartments. But the heart also has two major jobs that are quite different from major jobs that are quite different from major jobs that are quite different from one another and two major anatomical one another and two major anatomical one another and two major anatomical distinctions that allow those functions distinctions that allow those functions distinctions that allow those functions to occur. And those functions broadly to occur. And those functions broadly to occur. And those functions broadly speaking are to deliver oxygenated blood speaking are to deliver oxygenated blood speaking are to deliver oxygenated blood to all the tissues of your body to all the tissues of your body to all the tissues of your body including your brain, your spleen. Every including your brain, your spleen. Every including your brain, your spleen. Every organ and tissue in the body needs organ and tissue in the body needs organ and tissue in the body needs oxygenated blood and also to return the oxygenated blood and also to return the oxygenated blood and also to return the non oxygenated blood back to the heart non oxygenated blood back to the heart non oxygenated blood back to the heart and back to the lungs so that it can get and back to the lungs so that it can get and back to the lungs so that it can get reoxygenated. So I'm just going to reoxygenated. So I'm just going to reoxygenated. So I'm just going to briefly describe the blood circulatory briefly describe the blood circulatory briefly describe the blood circulatory system in very broad terms. We probably system in very broad terms. We probably system in very broad terms. We probably should do an entire episode about heart should do an entire episode about heart should do an entire episode about heart health and heart function and we will. health and heart function and we will. health and heart function and we will. But for those of you not familiar with But for those of you not familiar with But for those of you not familiar with how the heart works, basically the heart how the heart works, basically the heart how the heart works, basically the heart is going to pump blood out through what is going to pump blood out through what is going to pump blood out through what are called arteries. You've all heard of are called arteries. You've all heard of are called arteries. You've all heard of arteries, which are fairly large arteries, which are fairly large arteries, which are fairly large diameter tubes. They have walls of those diameter tubes. They have walls of those diameter tubes. They have walls of those tubes that can resist a lot of pressure. tubes that can resist a lot of pressure. tubes that can resist a lot of pressure. And that's important because we need to And that's important because we need to And that's important because we need to put a lot of pressure to be able to pump put a lot of pressure to be able to pump put a lot of pressure to be able to pump blood far out into the body, out to your blood far out into the body, out to your blood far out into the body, out to your fingertips, your toes, and everything in fingertips, your toes, and everything in fingertips, your toes, and everything in between. Okay, oxygenated blood is going between. Okay, oxygenated blood is going between. Okay, oxygenated blood is going to travel out through those arteries and to travel out through those arteries and to travel out through those arteries and then eventually as those arteries then eventually as those arteries then eventually as those arteries approach the tissues that they need to approach the tissues that they need to approach the tissues that they need to oxygenate and by the way the blood is oxygenate and by the way the blood is oxygenate and by the way the blood is delivering not just oxygen but also delivering not just oxygen but also delivering not just oxygen but also glucose, blood sugar, hormones, glucose, blood sugar, hormones, glucose, blood sugar, hormones, different proteins, amino acids, all the different proteins, amino acids, all the different proteins, amino acids, all the stuff that your tissues need, not just stuff that your tissues need, not just stuff that your tissues need, not just oxygen. But then those arteries are oxygen. But then those arteries are oxygen. But then those arteries are going to transition into smaller going to transition into smaller going to transition into smaller diameter tubes that we call the diameter tubes that we call the diameter tubes that we call the arterials. And then eventually as those arterials. And then eventually as those arterials. And then eventually as those arterials approach the tissues they need arterials approach the tissues they need arterials approach the tissues they need to deliver all that stuff, all those to deliver all that stuff, all those to deliver all that stuff, all those goodies within the blood, those goodies within the blood, those goodies within the blood, those arterials are going to transition and arterials are going to transition and arterials are going to transition and start branching into what are called start branching into what are called start branching into what are called capillaries. Most of you have probably capillaries. Most of you have probably capillaries. Most of you have probably heard of capillaries. Capillaries have a heard of capillaries. Capillaries have a heard of capillaries. Capillaries have a very thin wall, just one cell very thin wall, just one cell very thin wall, just one cell thick, which allows things within the thick, which allows things within the thick, which allows things within the blood like oxygen, amino acids, and blood like oxygen, amino acids, and blood like oxygen, amino acids, and other things that the cells in the other things that the cells in the other things that the cells in the tissues of your body need to actually tissues of your body need to actually tissues of your body need to actually get out into those tissues. Okay, so get out into those tissues. Okay, so get out into those tissues. Okay, so most of us think about the blood system most of us think about the blood system most of us think about the blood system as pumping stuff out there, but we as pumping stuff out there, but we as pumping stuff out there, but we probably haven't thought about how the probably haven't thought about how the probably haven't thought about how the stuff that needs to get to our cells stuff that needs to get to our cells stuff that needs to get to our cells actually gets out of the blood and into actually gets out of the blood and into actually gets out of the blood and into those cells. And I just explained how by those cells. And I just explained how by those cells. And I just explained how by having a very thinwalled set of having a very thinwalled set of having a very thinwalled set of capillaries carrying that oxygenated capillaries carrying that oxygenated capillaries carrying that oxygenated amino acid containing glucose containing amino acid containing glucose containing amino acid containing glucose containing blood, those nutrients and that oxygen blood, those nutrients and that oxygen blood, those nutrients and that oxygen can actually get out of the vascule, out can actually get out of the vascule, out can actually get out of the vascule, out of those capillaries and into the cells of those capillaries and into the cells of those capillaries and into the cells that need them. Okay. At a future date, that need them. Okay. At a future date, that need them. Okay. At a future date, I'll talk about the actual mechanics of I'll talk about the actual mechanics of I'll talk about the actual mechanics of how that's done, but for right now, I how that's done, but for right now, I how that's done, but for right now, I think that's sufficient. Now, once that think that's sufficient. Now, once that think that's sufficient. Now, once that stuff arrives in the tissue, and here stuff arrives in the tissue, and here stuff arrives in the tissue, and here when I say tissue, it could be brain when I say tissue, it could be brain when I say tissue, it could be brain tissue, it could be muscle tissue, it tissue, it could be muscle tissue, it tissue, it could be muscle tissue, it could be liver tissue. Once that stuff could be liver tissue. Once that stuff could be liver tissue. Once that stuff gets out into the cells, the cells are gets out into the cells, the cells are gets out into the cells, the cells are going to use it. They're going to use going to use it. They're going to use going to use it. They're going to use the oxygen. They're going to use the oxygen. They're going to use the oxygen. They're going to use the glucose. They're going to use the amino glucose. They're going to use the amino glucose. They're going to use the amino acids. They're going to use the acids. They're going to use the acids. They're going to use the hormones. And as a consequence, they are hormones. And as a consequence, they are hormones. And as a consequence, they are going to create some waste products. going to create some waste products. going to create some waste products. There's going to be carbon dioxide There's going to be carbon dioxide There's going to be carbon dioxide that's created. There's going to be that's created. There's going to be that's created. There's going to be cellular waste in the form of actual cellular waste in the form of actual cellular waste in the form of actual physical debris. There's going to be physical debris. There's going to be physical debris. There's going to be metabolites. There's going to be metabolites. There's going to be metabolites. There's going to be ammonia. Basically, a bunch of waste ammonia. Basically, a bunch of waste ammonia. Basically, a bunch of waste product is going to then get kicked out product is going to then get kicked out product is going to then get kicked out of those cells into what's called the of those cells into what's called the of those cells into what's called the extracellular space. Now, a couple times extracellular space. Now, a couple times extracellular space. Now, a couple times today, I'll talk about what's referred today, I'll talk about what's referred today, I'll talk about what's referred to as the interstatial space. The to as the interstatial space. The to as the interstatial space. The interstitial space is the area around interstitial space is the area around interstitial space is the area around the cells of the various tissues and the cells of the various tissues and the cells of the various tissues and organs of your body. And fluid and these organs of your body. And fluid and these organs of your body. And fluid and these waste products gets kicked out into that waste products gets kicked out into that waste products gets kicked out into that interstitial space between the cells. So interstitial space between the cells. So interstitial space between the cells. So once it's there, it needs to be cleared once it's there, it needs to be cleared once it's there, it needs to be cleared out of there. How is it cleared out of out of there. How is it cleared out of out of there. How is it cleared out of there? Some of it will be taken back up there? Some of it will be taken back up there? Some of it will be taken back up into the blood supply and with it a lot into the blood supply and with it a lot into the blood supply and with it a lot of water, a lot of fluid. I didn't of water, a lot of fluid. I didn't of water, a lot of fluid. I didn't mention this yet, but a lot of fluid, a mention this yet, but a lot of fluid, a mention this yet, but a lot of fluid, a lot of water gets out of the vascule and lot of water gets out of the vascule and lot of water gets out of the vascule and into those cells and into the into those cells and into the into those cells and into the interstitial space around those cells interstitial space around those cells interstitial space around those cells while it's delivering all those while it's delivering all those while it's delivering all those nutrients and goodies that we talked nutrients and goodies that we talked nutrients and goodies that we talked about a minute ago. Now, some of the about a minute ago. Now, some of the about a minute ago. Now, some of the waste product and the water, so carbon waste product and the water, so carbon waste product and the water, so carbon dioxide and water, etc. will be taken dioxide and water, etc. will be taken dioxide and water, etc. will be taken back up by the blood supply. How does back up by the blood supply. How does back up by the blood supply. How does that happen? Well, there are capillaries that happen? Well, there are capillaries that happen? Well, there are capillaries that are referred to as venus that are referred to as venus that are referred to as venus capillaries. Okay, so we talked about capillaries. Okay, so we talked about capillaries. Okay, so we talked about the arterial system which delivers the arterial system which delivers the arterial system which delivers oxygenated blood. There's also another oxygenated blood. There's also another oxygenated blood. There's also another system called the venus system which system called the venus system which system called the venus system which takes de oxygenated blood back up to be takes de oxygenated blood back up to be takes de oxygenated blood back up to be oxygenated by the lungs and it does that oxygenated by the lungs and it does that oxygenated by the lungs and it does that of course in concert with the heart. So of course in concert with the heart. So of course in concert with the heart. So we have the arterial system that we have the arterial system that we have the arterial system that delivers oxygenated blood. There are delivers oxygenated blood. There are delivers oxygenated blood. There are rare exceptions of arteries that deliver rare exceptions of arteries that deliver rare exceptions of arteries that deliver non oxygenated blood to tissues such as non oxygenated blood to tissues such as non oxygenated blood to tissues such as the lungs, but let's just set that aside the lungs, but let's just set that aside the lungs, but let's just set that aside for now. We've got these arterial system for now. We've got these arterial system for now. We've got these arterial system that delivers oxygenated blood. And then that delivers oxygenated blood. And then that delivers oxygenated blood. And then now we have the venus system. We have now we have the venus system. We have now we have the venus system. We have these little venous capillaries that are these little venous capillaries that are these little venous capillaries that are also just one cell wall thick. And the also just one cell wall thick. And the also just one cell wall thick. And the water, the carbon dioxide, the ammonia, water, the carbon dioxide, the ammonia, water, the carbon dioxide, the ammonia, the waste products is going to get the waste products is going to get the waste products is going to get reabsorbed there. It's going to then go reabsorbed there. It's going to then go reabsorbed there. It's going to then go from small diameter tubes, the venus from small diameter tubes, the venus from small diameter tubes, the venus capillaries, up to larger diameter capillaries, up to larger diameter capillaries, up to larger diameter tubes, and eventually into the veins tubes, and eventually into the veins tubes, and eventually into the veins that are going to deliver that blood and that are going to deliver that blood and that are going to deliver that blood and the waste products and the carbon the waste products and the carbon the waste products and the carbon dioxide back to the heart and lungs to dioxide back to the heart and lungs to dioxide back to the heart and lungs to be reoxygenated and then sent back out be reoxygenated and then sent back out be reoxygenated and then sent back out to the body. Okay? And you may have to the body. Okay? And you may have to the body. Okay? And you may have heard the word pulmonary before. If you heard the word pulmonary before. If you heard the word pulmonary before. If you haven't, that's okay. The pulmonary haven't, that's okay. The pulmonary haven't, that's okay. The pulmonary system is the aspect of the circulatory system is the aspect of the circulatory system is the aspect of the circulatory system that is directed towards the system that is directed towards the system that is directed towards the lungs to oxygenate the blood. Okay? So, lungs to oxygenate the blood. Okay? So, lungs to oxygenate the blood. Okay? So, we've got this really nice looped system we've got this really nice looped system we've got this really nice looped system where oxygenated blood can get out to where oxygenated blood can get out to where oxygenated blood can get out to the tissues of the body. The cells in the tissues of the body. The cells in the tissues of the body. The cells in those tissues can use the oxygen, the those tissues can use the oxygen, the those tissues can use the oxygen, the nutrients, etc. and the water and the nutrients, etc. and the water and the nutrients, etc. and the water and the carbon dioxide and ammonia and other carbon dioxide and ammonia and other carbon dioxide and ammonia and other waste products that come from just cells waste products that come from just cells waste products that come from just cells doing their business from them doing all doing their business from them doing all doing their business from them doing all the things that they need to do as a the things that they need to do as a the things that they need to do as a liver cell as a brain cell etc is then liver cell as a brain cell etc is then liver cell as a brain cell etc is then going to be passed back into the going to be passed back into the going to be passed back into the circulatory system and then back to the circulatory system and then back to the circulatory system and then back to the heart and lungs so that the waste heart and lungs so that the waste heart and lungs so that the waste products can be expelled. For instance, products can be expelled. For instance, products can be expelled. For instance, when you exhale, the carbon dioxide is when you exhale, the carbon dioxide is when you exhale, the carbon dioxide is expelled from your body and when you expelled from your body and when you expelled from your body and when you inhale, [snorts] you bring in more inhale, [snorts] you bring in more inhale, [snorts] you bring in more oxygen that then gets on hemoglobin and oxygen that then gets on hemoglobin and oxygen that then gets on hemoglobin and then back to through the arterial system then back to through the arterial system then back to through the arterial system and so on and so forth. Okay? So, it's a and so on and so forth. Okay? So, it's a and so on and so forth. Okay? So, it's a beautiful system. And even if you only beautiful system. And even if you only beautiful system. And even if you only captured 5 to 10% of what I just said, captured 5 to 10% of what I just said, captured 5 to 10% of what I just said, you certainly will have in mind now that you certainly will have in mind now that you certainly will have in mind now that your circulatory system for your blood your circulatory system for your blood your circulatory system for your blood is sending out oxygenated stuff, is sending out oxygenated stuff, is sending out oxygenated stuff, returning non oxygenated stuff that also returning non oxygenated stuff that also returning non oxygenated stuff that also has a lot of waste product in it, and has a lot of waste product in it, and has a lot of waste product in it, and that there's a lot of water in that there's a lot of water in that there's a lot of water in that whole business. This is all liquid and whole business. This is all liquid and whole business. This is all liquid and proteins and glucose etc. But there's a proteins and glucose etc. But there's a proteins and glucose etc. But there's a lot of water in this whole thing. After lot of water in this whole thing. After lot of water in this whole thing. After all, your blood is liquid. So the all, your blood is liquid. So the all, your blood is liquid. So the important thing to understand about the important thing to understand about the important thing to understand about the lymphatic system is that the lymphatic system is that the lymphatic system is that the lymphatic system is there waiting at the system is there waiting at the system is there waiting at the interstatial space and at the interface interstatial space and at the interface interstatial space and at the interface between this arterial system that between this arterial system that between this arterial system that delivers oxygenated blood and the venous delivers oxygenated blood and the venous delivers oxygenated blood and the venous system of capillaries that collects the system of capillaries that collects the system of capillaries that collects the deoxxygenated blood and all these waste deoxxygenated blood and all these waste deoxxygenated blood and all these waste products. And it's right there as a products. And it's right there as a products. And it's right there as a series of tubes ready to catch the series of tubes ready to catch the series of tubes ready to catch the excess fluid and the waste products and excess fluid and the waste products and excess fluid and the waste products and bring them back to the heart also, but bring them back to the heart also, but bring them back to the heart also, but to do a lot of really important things to do a lot of really important things to do a lot of really important things with them along the way. You might say, with them along the way. You might say, with them along the way. You might say, why would you have this third system, why would you have this third system, why would you have this third system, right? The circulatory system for blood right? The circulatory system for blood right? The circulatory system for blood sounds nearly perfect. And the key is sounds nearly perfect. And the key is sounds nearly perfect. And the key is it's not perfect. Your lymphatic system it's not perfect. Your lymphatic system it's not perfect. Your lymphatic system is responsible for taking the fluid that is responsible for taking the fluid that is responsible for taking the fluid that remains in the extracellular space and remains in the extracellular space and remains in the extracellular space and all the gunk, all the waste products all the gunk, all the waste products all the gunk, all the waste products from cellular metabolism, again from cellular metabolism, again from cellular metabolism, again proteins, ammonia, carbon dioxide, and proteins, ammonia, carbon dioxide, and proteins, ammonia, carbon dioxide, and bringing that back into the circulatory bringing that back into the circulatory bringing that back into the circulatory system of blood. But along the way, system of blood. But along the way, system of blood. But along the way, doing a number of very important things doing a number of very important things doing a number of very important things including checking it out to see whether including checking it out to see whether including checking it out to see whether or not there are any contaminants, or not there are any contaminants, or not there are any contaminants, right? any infections, bacterial or right? any infections, bacterial or right? any infections, bacterial or viral infections that occurs in viral infections that occurs in viral infections that occurs in structures called the lymph nodes, which structures called the lymph nodes, which structures called the lymph nodes, which you've probably heard of and we will you've probably heard of and we will you've probably heard of and we will return to a little bit later. But return to a little bit later. But return to a little bit later. But leaving aside the immune surveillance leaving aside the immune surveillance leaving aside the immune surveillance role of the lymphatic system, just the role of the lymphatic system, just the role of the lymphatic system, just the mere role of needing to clear away what mere role of needing to clear away what mere role of needing to clear away what really is about 3 to four lers of excess really is about 3 to four lers of excess really is about 3 to four lers of excess fluid in the interstitial space is so fluid in the interstitial space is so fluid in the interstitial space is so important. You might say, well, how important. You might say, well, how important. You might say, well, how important can it really be, right? Three important can it really be, right? Three important can it really be, right? Three or four liters. Is it really that or four liters. Is it really that or four liters. Is it really that important? It is absolutely crucial. important? It is absolutely crucial. important? It is absolutely crucial. Why? Because if too much fluid and amino Why? Because if too much fluid and amino Why? Because if too much fluid and amino acids and cellular waste products build acids and cellular waste products build acids and cellular waste products build up in the tissues that are using the up in the tissues that are using the up in the tissues that are using the oxygenated blood and need all the oxygenated blood and need all the oxygenated blood and need all the nutrients that is ripe for infection, right? that is ripe for infection, right? that is ripe for infection, right? Bacteria love to grow in warm Bacteria love to grow in warm Bacteria love to grow in warm environments with lots of amino acids. environments with lots of amino acids. environments with lots of amino acids. It's ripe for inflammation because of It's ripe for inflammation because of It's ripe for inflammation because of the CO2 and because of the ammonia and the CO2 and because of the ammonia and the CO2 and because of the ammonia and the waste products. And if that the waste products. And if that the waste products. And if that inflammation occurs, you get buildup of inflammation occurs, you get buildup of inflammation occurs, you get buildup of tissue. In particular, atapost tissue tissue. In particular, atapost tissue tissue. In particular, atapost tissue can really thicken. skin can thicken and can really thicken. skin can thicken and can really thicken. skin can thicken and it starts becoming chronically inflamed. it starts becoming chronically inflamed. it starts becoming chronically inflamed. And this is something that believe it or And this is something that believe it or And this is something that believe it or not is fairly common. It's common in not is fairly common. It's common in not is fairly common. It's common in people who are obese. It's common in people who are obese. It's common in people who are obese. It's common in people that don't move enough. We'll people that don't move enough. We'll people that don't move enough. We'll talk about why that's so in a moment. talk about why that's so in a moment. talk about why that's so in a moment. The lymphatic systems just basic role The lymphatic systems just basic role The lymphatic systems just basic role for draining that fluid out of the for draining that fluid out of the for draining that fluid out of the intercal space is something that all of intercal space is something that all of intercal space is something that all of us should really care about healthy or us should really care about healthy or us should really care about healthy or unhealthy. So even if you're not obese, unhealthy. So even if you're not obese, unhealthy. So even if you're not obese, you need to get your lymphatic system you need to get your lymphatic system you need to get your lymphatic system tuned up so that it's clearing that tuned up so that it's clearing that tuned up so that it's clearing that stuff. It's clearing what we call lymph, stuff. It's clearing what we call lymph, stuff. It's clearing what we call lymph, which is kind of like a sticky um kind which is kind of like a sticky um kind which is kind of like a sticky um kind of sticky fluid because it's got stuff of sticky fluid because it's got stuff of sticky fluid because it's got stuff other than water in there. It's got all other than water in there. It's got all other than water in there. It's got all those waste products and it uh rarely those waste products and it uh rarely those waste products and it uh rarely has red blood cells in it, but it often has red blood cells in it, but it often has red blood cells in it, but it often can have a few white blood cells and it can have a few white blood cells and it can have a few white blood cells and it can have some other stuff in it. And we can have some other stuff in it. And we can have some other stuff in it. And we need to clear that out. So, it's need to clear that out. So, it's need to clear that out. So, it's semi-iscus. It's not super fluid. It's semi-iscus. It's not super fluid. It's semi-iscus. It's not super fluid. It's not it's not a gel. It's kind of not it's not a gel. It's kind of not it's not a gel. It's kind of somewhere in between. And we need to somewhere in between. And we need to somewhere in between. And we need to clear that out. In fact, if we don't clear that out. In fact, if we don't clear that out. In fact, if we don't clear it out, our body very quickly goes clear it out, our body very quickly goes clear it out, our body very quickly goes into local or systemic inflammation. And into local or systemic inflammation. And into local or systemic inflammation. And if we don't clear it out within the if we don't clear it out within the if we don't clear it out within the brain, we get what's called brain fog. brain, we get what's called brain fog. brain, we get what's called brain fog. You get cognitive impairment. And the You get cognitive impairment. And the You get cognitive impairment. And the brain fog that occurs from lack of brain fog that occurs from lack of brain fog that occurs from lack of lymphatic clearance from brain tissue. lymphatic clearance from brain tissue. lymphatic clearance from brain tissue. Comes on very quickly, even after one Comes on very quickly, even after one Comes on very quickly, even after one poor night's sleep. And it is very poor night's sleep. And it is very poor night's sleep. And it is very severe. If any of you have ever severe. If any of you have ever severe. If any of you have ever experienced brain fog, it is awful. The experienced brain fog, it is awful. The experienced brain fog, it is awful. The inability to kind of hold a thought and inability to kind of hold a thought and inability to kind of hold a thought and maintain a thought and you're kind of maintain a thought and you're kind of maintain a thought and you're kind of somewhere between sleep and awake. and somewhere between sleep and awake. and somewhere between sleep and awake. and then you're kind of stressed about that then you're kind of stressed about that then you're kind of stressed about that is serious. So the mere clearance of the is serious. So the mere clearance of the is serious. So the mere clearance of the stuff from the extracellular space, the stuff from the extracellular space, the stuff from the extracellular space, the water, CO2 and waste products by the water, CO2 and waste products by the water, CO2 and waste products by the lymphatic system is crucial. So before I lymphatic system is crucial. So before I lymphatic system is crucial. So before I talk about the immune surveillance role talk about the immune surveillance role talk about the immune surveillance role of the lymphatic system, I want to talk of the lymphatic system, I want to talk of the lymphatic system, I want to talk about what you can do to encourage the about what you can do to encourage the about what you can do to encourage the collection and drainage of all that collection and drainage of all that collection and drainage of all that extracellular fluid and the waste extracellular fluid and the waste extracellular fluid and the waste products with it. I'd like to take a products with it. I'd like to take a products with it. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration, can diminish your cognitive dehydration, can diminish your cognitive dehydration, can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's to claim a free sample pack. Today's to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by David. episode is also brought to us by David. episode is also brought to us by David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 gram of protein. Only other. It has 28 gram of protein. Only other. It has 28 gram of protein. Only 150 calories and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 gram of protein and 75% That's right, 28 gram of protein and 75% That's right, 28 gram of protein and 75% of its calories come from protein. of its calories come from protein. of its calories come from protein. That's 50% higher than the next closest That's 50% higher than the next closest That's 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. These bars from David also protein bar. These bars from David also protein bar. These bars from David also taste amazing. Right now, my favorite taste amazing. Right now, my favorite taste amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I also like the chocolate chip but I also like the chocolate chip but I also like the chocolate chip cookie dough flavor, and I also like the cookie dough flavor, and I also like the cookie dough flavor, and I also like the salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like all the flavors. They're all I like all the flavors. They're all I like all the flavors. They're all delicious. Also, big news. David bars delicious. Also, big news. David bars delicious. Also, big news. David bars are now back in stock. They were sold are now back in stock. They were sold are now back in stock. They were sold out for several months because they are out for several months because they are out for several months because they are that popular, but they are now back in that popular, but they are now back in that popular, but they are now back in stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the to get 28 grams of protein in the to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it very calories of a snack, which makes it very calories of a snack, which makes it very easy for me to meet my protein goals of easy for me to meet my protein goals of easy for me to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per day and to do so without weight per day and to do so without weight per day and to do so without eating excess calories. I generally eat eating excess calories. I generally eat eating excess calories. I generally eat a David Bar most afternoons, and I a David Bar most afternoons, and I a David Bar most afternoons, and I always keep them with me when I'm away always keep them with me when I'm away always keep them with me when I'm away from home or traveling because they're from home or traveling because they're from home or traveling because they're incredibly convenient to get enough incredibly convenient to get enough incredibly convenient to get enough protein. As I mentioned, they're protein. As I mentioned, they're protein. As I mentioned, they're incredibly delicious and given that 28 incredibly delicious and given that 28 incredibly delicious and given that 28 grams of protein, they're pretty filling grams of protein, they're pretty filling grams of protein, they're pretty filling for just 150 calories, so they're great for just 150 calories, so they're great for just 150 calories, so they're great between meals as well. If you'd like to between meals as well. If you'd like to between meals as well. If you'd like to try David, you can go to try David, you can go to try David, you can go to davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Okay, so let's talk about the lymphatic Okay, so let's talk about the lymphatic Okay, so let's talk about the lymphatic system, focusing on the lymphatic system, focusing on the lymphatic system, focusing on the lymphatic vessels, which are basically just tubes. vessels, which are basically just tubes. vessels, which are basically just tubes. Okay, tubes of different sizes depending Okay, tubes of different sizes depending Okay, tubes of different sizes depending on where you are in the body and what on where you are in the body and what on where you are in the body and what you need to accomplish. But here's a you need to accomplish. But here's a you need to accomplish. But here's a really key point that everyone should really key point that everyone should really key point that everyone should know. We spend so much time and know. We spend so much time and know. We spend so much time and attention thinking about the lymph attention thinking about the lymph attention thinking about the lymph nodes, which of course are super nodes, which of course are super nodes, which of course are super important, right? You go to the doctor, important, right? You go to the doctor, important, right? You go to the doctor, you say you're not feeling well, they're you say you're not feeling well, they're you say you're not feeling well, they're going to feel your lymph nodes. I'll going to feel your lymph nodes. I'll going to feel your lymph nodes. I'll explain why they do that in a minute. explain why they do that in a minute. explain why they do that in a minute. They're going to feel under your jaw. They're going to feel under your jaw. They're going to feel under your jaw. You know, maybe you've had swollen lymph You know, maybe you've had swollen lymph You know, maybe you've had swollen lymph nodes um and where your legs meet your nodes um and where your legs meet your nodes um and where your legs meet your groin, you have your armpits, you'll groin, you have your armpits, you'll groin, you have your armpits, you'll occasionally uh feel some swelling occasionally uh feel some swelling occasionally uh feel some swelling or some kind of dull pain. By the way, or some kind of dull pain. By the way, or some kind of dull pain. By the way, that dull pain or swelling isn't that dull pain or swelling isn't that dull pain or swelling isn't necessarily a sign of a systemic necessarily a sign of a systemic necessarily a sign of a systemic infection. It could be, but it's not infection. It could be, but it's not infection. It could be, but it's not necessarily a sign of an infection. necessarily a sign of an infection. necessarily a sign of an infection. We'll talk about what the lymph nodes We'll talk about what the lymph nodes We'll talk about what the lymph nodes do, but the lymphatic vessels don't get do, but the lymphatic vessels don't get do, but the lymphatic vessels don't get nearly enough attention in my opinion. nearly enough attention in my opinion. nearly enough attention in my opinion. Your entire body is inervated, as we Your entire body is inervated, as we Your entire body is inervated, as we say, by these lymphatic vessels, right? say, by these lymphatic vessels, right? say, by these lymphatic vessels, right? From your little pinky toe and all your From your little pinky toe and all your From your little pinky toe and all your toes and your feet, any tissue in your toes and your feet, any tissue in your toes and your feet, any tissue in your body because it needs blood and oxygen body because it needs blood and oxygen body because it needs blood and oxygen and nutrients. And because the cells and nutrients. And because the cells and nutrients. And because the cells there create waste products and because there create waste products and because there create waste products and because some of that fluid remains in the some of that fluid remains in the some of that fluid remains in the interstitial space, doesn't make it back interstitial space, doesn't make it back interstitial space, doesn't make it back into the vascule, you need lymphatic into the vascule, you need lymphatic into the vascule, you need lymphatic vessels everywhere. You need them in vessels everywhere. You need them in vessels everywhere. You need them in your brain, you need them in your skin, your brain, you need them in your skin, your brain, you need them in your skin, you need them in your atapost tissue, you need them in your atapost tissue, you need them in your atapost tissue, your fat that is, you need them your fat that is, you need them your fat that is, you need them everywhere. And so if I were to give you everywhere. And so if I were to give you everywhere. And so if I were to give you a map of the lymphatic vessels across a map of the lymphatic vessels across a map of the lymphatic vessels across the body, it would just look like the body, it would just look like the body, it would just look like spaghetti everywhere. Lymph nodes are spaghetti everywhere. Lymph nodes are spaghetti everywhere. Lymph nodes are going to be those larger compartments going to be those larger compartments going to be those larger compartments where some of the lymphatic fluid and where some of the lymphatic fluid and where some of the lymphatic fluid and the stuff within it is sequestered for a the stuff within it is sequestered for a the stuff within it is sequestered for a bit, monitored for infections and then bit, monitored for infections and then bit, monitored for infections and then passed along. We'll get back to that passed along. We'll get back to that passed along. We'll get back to that later. The lymphatic vessels have a very later. The lymphatic vessels have a very later. The lymphatic vessels have a very important property which is that they important property which is that they important property which is that they are one-way vessels. Okay, fluid can are one-way vessels. Okay, fluid can are one-way vessels. Okay, fluid can only pass one direction through them. only pass one direction through them. only pass one direction through them. And that unidirectionality of the And that unidirectionality of the And that unidirectionality of the vessels is oh so important when thinking vessels is oh so important when thinking vessels is oh so important when thinking about how to encourage lymphatic about how to encourage lymphatic about how to encourage lymphatic drainage and lymphatic flow. And when I drainage and lymphatic flow. And when I drainage and lymphatic flow. And when I say lymphatic flow, what I really mean say lymphatic flow, what I really mean say lymphatic flow, what I really mean is the passage of fluid from the is the passage of fluid from the is the passage of fluid from the interstitial extracellular space into interstitial extracellular space into interstitial extracellular space into these lymphatic vessels. Sometimes these lymphatic vessels. Sometimes these lymphatic vessels. Sometimes people will call them lymphatic ducts, people will call them lymphatic ducts, people will call them lymphatic ducts, but that's actually a technical term but that's actually a technical term but that's actually a technical term related to something else. but into related to something else. but into related to something else. but into these lymphatic vessels, then through these lymphatic vessels, then through these lymphatic vessels, then through these vessels and back into the venus these vessels and back into the venus these vessels and back into the venus blood supply where all sorts of good blood supply where all sorts of good blood supply where all sorts of good things happen and we'll talk about it in things happen and we'll talk about it in things happen and we'll talk about it in a bit. So, they're one-way vessels. And a bit. So, they're one-way vessels. And a bit. So, they're one-way vessels. And if you think about the lymph that if you think about the lymph that if you think about the lymph that accumulates and then goes into the accumulates and then goes into the accumulates and then goes into the vessels in say your feet, if it's a vessels in say your feet, if it's a vessels in say your feet, if it's a one-way vessel, you know, you need that one-way vessel, you know, you need that one-way vessel, you know, you need that vessel is going to be directed towards vessel is going to be directed towards vessel is going to be directed towards the heart, right? The fluid will be able the heart, right? The fluid will be able the heart, right? The fluid will be able to go towards the heart, right? Because to go towards the heart, right? Because to go towards the heart, right? Because eventually that's where this stuff needs eventually that's where this stuff needs eventually that's where this stuff needs to go. It needs to dump back into the to go. It needs to dump back into the to go. It needs to dump back into the venus blood supply, get oxygenated and venus blood supply, get oxygenated and venus blood supply, get oxygenated and so forth. And the waste has to be so forth. And the waste has to be so forth. And the waste has to be disposed. And we have this thing called gravity, And we have this thing called gravity, And we have this thing called gravity, which is pulling down, right? It's which is pulling down, right? It's which is pulling down, right? It's pulling down. It's a force that's pulling down. It's a force that's pulling down. It's a force that's literally pulling down. And you got literally pulling down. And you got literally pulling down. And you got these one-way vessels trying to pass these one-way vessels trying to pass these one-way vessels trying to pass lymph, which is fluid, but it's kind of lymph, which is fluid, but it's kind of lymph, which is fluid, but it's kind of a slightly viscous fluid up toward the a slightly viscous fluid up toward the a slightly viscous fluid up toward the heart. You also have lymphatic vessels heart. You also have lymphatic vessels heart. You also have lymphatic vessels in your hands, in your arms, and gravity in your hands, in your arms, and gravity in your hands, in your arms, and gravity is of course pulling down on the fluid is of course pulling down on the fluid is of course pulling down on the fluid within them as well and your brain etc. within them as well and your brain etc. within them as well and your brain etc. Now, here's a critical feature of the Now, here's a critical feature of the Now, here's a critical feature of the lymphatic system that is different from lymphatic system that is different from lymphatic system that is different from the cardiovascular system, which is the cardiovascular system, which is the cardiovascular system, which is there's no pump. In the cardiovascular there's no pump. In the cardiovascular there's no pump. In the cardiovascular system, you have a pump. You have a system, you have a pump. You have a system, you have a pump. You have a heart that can generate a lot of force heart that can generate a lot of force heart that can generate a lot of force to move that liquid out through the to move that liquid out through the to move that liquid out through the arteries and back through the veins. and arteries and back through the veins. and arteries and back through the veins. and you've got a lot of mechanical force you've got a lot of mechanical force you've got a lot of mechanical force coming from that heart. The lymphatic coming from that heart. The lymphatic coming from that heart. The lymphatic system doesn't have that at all on its system doesn't have that at all on its system doesn't have that at all on its own. It's a passive system, no pump, and own. It's a passive system, no pump, and own. It's a passive system, no pump, and it's fighting gravity all the time. So, it's fighting gravity all the time. So, it's fighting gravity all the time. So, how does lymph move through these how does lymph move through these how does lymph move through these lymphatic vessels? Nature came up with a lymphatic vessels? Nature came up with a lymphatic vessels? Nature came up with a brilliant solution. It's actually the brilliant solution. It's actually the brilliant solution. It's actually the movement of your body that creates the movement of your body that creates the movement of your body that creates the movement of lymph up through these movement of lymph up through these movement of lymph up through these vessels from the lower half of your body vessels from the lower half of your body vessels from the lower half of your body or down from the vessels in your upper or down from the vessels in your upper or down from the vessels in your upper part of your body or in from your arms part of your body or in from your arms part of your body or in from your arms and fingers toward the center of your and fingers toward the center of your and fingers toward the center of your body to eventually be returned back to body to eventually be returned back to body to eventually be returned back to the venus blood supply. the venus blood supply. the venus blood supply. This is really important to understand. This is really important to understand. This is really important to understand. The movement of your muscles, not The movement of your muscles, not The movement of your muscles, not necessarily resistance training, necessarily resistance training, necessarily resistance training, although that would contribute to it, although that would contribute to it, although that would contribute to it, but low-level muscular contractions of but low-level muscular contractions of but low-level muscular contractions of the sort that occur when you walk, when the sort that occur when you walk, when the sort that occur when you walk, when you stand up and sit down again, when you stand up and sit down again, when you stand up and sit down again, when you make little micro movements, but you make little micro movements, but you make little micro movements, but certainly the movement of the large certainly the movement of the large certainly the movement of the large musculature of your body in particular musculature of your body in particular musculature of your body in particular like your legs and your trunk and your like your legs and your trunk and your like your legs and your trunk and your arms. That's what's going to move this arms. That's what's going to move this arms. That's what's going to move this lymphatic fluid along because the lymphatic fluid along because the lymphatic fluid along because the lymphatic vessels can sit very lymphatic vessels can sit very lymphatic vessels can sit very superficially just underneath the skin superficially just underneath the skin superficially just underneath the skin right very close to the surface. right very close to the surface. right very close to the surface. The lymphatic system also has these you The lymphatic system also has these you The lymphatic system also has these you know small diameter things we call know small diameter things we call know small diameter things we call lymphatic capillaries but it has bigger lymphatic capillaries but it has bigger lymphatic capillaries but it has bigger diameter vessels within the deeper diameter vessels within the deeper diameter vessels within the deeper tissues closer to the muscle and tissues closer to the muscle and tissues closer to the muscle and intimately related to what's called the intimately related to what's called the intimately related to what's called the fascia. I know some of you have heard of fascia. I know some of you have heard of fascia. I know some of you have heard of the fascia, some of you perhaps have the fascia, some of you perhaps have the fascia, some of you perhaps have not. If you've ever prepared a steak and not. If you've ever prepared a steak and not. If you've ever prepared a steak and you saw there's kind of a not the you saw there's kind of a not the you saw there's kind of a not the fatty stuff, but the it's like a white fatty stuff, but the it's like a white fatty stuff, but the it's like a white fibrous sheet that you can almost peel fibrous sheet that you can almost peel fibrous sheet that you can almost peel off the meat. Your muscles are off the meat. Your muscles are off the meat. Your muscles are surrounded by fascia and those deep surrounded by fascia and those deep surrounded by fascia and those deep lymphatic vessels are closely tied to lymphatic vessels are closely tied to lymphatic vessels are closely tied to the fascia and to the muscular system so the fascia and to the muscular system so the fascia and to the muscular system so that when you move your body, walking or that when you move your body, walking or that when you move your body, walking or running, could be exercise, but even running, could be exercise, but even running, could be exercise, but even just everyday activities, that lymphatic just everyday activities, that lymphatic just everyday activities, that lymphatic fluid is being carried back up toward fluid is being carried back up toward fluid is being carried back up toward the heart to return and join the blood the heart to return and join the blood the heart to return and join the blood supply. So hopefully you're getting a supply. So hopefully you're getting a supply. So hopefully you're getting a sense of the organizational logic of the sense of the organizational logic of the sense of the organizational logic of the lymphatic system. Nature has co-opted lymphatic system. Nature has co-opted lymphatic system. Nature has co-opted movement as a way to move lymphatic movement as a way to move lymphatic movement as a way to move lymphatic fluid along and encourage lymphatic fluid along and encourage lymphatic fluid along and encourage lymphatic drainage. And you want lymphatic drainage. And you want lymphatic drainage. And you want lymphatic drainage. You want that fluid pulled out drainage. You want that fluid pulled out drainage. You want that fluid pulled out of the extracellular space into those of the extracellular space into those of the extracellular space into those vessels and then returned back to the vessels and then returned back to the vessels and then returned back to the heart. And as I mentioned before, a heart. And as I mentioned before, a heart. And as I mentioned before, a bunch of other great things happen along bunch of other great things happen along bunch of other great things happen along the way in terms of immune surveillance. the way in terms of immune surveillance. the way in terms of immune surveillance. So, if we're going to discuss protocols, So, if we're going to discuss protocols, So, if we're going to discuss protocols, one of the most important ways to one of the most important ways to one of the most important ways to encourage lymphatic drainage, which is a encourage lymphatic drainage, which is a encourage lymphatic drainage, which is a good thing, and to encourage the general good thing, and to encourage the general good thing, and to encourage the general health of your lymphatic system, because health of your lymphatic system, because health of your lymphatic system, because you don't want lymph sitting stagnant in you don't want lymph sitting stagnant in you don't want lymph sitting stagnant in those vessels, especially if it has those vessels, especially if it has those vessels, especially if it has contaminants within it is to make sure contaminants within it is to make sure contaminants within it is to make sure that you're moving enough each day. And that you're moving enough each day. And that you're moving enough each day. And we hear a lot these days about, you we hear a lot these days about, you we hear a lot these days about, you know, you need 10,000 steps a day or know, you need 10,000 steps a day or know, you need 10,000 steps a day or maybe it's just 7,000 or maybe it's maybe it's just 7,000 or maybe it's maybe it's just 7,000 or maybe it's 3,000. No one can really come up with a 3,000. No one can really come up with a 3,000. No one can really come up with a single answer because it depends on single answer because it depends on single answer because it depends on which system you're trying to create which system you're trying to create which system you're trying to create support for the cardiovascular system, support for the cardiovascular system, support for the cardiovascular system, the brain system. But I think a good the brain system. But I think a good the brain system. But I think a good number, a good thing to shoot for is at number, a good thing to shoot for is at number, a good thing to shoot for is at least 7,000 steps per day. You know, I least 7,000 steps per day. You know, I least 7,000 steps per day. You know, I happen to have some steps in my home. happen to have some steps in my home. happen to have some steps in my home. Not a lot of them, but I find that if Not a lot of them, but I find that if Not a lot of them, but I find that if I'm going up and down those stairs a lot I'm going up and down those stairs a lot I'm going up and down those stairs a lot per day, uh that's good and probably is per day, uh that's good and probably is per day, uh that's good and probably is a little different than if I was just a little different than if I was just a little different than if I was just walking on a flat surface. Sometimes walking on a flat surface. Sometimes walking on a flat surface. Sometimes I'll get out and get 12,000 steps in a I'll get out and get 12,000 steps in a I'll get out and get 12,000 steps in a day or if I'm visiting a new city and day or if I'm visiting a new city and day or if I'm visiting a new city and I'm walking a lot, 20,000 steps. But I I'm walking a lot, 20,000 steps. But I I'm walking a lot, 20,000 steps. But I really strive to get enough steps per really strive to get enough steps per really strive to get enough steps per day. And you will notice that if you day. And you will notice that if you day. And you will notice that if you don't get enough steps per day, your don't get enough steps per day, your don't get enough steps per day, your system, your body will feel kind of system, your body will feel kind of system, your body will feel kind of sluggish. If you're sitting a lot sluggish. If you're sitting a lot sluggish. If you're sitting a lot because of travel, you know, you should because of travel, you know, you should because of travel, you know, you should really strive to get as much movement in really strive to get as much movement in really strive to get as much movement in the airport as you can. Maybe ideally the airport as you can. Maybe ideally the airport as you can. Maybe ideally you take the stairs, you don't get on you take the stairs, you don't get on you take the stairs, you don't get on the conveyors. If you can manage to do the conveyors. If you can manage to do the conveyors. If you can manage to do that, getting a lot of steps will help that, getting a lot of steps will help that, getting a lot of steps will help your body feel less sore, less sluggish. your body feel less sore, less sluggish. your body feel less sore, less sluggish. And not all, but a fair amount of the And not all, but a fair amount of the And not all, but a fair amount of the sluggishness that we feel when we don't sluggishness that we feel when we don't sluggishness that we feel when we don't move around a lot. when inactivity leads move around a lot. when inactivity leads move around a lot. when inactivity leads us to feel less energy is the slow us to feel less energy is the slow us to feel less energy is the slow movement and the buildup of that movement and the buildup of that movement and the buildup of that lymphatic fluid. And keep in mind that lymphatic fluid. And keep in mind that lymphatic fluid. And keep in mind that lymphatic fluid isn't quote unquote bad, lymphatic fluid isn't quote unquote bad, lymphatic fluid isn't quote unquote bad, but it contains a lot of waste products but it contains a lot of waste products but it contains a lot of waste products that you do not want sitting around in that you do not want sitting around in that you do not want sitting around in the local tissues. And I'll underscore the local tissues. And I'll underscore the local tissues. And I'll underscore that later when we talk about lympadeema that later when we talk about lympadeema that later when we talk about lympadeema that occurs under conditions where that occurs under conditions where that occurs under conditions where somebody's being treated for say cancer somebody's being treated for say cancer somebody's being treated for say cancer and their lymph nodes and their lymph and their lymph nodes and their lymph and their lymph nodes and their lymph vessels are intentionally destroyed as a vessels are intentionally destroyed as a vessels are intentionally destroyed as a way to try and eradicate the cancers way to try and eradicate the cancers way to try and eradicate the cancers that have invaded the lymphatic system. that have invaded the lymphatic system. that have invaded the lymphatic system. When that happens, you get a lot of When that happens, you get a lot of When that happens, you get a lot of swelling of tissue. It can be painful. swelling of tissue. It can be painful. swelling of tissue. It can be painful. The tissue can become necrotic, The tissue can become necrotic, The tissue can become necrotic, infected, and inflamed. And it can lead infected, and inflamed. And it can lead infected, and inflamed. And it can lead to all sorts of local and systemic to all sorts of local and systemic to all sorts of local and systemic issues. And cosmetically, of course, um issues. And cosmetically, of course, um issues. And cosmetically, of course, um it's not good either. it's not good either. it's not good either. Movement, movement, movement is the way Movement, movement, movement is the way Movement, movement, movement is the way you're going to encourage lymphatic you're going to encourage lymphatic you're going to encourage lymphatic flow. Walking is one way to do it. Yes, flow. Walking is one way to do it. Yes, flow. Walking is one way to do it. Yes, cardiovascular exercise is excellent for cardiovascular exercise is excellent for cardiovascular exercise is excellent for that. And later, we'll talk a little bit that. And later, we'll talk a little bit that. And later, we'll talk a little bit about the specifics of how about the specifics of how about the specifics of how cardiovascular exercise benefits your cardiovascular exercise benefits your cardiovascular exercise benefits your heart. Little hint, it's through growth heart. Little hint, it's through growth heart. Little hint, it's through growth of lymphatic vessels. Did you know that of lymphatic vessels. Did you know that of lymphatic vessels. Did you know that much of the benefit of aerobic exercise much of the benefit of aerobic exercise much of the benefit of aerobic exercise for your heart is because of the way for your heart is because of the way for your heart is because of the way that exercise stimulates growth and that exercise stimulates growth and that exercise stimulates growth and health of lymphatic vessels, not heart health of lymphatic vessels, not heart health of lymphatic vessels, not heart cells directly. We'll get back to that. cells directly. We'll get back to that. cells directly. We'll get back to that. Walking is terrific. Cardiovascular Walking is terrific. Cardiovascular Walking is terrific. Cardiovascular exercise, you know, these days we are exercise, you know, these days we are exercise, you know, these days we are all told we need about 150 to 200 all told we need about 150 to 200 all told we need about 150 to 200 minutes of so-called zone 2 cardio. minutes of so-called zone 2 cardio. minutes of so-called zone 2 cardio. People debate whether or not it's better People debate whether or not it's better People debate whether or not it's better to do high-intensity interval training. to do high-intensity interval training. to do high-intensity interval training. Uh, look, I think it's all good. It's Uh, look, I think it's all good. It's Uh, look, I think it's all good. It's all excellent, but none of it really is all excellent, but none of it really is all excellent, but none of it really is a replacement for just as much movement a replacement for just as much movement a replacement for just as much movement during the day as possible. I work a during the day as possible. I work a during the day as possible. I work a desk job. I'm mainly researching podcast desk job. I'm mainly researching podcast desk job. I'm mainly researching podcast episodes or doing research. Back in the episodes or doing research. Back in the episodes or doing research. Back in the days when I was doing experiments in my days when I was doing experiments in my days when I was doing experiments in my lab, I was getting up and standing up lab, I was getting up and standing up lab, I was getting up and standing up and moving around a lot. I've noticed and moving around a lot. I've noticed and moving around a lot. I've noticed that with each passing year, I'm 50 now. that with each passing year, I'm 50 now. that with each passing year, I'm 50 now. With each passing year, I tend to move a With each passing year, I tend to move a With each passing year, I tend to move a lot less just spontaneously and as a lot less just spontaneously and as a lot less just spontaneously and as a requirement of my life. So, I do more requirement of my life. So, I do more requirement of my life. So, I do more exercise. But if you move a lot during exercise. But if you move a lot during exercise. But if you move a lot during your day, that's great. Vacuuming, your day, that's great. Vacuuming, your day, that's great. Vacuuming, cleaning, this is a great thing for your cleaning, this is a great thing for your cleaning, this is a great thing for your lymphatic system. Okay, this is also an lymphatic system. Okay, this is also an lymphatic system. Okay, this is also an appropriate time to talk about some of appropriate time to talk about some of appropriate time to talk about some of the quote unquote kind of goofy the quote unquote kind of goofy the quote unquote kind of goofy practices that you'll see out there. I'm practices that you'll see out there. I'm practices that you'll see out there. I'm not calling them goofy, but they can not calling them goofy, but they can not calling them goofy, but they can look a little odd where people, you look a little odd where people, you look a little odd where people, you know, are talking about like shaking know, are talking about like shaking know, are talking about like shaking their body or they're talking about their body or they're talking about their body or they're talking about jumping up and down or rebounding, jumping up and down or rebounding, jumping up and down or rebounding, jumping on a small trampoline. I jumping on a small trampoline. I jumping on a small trampoline. I confess, I own a small trampoline that I confess, I own a small trampoline that I confess, I own a small trampoline that I jump on in the morning. I just think jump on in the morning. I just think jump on in the morning. I just think it's fun and it turns out to be really it's fun and it turns out to be really it's fun and it turns out to be really good for your lymphatic system. As is good for your lymphatic system. As is good for your lymphatic system. As is treading water, excellent for your treading water, excellent for your treading water, excellent for your lymphatic system. Swimming excellent for lymphatic system. Swimming excellent for lymphatic system. Swimming excellent for your lymphatic system. There are great your lymphatic system. There are great your lymphatic system. There are great studies showing that. And you might say, studies showing that. And you might say, studies showing that. And you might say, "How is it that jumping up and down is "How is it that jumping up and down is "How is it that jumping up and down is moving lymphatic fluid up toward my moving lymphatic fluid up toward my moving lymphatic fluid up toward my heart because I'm jumping down? Wouldn't heart because I'm jumping down? Wouldn't heart because I'm jumping down? Wouldn't this be like stamping the fluid down this be like stamping the fluid down this be like stamping the fluid down toward gravity?" When I was a kid, we toward gravity?" When I was a kid, we toward gravity?" When I was a kid, we used to go to 7-Eleven and we'd get used to go to 7-Eleven and we'd get used to go to 7-Eleven and we'd get slurpies and we wanted to get as much slurpies and we wanted to get as much slurpies and we wanted to get as much slurpee in there as we could. And so we slurpee in there as we could. And so we slurpee in there as we could. And so we used to like bang the cups there and we used to like bang the cups there and we used to like bang the cups there and we used to get yelled at, "No, no slurpee used to get yelled at, "No, no slurpee used to get yelled at, "No, no slurpee stamping." And we were like, we would do stamping." And we were like, we would do stamping." And we were like, we would do it anyway. I don't drink slurpies it anyway. I don't drink slurpies it anyway. I don't drink slurpies anymore, but so no slurpee stamping. Um, anymore, but so no slurpee stamping. Um, anymore, but so no slurpee stamping. Um, but we were kind of pushing that ice and but we were kind of pushing that ice and but we were kind of pushing that ice and fluid down so we could get more in fluid down so we could get more in fluid down so we could get more in there. Why would rebounding, jumping on there. Why would rebounding, jumping on there. Why would rebounding, jumping on a small trampoline or, you know, even a small trampoline or, you know, even a small trampoline or, you know, even shaking or jumping at all, why would it shaking or jumping at all, why would it shaking or jumping at all, why would it bring the fluid up? Wouldn't it stamp it bring the fluid up? Wouldn't it stamp it bring the fluid up? Wouldn't it stamp it down? Ah, those lymphatic vessels are down? Ah, those lymphatic vessels are down? Ah, those lymphatic vessels are one-way vessels. So, as you shake the one-way vessels. So, as you shake the one-way vessels. So, as you shake the fluid, right, it's going up up. fluid, right, it's going up up. fluid, right, it's going up up. There's another way to really encourage There's another way to really encourage There's another way to really encourage a lot of lymphatic flow. And this will a lot of lymphatic flow. And this will a lot of lymphatic flow. And this will serve people cosmetically and just serve people cosmetically and just serve people cosmetically and just generally in terms of feeling of more generally in terms of feeling of more generally in terms of feeling of more energetic and kind of a lightness in energetic and kind of a lightness in energetic and kind of a lightness in your lower limbs. If you've ever felt a your lower limbs. If you've ever felt a your lower limbs. If you've ever felt a lot of heaviness in your lower limbs, lot of heaviness in your lower limbs, lot of heaviness in your lower limbs, there could be a variety of reasons for there could be a variety of reasons for there could be a variety of reasons for that. Could be related to something in that. Could be related to something in that. Could be related to something in your vascular system. Could be because your vascular system. Could be because your vascular system. Could be because you trained your legs too hard. Almost you trained your legs too hard. Almost you trained your legs too hard. Almost always some of that is due to not moving always some of that is due to not moving always some of that is due to not moving around enough and the buildup of around enough and the buildup of around enough and the buildup of lymphatic fluid in the interstitial lymphatic fluid in the interstitial lymphatic fluid in the interstitial space or within the lymphatic vessels space or within the lymphatic vessels space or within the lymphatic vessels themselves. One of the best documented themselves. One of the best documented themselves. One of the best documented ways to improve lymphatic flow to inc ways to improve lymphatic flow to inc ways to improve lymphatic flow to inc imp improve the rate and the extent of imp improve the rate and the extent of imp improve the rate and the extent of the lymphatic drainage is actually the lymphatic drainage is actually the lymphatic drainage is actually through breathing. When I first heard through breathing. When I first heard through breathing. When I first heard this, I thought, "Oh boy, we're now this, I thought, "Oh boy, we're now this, I thought, "Oh boy, we're now we're getting into breath work." My lab we're getting into breath work." My lab we're getting into breath work." My lab has studied breath work, aka respiration has studied breath work, aka respiration has studied breath work, aka respiration physiology, and it's known to be physiology, and it's known to be physiology, and it's known to be powerful, but you know, the domain of powerful, but you know, the domain of powerful, but you know, the domain of breath work oftentimes has naming of breath work oftentimes has naming of breath work oftentimes has naming of breath work practices and stuff that can breath work practices and stuff that can breath work practices and stuff that can start seeming a little counterculture start seeming a little counterculture start seeming a little counterculture new age woo biohacking, which is not my new age woo biohacking, which is not my new age woo biohacking, which is not my flavor. But get this, along the network flavor. But get this, along the network flavor. But get this, along the network of lymphatic vessels, some of those of lymphatic vessels, some of those of lymphatic vessels, some of those vessels are somewhat larger. And there's vessels are somewhat larger. And there's vessels are somewhat larger. And there's a particularly large compartment that a particularly large compartment that a particularly large compartment that sits within your abdomen called the sits within your abdomen called the sits within your abdomen called the cesterna kyyli. Okay, fancy name, but cesterna kyyli. Okay, fancy name, but cesterna kyyli. Okay, fancy name, but cesterna kyyli is an outpouching or a cesterna kyyli is an outpouching or a cesterna kyyli is an outpouching or a swelling of the vessels that contains a swelling of the vessels that contains a swelling of the vessels that contains a lot of lymph. And we haven't quite lot of lymph. And we haven't quite lot of lymph. And we haven't quite gotten to how lymphatic fluid gets back gotten to how lymphatic fluid gets back gotten to how lymphatic fluid gets back into the venus supply and joins up with into the venus supply and joins up with into the venus supply and joins up with the blood. etc. But the cesterna kyi is the blood. etc. But the cesterna kyi is the blood. etc. But the cesterna kyi is kind of like the sink or the kind of like the sink or the kind of like the sink or the drain for a lot of the lymphatic fluid drain for a lot of the lymphatic fluid drain for a lot of the lymphatic fluid that's made it back to your body but has that's made it back to your body but has that's made it back to your body but has not yet made it back to the blood supply not yet made it back to the blood supply not yet made it back to the blood supply hasn't cleared the lymphatic hasn't cleared the lymphatic hasn't cleared the lymphatic system yet. So it turns out one of the system yet. So it turns out one of the system yet. So it turns out one of the best ways to encourage the movement of best ways to encourage the movement of best ways to encourage the movement of lymph fluid that's already been checked lymph fluid that's already been checked lymph fluid that's already been checked out for infections etc and that's been out for infections etc and that's been out for infections etc and that's been taken out of the interstitial space to taken out of the interstitial space to taken out of the interstitial space to go back into your blood supply which is go back into your blood supply which is go back into your blood supply which is what you want is through what's called what you want is through what's called what you want is through what's called diaphragmatic breathing and the reason diaphragmatic breathing and the reason diaphragmatic breathing and the reason for this is that when you do for this is that when you do for this is that when you do diaphragmatic breathing I'll explain how diaphragmatic breathing I'll explain how diaphragmatic breathing I'll explain how to do that in a moment it's very simple to do that in a moment it's very simple to do that in a moment it's very simple the reason diaphragmatic breathing is so the reason diaphragmatic breathing is so the reason diaphragmatic breathing is so useful for encouraging lymph drainage useful for encouraging lymph drainage useful for encouraging lymph drainage and lymph flow is because when you do and lymph flow is because when you do and lymph flow is because when you do diaphragmatic breathing which is having diaphragmatic breathing which is having diaphragmatic breathing which is having your belly extend as you inhale. So you your belly extend as you inhale. So you your belly extend as you inhale. So you have this thing called the diaphragm have this thing called the diaphragm have this thing called the diaphragm which is a muscle inside your body and which is a muscle inside your body and which is a muscle inside your body and when you inhale the diaphragm moves down when you inhale the diaphragm moves down when you inhale the diaphragm moves down of course the lungs inflate and ideally of course the lungs inflate and ideally of course the lungs inflate and ideally your belly moves out a little bit right your belly moves out a little bit right your belly moves out a little bit right we generally tell people that it's not we generally tell people that it's not we generally tell people that it's not so good to breathe by lifting your chest so good to breathe by lifting your chest so good to breathe by lifting your chest and using your ribs although you can use and using your ribs although you can use and using your ribs although you can use the muscles between your ribs the muscles between your ribs the muscles between your ribs the intercostals and your ribs to breathe intercostals and your ribs to breathe intercostals and your ribs to breathe but you don't want to be breathing like but you don't want to be breathing like but you don't want to be breathing like this [snorts] this [snorts] this [snorts] [sighs and gasps] [sighs and gasps] [sighs and gasps] ideally diaphragmatic breathing is what ideally diaphragmatic breathing is what ideally diaphragmatic breathing is what you do most of the time unless you need you do most of the time unless you need you do most of the time unless you need to breathe much harder and you're to breathe much harder and you're to breathe much harder and you're inhaling and your belly is moving out inhaling and your belly is moving out inhaling and your belly is moving out Okay. When you inhale and your belly is Okay. When you inhale and your belly is Okay. When you inhale and your belly is moving out, you are certain that you're moving out, you are certain that you're moving out, you are certain that you're doing diaphragmatic breathing. doing diaphragmatic breathing. doing diaphragmatic breathing. Diaphragmatic breathing creates a Diaphragmatic breathing creates a Diaphragmatic breathing creates a pressure differential between this kyi pressure differential between this kyi pressure differential between this kyi right this reservoir of lymph and your right this reservoir of lymph and your right this reservoir of lymph and your blood supply which has a different blood supply which has a different blood supply which has a different pressure within it. And so if you do a pressure within it. And so if you do a pressure within it. And so if you do a few rounds of diaphragmatic breathing few rounds of diaphragmatic breathing few rounds of diaphragmatic breathing and when I say rounds I just mean a few and when I say rounds I just mean a few and when I say rounds I just mean a few breaths. So inhale [snorts] breaths. So inhale [snorts] breaths. So inhale [snorts] deeply and have your belly move out and deeply and have your belly move out and deeply and have your belly move out and then exhale. then exhale. then exhale. You're greatly encouraging the passage You're greatly encouraging the passage You're greatly encouraging the passage of lymph from the lymph vessels back of lymph from the lymph vessels back of lymph from the lymph vessels back into the blood supply. Okay? Doing this into the blood supply. Okay? Doing this into the blood supply. Okay? Doing this just two or three times when you wake up just two or three times when you wake up just two or three times when you wake up in the morning. Doing this two or three in the morning. Doing this two or three in the morning. Doing this two or three times in the afternoon or in the evening times in the afternoon or in the evening times in the afternoon or in the evening or really any time that you remember or really any time that you remember or really any time that you remember will really encourage lymphatic will really encourage lymphatic will really encourage lymphatic drainage. It will really encourage the drainage. It will really encourage the drainage. It will really encourage the movement of that lymph fluid. And this movement of that lymph fluid. And this movement of that lymph fluid. And this is especially important to do if you're is especially important to do if you're is especially important to do if you're stuck on a plane or behind a desk or you stuck on a plane or behind a desk or you stuck on a plane or behind a desk or you haven't had the opportunity to move haven't had the opportunity to move haven't had the opportunity to move quite as much as you would like because quite as much as you would like because quite as much as you would like because again the other way to move lymph fluid again the other way to move lymph fluid again the other way to move lymph fluid along is through low-level muscular along is through low-level muscular along is through low-level muscular contractions. But if you're trapped contractions. But if you're trapped contractions. But if you're trapped behind a desk or an airplane seat, you behind a desk or an airplane seat, you behind a desk or an airplane seat, you can't do that. So make it a point to do can't do that. So make it a point to do can't do that. So make it a point to do a few diaphragmatic breaths per day and a few diaphragmatic breaths per day and a few diaphragmatic breaths per day and you will greatly encourage the movement you will greatly encourage the movement you will greatly encourage the movement and drainage of lymphatic fluid. And it and drainage of lymphatic fluid. And it and drainage of lymphatic fluid. And it actually can make a cosmetic difference. actually can make a cosmetic difference. actually can make a cosmetic difference. It can actually make a real difference It can actually make a real difference It can actually make a real difference in terms of less swelling of your lower in terms of less swelling of your lower in terms of less swelling of your lower body tissues because as you clear the body tissues because as you clear the body tissues because as you clear the cesterna kyli, you allow the lymph cesterna kyli, you allow the lymph cesterna kyli, you allow the lymph coming up from your legs and from other coming up from your legs and from other coming up from your legs and from other locations to also move up, right? locations to also move up, right? locations to also move up, right? Because you're just creating room for it Because you're just creating room for it Because you're just creating room for it to move into those now empty tubes. So, to move into those now empty tubes. So, to move into those now empty tubes. So, while things like rebounding and turns while things like rebounding and turns while things like rebounding and turns out treading water in a pool or swimming out treading water in a pool or swimming out treading water in a pool or swimming in a pool is an excellent way to create in a pool is an excellent way to create in a pool is an excellent way to create lymphatic drainage, I mean, it's one of lymphatic drainage, I mean, it's one of lymphatic drainage, I mean, it's one of the best ways just because of the way the best ways just because of the way the best ways just because of the way that the physics of the water interacts that the physics of the water interacts that the physics of the water interacts with those superficial vessels of the with those superficial vessels of the with those superficial vessels of the skin. You know, as you swim, there's skin. You know, as you swim, there's skin. You know, as you swim, there's kind of a shearing along of the of the kind of a shearing along of the of the kind of a shearing along of the of the skin. You might not notice it unless you skin. You might not notice it unless you skin. You might not notice it unless you use a slow motion camera, but there's use a slow motion camera, but there's use a slow motion camera, but there's kind of a rippling of the of the skin kind of a rippling of the of the skin kind of a rippling of the of the skin and those lymphatic vessels that sit and those lymphatic vessels that sit and those lymphatic vessels that sit just below the skin. Those really just below the skin. Those really just below the skin. Those really tiny little capillaries, they're getting tiny little capillaries, they're getting tiny little capillaries, they're getting kind of squeezed along by the movement, kind of squeezed along by the movement, kind of squeezed along by the movement, that shearing of the skin along the top. that shearing of the skin along the top. that shearing of the skin along the top. So, swimming is great. It's sometimes So, swimming is great. It's sometimes So, swimming is great. It's sometimes hard to get access to a pool. A really hard to get access to a pool. A really hard to get access to a pool. A really fun way to do this as well is you can fun way to do this as well is you can fun way to do this as well is you can kind of go down to the bottom of the kind of go down to the bottom of the kind of go down to the bottom of the pool and then blast off the bottom, grab pool and then blast off the bottom, grab pool and then blast off the bottom, grab a gulp of air, go back down and blast up a gulp of air, go back down and blast up a gulp of air, go back down and blast up and grab a gulp of air. For those of you and grab a gulp of air. For those of you and grab a gulp of air. For those of you that have ever seen um Lear Hamilton, that have ever seen um Lear Hamilton, that have ever seen um Lear Hamilton, the great surfer, Lear Hamilton, and the great surfer, Lear Hamilton, and the great surfer, Lear Hamilton, and Gabby Reese, who's also great, his wife, Gabby Reese, who's also great, his wife, Gabby Reese, who's also great, his wife, they've developed tools and protocols they've developed tools and protocols they've developed tools and protocols for this called XPT. I don't have any for this called XPT. I don't have any for this called XPT. I don't have any formal affiliation with XPTt, but formal affiliation with XPTt, but formal affiliation with XPTt, but they've developed a whole set of they've developed a whole set of they've developed a whole set of workouts related to this for general workouts related to this for general workouts related to this for general health reasons, uh for athletic health reasons, uh for athletic health reasons, uh for athletic performance, and it will also improve performance, and it will also improve performance, and it will also improve lymphatic drainage and lymphatic drainage and lymphatic drainage and lymphatic passage up from the bottom of the body. passage up from the bottom of the body. passage up from the bottom of the body. And you can think about the physics of And you can think about the physics of And you can think about the physics of bouncing off the bottom of the pool, bouncing off the bottom of the pool, bouncing off the bottom of the pool, like doing a squat and then grabbing a like doing a squat and then grabbing a like doing a squat and then grabbing a gulp of air and going back down and up. gulp of air and going back down and up. gulp of air and going back down and up. That's almost perfect for what we're That's almost perfect for what we're That's almost perfect for what we're trying to accomplish when we talk about trying to accomplish when we talk about trying to accomplish when we talk about the movement of lymphatic uh fluid uh up the movement of lymphatic uh fluid uh up the movement of lymphatic uh fluid uh up and back toward the heart. But most and back toward the heart. But most and back toward the heart. But most people don't have access to a pool. So people don't have access to a pool. So people don't have access to a pool. So low-level muscul muscular contraction low-level muscul muscular contraction low-level muscul muscular contraction from walking, diaphragmatic breathing. from walking, diaphragmatic breathing. from walking, diaphragmatic breathing. If you want to get a rebounder, a little If you want to get a rebounder, a little If you want to get a rebounder, a little trampoline, they're kind of fun. I think trampoline, they're kind of fun. I think trampoline, they're kind of fun. I think they're fun anyway. Um hard to travel they're fun anyway. Um hard to travel they're fun anyway. Um hard to travel with. Uh if you ever see people uh doing with. Uh if you ever see people uh doing with. Uh if you ever see people uh doing taichi type movements uh in the park in taichi type movements uh in the park in taichi type movements uh in the park in the morning, oftentimes they'll also the morning, oftentimes they'll also the morning, oftentimes they'll also include some shaking and things like include some shaking and things like include some shaking and things like that might look a little goofy, but that might look a little goofy, but that might look a little goofy, but there's a clear structural there's a clear structural there's a clear structural functional basis for why that would functional basis for why that would functional basis for why that would actually work. And along those lines, if actually work. And along those lines, if actually work. And along those lines, if you ever were to look up lymphatic you ever were to look up lymphatic you ever were to look up lymphatic massage, either lymphatic massage or massage, either lymphatic massage or massage, either lymphatic massage or sometimes called manual lymphatic sometimes called manual lymphatic sometimes called manual lymphatic relief, it comes by different names. relief, it comes by different names. relief, it comes by different names. Keep in mind there are a lot of quality Keep in mind there are a lot of quality Keep in mind there are a lot of quality peer-reviewed studies exploring this peer-reviewed studies exploring this peer-reviewed studies exploring this mostly in the context of treating mostly in the context of treating mostly in the context of treating lympadeema, the clearance of lymphatic lympadeema, the clearance of lymphatic lympadeema, the clearance of lymphatic buildup under conditions of cancer. Lots buildup under conditions of cancer. Lots buildup under conditions of cancer. Lots and lots of peer-reviewed studies. I've and lots of peer-reviewed studies. I've and lots of peer-reviewed studies. I've linked to some of those in the show note linked to some of those in the show note linked to some of those in the show note captions which show over and over again captions which show over and over again captions which show over and over again this can be a very useful practice. this can be a very useful practice. this can be a very useful practice. There are also drugs that are being There are also drugs that are being There are also drugs that are being developed for clearing out of lymph developed for clearing out of lymph developed for clearing out of lymph fluid um so-called lympadeema. Actually fluid um so-called lympadeema. Actually fluid um so-called lympadeema. Actually a lab at Stanford School of Medicine is a lab at Stanford School of Medicine is a lab at Stanford School of Medicine is working hard. They've identified some of working hard. They've identified some of working hard. They've identified some of the molecular players that can help move the molecular players that can help move the molecular players that can help move lymph fluid out under conditions of lymph fluid out under conditions of lymph fluid out under conditions of lympadeema. I'll provide a link to an lympadeema. I'll provide a link to an lympadeema. I'll provide a link to an interesting discussion about that if interesting discussion about that if interesting discussion about that if you're if you're curious about it, if you're if you're curious about it, if you're if you're curious about it, if you know someone who's undergoing uh you know someone who's undergoing uh you know someone who's undergoing uh cancer treatment and suffering from cancer treatment and suffering from cancer treatment and suffering from lympadeema. But lymphatic massage is a very common But lymphatic massage is a very common But lymphatic massage is a very common medical practice. Couple things about medical practice. Couple things about medical practice. Couple things about lymphatic massage that you should know. lymphatic massage that you should know. lymphatic massage that you should know. I've had a lymphatic massage before and I've had a lymphatic massage before and I've had a lymphatic massage before and I was struck by how light the touch is. I was struck by how light the touch is. I was struck by how light the touch is. This is not a deep tissue massage. This is not a deep tissue massage. This is not a deep tissue massage. Lymphatic massage is intentionally Lymphatic massage is intentionally Lymphatic massage is intentionally rather light and sometimes we'll rather light and sometimes we'll rather light and sometimes we'll transition from kind of a uh kind of a transition from kind of a uh kind of a transition from kind of a uh kind of a pushing along of the skin. Uh for those pushing along of the skin. Uh for those pushing along of the skin. Uh for those of you that do this professionally, uh of you that do this professionally, uh of you that do this professionally, uh forgive my lack of specificity here. forgive my lack of specificity here. forgive my lack of specificity here. I'm going to make the point in a moment I'm going to make the point in a moment I'm going to make the point in a moment that the people who are skilled at doing that the people who are skilled at doing that the people who are skilled at doing this really need to be the ones doing this really need to be the ones doing this really need to be the ones doing this. You could do it too for yourself. this. You could do it too for yourself. this. You could do it too for yourself. Like if you wanted to do self- lymphatic Like if you wanted to do self- lymphatic Like if you wanted to do self- lymphatic massage, there are ways to do this. massage, there are ways to do this. massage, there are ways to do this. There's instructions online and it There's instructions online and it There's instructions online and it generally goes from, you know, people generally goes from, you know, people generally goes from, you know, people rubbing their skin fairly gently. rubbing their skin fairly gently. rubbing their skin fairly gently. People are always encouraged to do this People are always encouraged to do this People are always encouraged to do this more gently than they think they have to more gently than they think they have to more gently than they think they have to then usually there's some slapping or to then usually there's some slapping or to then usually there's some slapping or tapping, which seems kind of odd to tapping, which seems kind of odd to tapping, which seems kind of odd to those of us that aren't familiar with those of us that aren't familiar with those of us that aren't familiar with this, but it all makes perfect sense this, but it all makes perfect sense this, but it all makes perfect sense given that those lymphatic capillaries given that those lymphatic capillaries given that those lymphatic capillaries are so small diameter. You don't want to are so small diameter. You don't want to are so small diameter. You don't want to be pushing hard on the surface of the be pushing hard on the surface of the be pushing hard on the surface of the skin because those lymphatic capillaries skin because those lymphatic capillaries skin because those lymphatic capillaries will collapse or in some cases rupture. will collapse or in some cases rupture. will collapse or in some cases rupture. And so deep tissue massage is kind of And so deep tissue massage is kind of And so deep tissue massage is kind of the opposite of what we're talking about the opposite of what we're talking about the opposite of what we're talking about when we talk about lymphatic massage, when we talk about lymphatic massage, when we talk about lymphatic massage, which is also why when people talk which is also why when people talk which is also why when people talk about, you know, gouacha or a jade about, you know, gouacha or a jade about, you know, gouacha or a jade roller, it seems kind of woo, but the roller, it seems kind of woo, but the roller, it seems kind of woo, but the whole point is that you're applying whole point is that you're applying whole point is that you're applying gentle pressure. And I think it's really gentle pressure. And I think it's really gentle pressure. And I think it's really important to point out that there's a important to point out that there's a important to point out that there's a lot of discrepancy out there in terms of lot of discrepancy out there in terms of lot of discrepancy out there in terms of the direction and places to start and the direction and places to start and the direction and places to start and finish when doing lymphatic massage. And finish when doing lymphatic massage. And finish when doing lymphatic massage. And we'll talk about that in a little bit. we'll talk about that in a little bit. we'll talk about that in a little bit. This is actually crucial because you This is actually crucial because you This is actually crucial because you really don't want to be um squeezing or really don't want to be um squeezing or really don't want to be um squeezing or pushing on the lymphatic nodes pushing on the lymphatic nodes pushing on the lymphatic nodes especially because they often contain especially because they often contain especially because they often contain infections that are being battled there, infections that are being battled there, infections that are being battled there, right? So massaging your lymph nodes right? So massaging your lymph nodes right? So massaging your lymph nodes directly should be left to professionals directly should be left to professionals directly should be left to professionals and in many cases those professionals and in many cases those professionals and in many cases those professionals told me it's not generally a good idea, told me it's not generally a good idea, told me it's not generally a good idea, right? Because within those lymph nodes right? Because within those lymph nodes right? Because within those lymph nodes is where you've got the battle between is where you've got the battle between is where you've got the battle between infections and bacteria and things that infections and bacteria and things that infections and bacteria and things that just need to be cleared by your immune just need to be cleared by your immune just need to be cleared by your immune system. We're talking about massaging system. We're talking about massaging system. We're talking about massaging the lymphatic vessels. So, we've talked the lymphatic vessels. So, we've talked the lymphatic vessels. So, we've talked about a couple practices for improving about a couple practices for improving about a couple practices for improving lymphatic drainage. We've talked about lymphatic drainage. We've talked about lymphatic drainage. We've talked about some of the practices that might seem some of the practices that might seem some of the practices that might seem odd when you first encounter them, but odd when you first encounter them, but odd when you first encounter them, but they make perfect sense when you they make perfect sense when you they make perfect sense when you understand the structure function of the understand the structure function of the understand the structure function of the lymphatic system. I want to talk a lymphatic system. I want to talk a lymphatic system. I want to talk a little bit more about how the lymphatic little bit more about how the lymphatic little bit more about how the lymphatic system is organized so that you can system is organized so that you can system is organized so that you can leverage any practices including the leverage any practices including the leverage any practices including the ones I talked about and some that I'm ones I talked about and some that I'm ones I talked about and some that I'm going to talk about more in a few going to talk about more in a few going to talk about more in a few minutes in order to get drainage of minutes in order to get drainage of minutes in order to get drainage of lymphatic buildup in the areas of your lymphatic buildup in the areas of your lymphatic buildup in the areas of your body andor face that you want and need. body andor face that you want and need. body andor face that you want and need. We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Okay, so now you have a picture of your Okay, so now you have a picture of your Okay, so now you have a picture of your lymphatic system, right? It's a bunch of lymphatic system, right? It's a bunch of lymphatic system, right? It's a bunch of vessels, tubes that are collecting this vessels, tubes that are collecting this vessels, tubes that are collecting this fluid and all the waste products within fluid and all the waste products within fluid and all the waste products within them, headed back toward the heart to them, headed back toward the heart to them, headed back toward the heart to get that stuff back in with the venus get that stuff back in with the venus get that stuff back in with the venus blood supply so it can be reoxygenated. blood supply so it can be reoxygenated. blood supply so it can be reoxygenated. There are a couple of really important There are a couple of really important There are a couple of really important features to how it gets back to the features to how it gets back to the features to how it gets back to the blood that if you understand you will be blood that if you understand you will be blood that if you understand you will be able to facilitate your own lymphatic able to facilitate your own lymphatic able to facilitate your own lymphatic health and as a consequence general health and as a consequence general health and as a consequence general health. If you've ever seen anything about the If you've ever seen anything about the If you've ever seen anything about the lymphatic system or lymphatic drainage lymphatic system or lymphatic drainage lymphatic system or lymphatic drainage or massage or anything related to or massage or anything related to or massage or anything related to lymphatics as they're called this lymphatics as they're called this lymphatics as they're called this region, in fact I've been pointing to region, in fact I've been pointing to region, in fact I've been pointing to this region throughout today's episode. this region throughout today's episode. this region throughout today's episode. For those of you just listening, I'm For those of you just listening, I'm For those of you just listening, I'm pointing to my clavicle region, to my pointing to my clavicle region, to my pointing to my clavicle region, to my upper chest and where the neck meets the upper chest and where the neck meets the upper chest and where the neck meets the chest in particular. chest in particular. chest in particular. This area is extremely important because This area is extremely important because This area is extremely important because it's the area where lymph fluid is it's the area where lymph fluid is it's the area where lymph fluid is returned to join up with the blood returned to join up with the blood returned to join up with the blood supply. Remember that fluid started off supply. Remember that fluid started off supply. Remember that fluid started off in the blood supply. It got out into the in the blood supply. It got out into the in the blood supply. It got out into the interstitial space. It could have but interstitial space. It could have but interstitial space. It could have but didn't rejoin the blood supply out in didn't rejoin the blood supply out in didn't rejoin the blood supply out in the tissues. The lymphatic vessels the tissues. The lymphatic vessels the tissues. The lymphatic vessels grabbed it. maybe way down in your feet, grabbed it. maybe way down in your feet, grabbed it. maybe way down in your feet, maybe in your liver, maybe in your maybe in your liver, maybe in your maybe in your liver, maybe in your spleen, maybe in your brain. And now spleen, maybe in your brain. And now spleen, maybe in your brain. And now it's got to get back in with the blood. it's got to get back in with the blood. it's got to get back in with the blood. How does that happen? Well, you have two How does that happen? Well, you have two How does that happen? Well, you have two ducts, okay? Two tubes. I biology, we ducts, okay? Two tubes. I biology, we ducts, okay? Two tubes. I biology, we got so many names for tubes. got so many names for tubes. got so many names for tubes. You have two ducts. You have the right You have two ducts. You have the right You have two ducts. You have the right lymphatic duct, which is on the right, lymphatic duct, which is on the right, lymphatic duct, which is on the right, and you have the left lymphatic duct, and you have the left lymphatic duct, and you have the left lymphatic duct, which is the thoracic lymphatic duct on which is the thoracic lymphatic duct on which is the thoracic lymphatic duct on the left. Okay, here's the deal. If you the left. Okay, here's the deal. If you the left. Okay, here's the deal. If you were to draw a line right down the were to draw a line right down the were to draw a line right down the middle of your face or so and out middle of your face or so and out middle of your face or so and out towards your shoulder and below it on towards your shoulder and below it on towards your shoulder and below it on the right, maybe a little bit of torso the right, maybe a little bit of torso the right, maybe a little bit of torso and your right arm, and your right arm, and your right arm, that right side of your face, your right that right side of your face, your right that right side of your face, your right arm, your right shoulder, kind of upper arm, your right shoulder, kind of upper arm, your right shoulder, kind of upper part of your torso on the right hand part of your torso on the right hand part of your torso on the right hand side, that's all going to drain to the side, that's all going to drain to the side, that's all going to drain to the right side, that right thoracic duct. right side, that right thoracic duct. right side, that right thoracic duct. And that right thoracic duct is going to And that right thoracic duct is going to And that right thoracic duct is going to take all the lymph fluid and it's going take all the lymph fluid and it's going take all the lymph fluid and it's going to dump it back into the venus blood to dump it back into the venus blood to dump it back into the venus blood supply. It's literally going to join up supply. It's literally going to join up supply. It's literally going to join up with there. There's a not so little with there. There's a not so little with there. There's a not so little actually uh vascular tube delivering actually uh vascular tube delivering actually uh vascular tube delivering that deoxxygenated blood back to the that deoxxygenated blood back to the that deoxxygenated blood back to the heart and the lymph is going to dump heart and the lymph is going to dump heart and the lymph is going to dump into there. Okay. the rest of your body, into there. Okay. the rest of your body, into there. Okay. the rest of your body, both your left and right feet, left and both your left and right feet, left and both your left and right feet, left and right legs, the torso, that's everything right legs, the torso, that's everything right legs, the torso, that's everything I didn't describe for the right thoracic I didn't describe for the right thoracic I didn't describe for the right thoracic duct, left arm, shoulder, all of that. duct, left arm, shoulder, all of that. duct, left arm, shoulder, all of that. That's all going to drain to the left That's all going to drain to the left That's all going to drain to the left thoracic duct. It's actually just called thoracic duct. It's actually just called thoracic duct. It's actually just called the thoracic duct, and it's going to the thoracic duct, and it's going to the thoracic duct, and it's going to join up with the vein of supply there. join up with the vein of supply there. join up with the vein of supply there. The veins that the lymphatic system feed The veins that the lymphatic system feed The veins that the lymphatic system feed into before all of that gets back to the into before all of that gets back to the into before all of that gets back to the heart are called the subclavian veins. heart are called the subclavian veins. heart are called the subclavian veins. Okay? You have one on your right and you Okay? You have one on your right and you Okay? You have one on your right and you have one on your left. And as the name have one on your left. And as the name have one on your left. And as the name suggests, they sort of sit below sub suggests, they sort of sit below sub suggests, they sort of sit below sub clavicles. Okay? So you have your clavicles. Okay? So you have your clavicles. Okay? So you have your clavicles, which are, you know, your clavicles, which are, you know, your clavicles, which are, you know, your collar bones sometimes people call them. collar bones sometimes people call them. collar bones sometimes people call them. And below those are these vessels that And below those are these vessels that And below those are these vessels that feed back to the heart with feed back to the heart with feed back to the heart with deoxxygenated blood and a bunch of other deoxxygenated blood and a bunch of other deoxxygenated blood and a bunch of other stuff that needs dealing with by your stuff that needs dealing with by your stuff that needs dealing with by your cardiovascular system. The lymphatic cardiovascular system. The lymphatic cardiovascular system. The lymphatic drainage into these subclavian veins is drainage into these subclavian veins is drainage into these subclavian veins is a major drainage site. So these are big a major drainage site. So these are big a major drainage site. So these are big tubes dropping lymphatic fluid into big tubes dropping lymphatic fluid into big tubes dropping lymphatic fluid into big tubes. So this is the end point of the tubes. So this is the end point of the tubes. So this is the end point of the lymphatic system. Remember it's a lymphatic system. Remember it's a lymphatic system. Remember it's a one-way system. Up from your legs, out one-way system. Up from your legs, out one-way system. Up from your legs, out and in from your arms, up through the and in from your arms, up through the and in from your arms, up through the cestern kyite, and then dumping all that cestern kyite, and then dumping all that cestern kyite, and then dumping all that lymphatic fluid back into your blood lymphatic fluid back into your blood lymphatic fluid back into your blood supply. This is why in most practices supply. This is why in most practices supply. This is why in most practices that encourage lymphatic flow or what's that encourage lymphatic flow or what's that encourage lymphatic flow or what's often talked about lymphatic massage, often talked about lymphatic massage, often talked about lymphatic massage, whether or not it's for lympadeema or whether or not it's for lympadeema or whether or not it's for lympadeema or whether or not it's for cosmetic whether or not it's for cosmetic whether or not it's for cosmetic purposes, very often you hear about purposes, very often you hear about purposes, very often you hear about people encouraging some light rubbing people encouraging some light rubbing people encouraging some light rubbing first followed by some gentle tapping first followed by some gentle tapping first followed by some gentle tapping and maybe even eventually some harder and maybe even eventually some harder and maybe even eventually some harder slapping of the region around the slapping of the region around the slapping of the region around the clavicles. very important that you start with light very important that you start with light very important that you start with light touch and move up towards a more touch and move up towards a more touch and move up towards a more forceful touch. Although never forceful touch. Although never forceful touch. Although never particularly forceful because you don't particularly forceful because you don't particularly forceful because you don't want to collapse those lymphatic want to collapse those lymphatic want to collapse those lymphatic vessels. They're very small. You don't vessels. They're very small. You don't vessels. They're very small. You don't want to crush them. You don't want to want to crush them. You don't want to want to crush them. You don't want to pinch them because then the lymphatic pinch them because then the lymphatic pinch them because then the lymphatic fluid won't move through them. So fluid won't move through them. So fluid won't move through them. So there's kind of this progression from there's kind of this progression from there's kind of this progression from lighter touch and kind of gentle rubbing lighter touch and kind of gentle rubbing lighter touch and kind of gentle rubbing or shearing of the skin, very light or shearing of the skin, very light or shearing of the skin, very light to maybe some light tapping to encourage to maybe some light tapping to encourage to maybe some light tapping to encourage movement of the fluid along and then movement of the fluid along and then movement of the fluid along and then maybe um some slightly more vigorous, maybe um some slightly more vigorous, maybe um some slightly more vigorous, it's not really slapping, but kind of it's not really slapping, but kind of it's not really slapping, but kind of like a padding of the skin. That's it. like a padding of the skin. That's it. like a padding of the skin. That's it. a padding of the skin. Almost always a padding of the skin. Almost always a padding of the skin. Almost always that's somewhere in a lymphatic massage that's somewhere in a lymphatic massage that's somewhere in a lymphatic massage protocol. Whether the protocol is for protocol. Whether the protocol is for protocol. Whether the protocol is for lympadeema under conditions of you know lympadeema under conditions of you know lympadeema under conditions of you know cancer treatment or it's for purely cancer treatment or it's for purely cancer treatment or it's for purely cosmetic purposes almost always there's cosmetic purposes almost always there's cosmetic purposes almost always there's an encouragement of movement of an encouragement of movement of an encouragement of movement of lymphatic fluid from that kyi as well lymphatic fluid from that kyi as well lymphatic fluid from that kyi as well because again that's a major reservoir because again that's a major reservoir because again that's a major reservoir just below uh where the lymphatic system just below uh where the lymphatic system just below uh where the lymphatic system is going to drain back into the blood is going to drain back into the blood is going to drain back into the blood supply. People debate where to start supply. People debate where to start supply. People debate where to start these lymphatic massages. This is a these lymphatic massages. This is a these lymphatic massages. This is a whole field and frankly I found whole field and frankly I found whole field and frankly I found differing opinions on this. Some people differing opinions on this. Some people differing opinions on this. Some people say well you have to start um you know say well you have to start um you know say well you have to start um you know at the distal limbs meaning out towards at the distal limbs meaning out towards at the distal limbs meaning out towards the hands and fingers move things in. the hands and fingers move things in. the hands and fingers move things in. Other people say well no you actually Other people say well no you actually Other people say well no you actually want to push down to the legs then up want to push down to the legs then up want to push down to the legs then up through the legs. There's a lot of um through the legs. There's a lot of um through the legs. There's a lot of um debate here. I think if you look at the debate here. I think if you look at the debate here. I think if you look at the mechanics of the lymphatic system a mechanics of the lymphatic system a mechanics of the lymphatic system a couple of things become clear. You don't couple of things become clear. You don't couple of things become clear. You don't want to use firm pressure. This is not want to use firm pressure. This is not want to use firm pressure. This is not deep tissue massage. At some point in deep tissue massage. At some point in deep tissue massage. At some point in the protocol, you're going to want to the protocol, you're going to want to the protocol, you're going to want to include some encouragement of drainage include some encouragement of drainage include some encouragement of drainage from the clavicle reasons for all the from the clavicle reasons for all the from the clavicle reasons for all the reasons to be discussed and from the reasons to be discussed and from the reasons to be discussed and from the sternoc kyi. And then in terms of the sternoc kyi. And then in terms of the sternoc kyi. And then in terms of the lower legs and the legs and the arms, lower legs and the legs and the arms, lower legs and the legs and the arms, the out to in uh progression makes the out to in uh progression makes the out to in uh progression makes perfect sense. How you order those perfect sense. How you order those perfect sense. How you order those differs depending on the practitioner differs depending on the practitioner differs depending on the practitioner and indeed even in different research and indeed even in different research and indeed even in different research papers they use different uh approaches. papers they use different uh approaches. papers they use different uh approaches. I'm not so sure that it matters. What I'm not so sure that it matters. What I'm not so sure that it matters. What does seem to be very important is that does seem to be very important is that does seem to be very important is that you're not impinging or pushing hard on you're not impinging or pushing hard on you're not impinging or pushing hard on the lymph nodes because you want lymph the lymph nodes because you want lymph the lymph nodes because you want lymph fluid in the lymph nodes for a certain fluid in the lymph nodes for a certain fluid in the lymph nodes for a certain period of time so that your immune period of time so that your immune period of time so that your immune system can surveil that lymph fluid and system can surveil that lymph fluid and system can surveil that lymph fluid and decide whether or not there are indeed decide whether or not there are indeed decide whether or not there are indeed any bacterial or viral infections or any bacterial or viral infections or any bacterial or viral infections or other contaminants that need to be dealt other contaminants that need to be dealt other contaminants that need to be dealt with by the immune system. Let's take a with by the immune system. Let's take a with by the immune system. Let's take a couple of minutes and talk about the couple of minutes and talk about the couple of minutes and talk about the immune functions of the lymphatic immune functions of the lymphatic immune functions of the lymphatic system. Now, for most people, when they system. Now, for most people, when they system. Now, for most people, when they think about the lymphatic system, they think about the lymphatic system, they think about the lymphatic system, they think about the immune system. And think about the immune system. And think about the immune system. And that's because most anyone who's ever that's because most anyone who's ever that's because most anyone who's ever had a cold or some other virus has had a cold or some other virus has had a cold or some other virus has had the experience of having their lymph the experience of having their lymph the experience of having their lymph nodes feel kind of swollen and maybe nodes feel kind of swollen and maybe nodes feel kind of swollen and maybe even a little bit painful. Typically, even a little bit painful. Typically, even a little bit painful. Typically, that occurs in the throat or the that occurs in the throat or the that occurs in the throat or the area right below the jaw. If you go to area right below the jaw. If you go to area right below the jaw. If you go to the doctor, you say you're not feeling the doctor, you say you're not feeling the doctor, you say you're not feeling well, one of the first things they're well, one of the first things they're well, one of the first things they're going to do is they're going to kind of going to do is they're going to kind of going to do is they're going to kind of palpate gently and uh touch gently palpate gently and uh touch gently palpate gently and uh touch gently behind your ears, along your jawline, behind your ears, along your jawline, behind your ears, along your jawline, along your throat. They're going to do along your throat. They're going to do along your throat. They're going to do this. They might ask you if you have any this. They might ask you if you have any this. They might ask you if you have any swollen lymph nodes in your armpits or swollen lymph nodes in your armpits or swollen lymph nodes in your armpits or in your groin. You may even be able to in your groin. You may even be able to in your groin. You may even be able to sense that swelling yourself. And what sense that swelling yourself. And what sense that swelling yourself. And what that swelling reflects is the that swelling reflects is the that swelling reflects is the accumulation of lymph fluid in so-called accumulation of lymph fluid in so-called accumulation of lymph fluid in so-called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are these lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are these lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are these outpouchings or swellings along the outpouchings or swellings along the outpouchings or swellings along the lymph vessels where lymph fluid and the lymph vessels where lymph fluid and the lymph vessels where lymph fluid and the stuff within lymph fluid is sequestered. stuff within lymph fluid is sequestered. stuff within lymph fluid is sequestered. So, it's kept there for a while as So, it's kept there for a while as So, it's kept there for a while as opposed to just passing along through opposed to just passing along through opposed to just passing along through those one-way tubes and it is surveiled those one-way tubes and it is surveiled those one-way tubes and it is surveiled by the immune system. Why and how is it by the immune system. Why and how is it by the immune system. Why and how is it surveiled by the immune system? Well, surveiled by the immune system? Well, surveiled by the immune system? Well, first of all, remember when your cells first of all, remember when your cells first of all, remember when your cells are active, your liver cells, your brain are active, your liver cells, your brain are active, your liver cells, your brain cells, your muscle cells by doing the cells, your muscle cells by doing the cells, your muscle cells by doing the things they do, they use nutrients and things they do, they use nutrients and things they do, they use nutrients and energy, glucose, they use oxygen, they energy, glucose, they use oxygen, they energy, glucose, they use oxygen, they use amino acids, they rely on hormones use amino acids, they rely on hormones use amino acids, they rely on hormones and all that stuff. And they generate and all that stuff. And they generate and all that stuff. And they generate waste. They generate waste products in waste. They generate waste products in waste. They generate waste products in the form of little bits of cellular the form of little bits of cellular the form of little bits of cellular debris. They generate ammonia. Uh debris. They generate ammonia. Uh debris. They generate ammonia. Uh there's carbon dioxide. We listed off there's carbon dioxide. We listed off there's carbon dioxide. We listed off some of these earlier, but keep in mind some of these earlier, but keep in mind some of these earlier, but keep in mind that those cells are fed by the blood that those cells are fed by the blood that those cells are fed by the blood supply and stuff gets into the blood supply and stuff gets into the blood supply and stuff gets into the blood supply by way of what you breathe. Okay? supply by way of what you breathe. Okay? supply by way of what you breathe. Okay? So, you can inhale a virus, for So, you can inhale a virus, for So, you can inhale a virus, for instance, bacteria that could be in instance, bacteria that could be in instance, bacteria that could be in food, bacteria from things that you food, bacteria from things that you food, bacteria from things that you touch that somehow gets um beneath the touch that somehow gets um beneath the touch that somehow gets um beneath the skin and into your blood supply through skin and into your blood supply through skin and into your blood supply through a scratch or a cut, maybe a bite, these a scratch or a cut, maybe a bite, these a scratch or a cut, maybe a bite, these sorts of things. Or you, you know, maybe sorts of things. Or you, you know, maybe sorts of things. Or you, you know, maybe you cut yourself with a with a knife you cut yourself with a with a knife you cut yourself with a with a knife that had some bacteria gets into your that had some bacteria gets into your that had some bacteria gets into your blood supply. And so you have foreign blood supply. And so you have foreign blood supply. And so you have foreign bodies, contaminants within your blood bodies, contaminants within your blood bodies, contaminants within your blood supply. Some of that is going to get out supply. Some of that is going to get out supply. Some of that is going to get out into the interstatial space. Some of into the interstatial space. Some of into the interstatial space. Some of that will be taken up by the lymphatic that will be taken up by the lymphatic that will be taken up by the lymphatic system. You also have things again waste system. You also have things again waste system. You also have things again waste products that are being generated by the products that are being generated by the products that are being generated by the cells of your body. And the lymph nodes cells of your body. And the lymph nodes cells of your body. And the lymph nodes are the place where all that stuff can are the place where all that stuff can are the place where all that stuff can be surveiled by the immune system. What be surveiled by the immune system. What be surveiled by the immune system. What do I mean surveiled by the immune do I mean surveiled by the immune do I mean surveiled by the immune system? Well, within the lymph node, you system? Well, within the lymph node, you system? Well, within the lymph node, you have immune cells. You have things like have immune cells. You have things like have immune cells. You have things like T-C cells and B cells. So named because T-C cells and B cells. So named because T-C cells and B cells. So named because the T- cells mature in the thymus, which the T- cells mature in the thymus, which the T- cells mature in the thymus, which is a structure that is very prominent is a structure that is very prominent is a structure that is very prominent when you're young as a as a baby and as when you're young as a as a baby and as when you're young as a as a baby and as a kid and then over time you actually a kid and then over time you actually a kid and then over time you actually lose your thymic tissue as you become an lose your thymic tissue as you become an lose your thymic tissue as you become an adult and by the time you reach kind of adult and by the time you reach kind of adult and by the time you reach kind of 40s and 50s and 60s7s you may not even 40s and 50s and 60s7s you may not even 40s and 50s and 60s7s you may not even have any thymic tissue whatsoever. You have any thymic tissue whatsoever. You have any thymic tissue whatsoever. You have T-C cells, you have B cells which have T-C cells, you have B cells which have T-C cells, you have B cells which come from the bone marrow. These are come from the bone marrow. These are come from the bone marrow. These are different types of lymphosytes, different types of lymphosytes, different types of lymphosytes, different types of white blood cells. different types of white blood cells. different types of white blood cells. Again, these are all different Again, these are all different Again, these are all different categories. So, I'm talking about categories. So, I'm talking about categories. So, I'm talking about lymphosytes, white blood cells, T- lymphosytes, white blood cells, T- lymphosytes, white blood cells, T- cells, and B cells, different cells, and B cells, different cells, and B cells, different subcategories that go into the lymph nodes and then that go into the lymph nodes and then that go into the lymph nodes and then check out and see whether or not there check out and see whether or not there check out and see whether or not there are bacteria and viruses and other kinds are bacteria and viruses and other kinds are bacteria and viruses and other kinds of foreign invaders that might need to of foreign invaders that might need to of foreign invaders that might need to be dealt with by the immune system. be dealt with by the immune system. be dealt with by the immune system. In addition to that, you have cells that In addition to that, you have cells that In addition to that, you have cells that go out into your body, things like go out into your body, things like go out into your body, things like macrofasages, things like dendritic macrofasages, things like dendritic macrofasages, things like dendritic cells, okay, the names don't matter so cells, okay, the names don't matter so cells, okay, the names don't matter so much, that are looking for foreign much, that are looking for foreign much, that are looking for foreign invaders. Again, it could be viruses, invaders. Again, it could be viruses, invaders. Again, it could be viruses, bacteria, funguses, could be even just, bacteria, funguses, could be even just, bacteria, funguses, could be even just, you know, physical bodies that somehow you know, physical bodies that somehow you know, physical bodies that somehow made it into your system one way or the made it into your system one way or the made it into your system one way or the other. And they will literally present other. And they will literally present other. And they will literally present things to the T- cells and B cells and things to the T- cells and B cells and things to the T- cells and B cells and other immune cells within the lymph other immune cells within the lymph other immune cells within the lymph nodes so that the T- cells and B cells nodes so that the T- cells and B cells nodes so that the T- cells and B cells can generate through a process. This is can generate through a process. This is can generate through a process. This is takes some time to generate antibodies takes some time to generate antibodies takes some time to generate antibodies to fight those things off. Okay, I've to fight those things off. Okay, I've to fight those things off. Okay, I've talked about the immune system in talked about the immune system in talked about the immune system in previous episodes. You have an innate previous episodes. You have an innate previous episodes. You have an innate immune system which is a kind of generic immune system which is a kind of generic immune system which is a kind of generic response to all forms of foreign response to all forms of foreign response to all forms of foreign invaders that causes some local invaders that causes some local invaders that causes some local inflammation, some swelling, sometimes inflammation, some swelling, sometimes inflammation, some swelling, sometimes some symptomology uh in response to a some symptomology uh in response to a some symptomology uh in response to a virus that's just very generic like virus that's just very generic like virus that's just very generic like feeling stuffy, lethargic, uh you know, feeling stuffy, lethargic, uh you know, feeling stuffy, lethargic, uh you know, a little bit of a headache or a stomach a little bit of a headache or a stomach a little bit of a headache or a stomach ache, this kind of thing. And then you ache, this kind of thing. And then you ache, this kind of thing. And then you have your adaptive immune system which have your adaptive immune system which have your adaptive immune system which recognizes the specific surface of recognizes the specific surface of recognizes the specific surface of foreign invaders and generates foreign invaders and generates foreign invaders and generates antibodies to essentially bind that antibodies to essentially bind that antibodies to essentially bind that specific surface and its properties and specific surface and its properties and specific surface and its properties and neutralize that foreign invader. So neutralize that foreign invader. So neutralize that foreign invader. So innate immune system and adaptive immune innate immune system and adaptive immune innate immune system and adaptive immune system within your lymph nodes. You system within your lymph nodes. You system within your lymph nodes. You basically have a confluence of a lot of basically have a confluence of a lot of basically have a confluence of a lot of different immune cell types evaluating different immune cell types evaluating different immune cell types evaluating what's coming through in the lymph fluid what's coming through in the lymph fluid what's coming through in the lymph fluid which reflects of course what's in the which reflects of course what's in the which reflects of course what's in the blood because remember the blood supply blood because remember the blood supply blood because remember the blood supply is giving oxygen and nutrients and other is giving oxygen and nutrients and other is giving oxygen and nutrients and other things to your cells. A lot of the fluid things to your cells. A lot of the fluid things to your cells. A lot of the fluid that's put out into the interstitial that's put out into the interstitial that's put out into the interstitial space. Remember about 16 or 17 of the 20 space. Remember about 16 or 17 of the 20 space. Remember about 16 or 17 of the 20 L per day will be drawn back up into the L per day will be drawn back up into the L per day will be drawn back up into the blood supply. But then some significant blood supply. But then some significant blood supply. But then some significant portion that 3 to four lers of fluid portion that 3 to four lers of fluid portion that 3 to four lers of fluid that ends up in the lymphatic system is that ends up in the lymphatic system is that ends up in the lymphatic system is going to reflect what's in the global going to reflect what's in the global going to reflect what's in the global circulation system. And these lymph circulation system. And these lymph circulation system. And these lymph nodes are a place where what's in the nodes are a place where what's in the nodes are a place where what's in the lymphatic system can be evaluated to lymphatic system can be evaluated to lymphatic system can be evaluated to determine whether or not you've got determine whether or not you've got determine whether or not you've got something in your body that you something in your body that you something in your body that you shouldn't or that you would like to shouldn't or that you would like to shouldn't or that you would like to eradicate. So the lymphatic system, eradicate. So the lymphatic system, eradicate. So the lymphatic system, which we've mostly been talking about up which we've mostly been talking about up which we've mostly been talking about up until this point as a drainage system, until this point as a drainage system, until this point as a drainage system, has a second purpose, right? It's a has a second purpose, right? It's a has a second purpose, right? It's a multitasker. It also serves an immune multitasker. It also serves an immune multitasker. It also serves an immune system role to evaluate what's in the system role to evaluate what's in the system role to evaluate what's in the lymph and therefore in the blood and lymph and therefore in the blood and lymph and therefore in the blood and therefore in the entire body. Now while therefore in the entire body. Now while therefore in the entire body. Now while we have lymph nodes in our jaw, behind we have lymph nodes in our jaw, behind we have lymph nodes in our jaw, behind our ears, back of our head and occipital our ears, back of our head and occipital our ears, back of our head and occipital area, lower back part of our head, area, lower back part of our head, area, lower back part of our head, we also have them behind our knees, our we also have them behind our knees, our we also have them behind our knees, our groin, inner elbow region. We have groin, inner elbow region. We have groin, inner elbow region. We have collections of lymph nodes distributed collections of lymph nodes distributed collections of lymph nodes distributed essentially across the entire body. essentially across the entire body. essentially across the entire body. Okay? You're not going to see them Okay? You're not going to see them Okay? You're not going to see them continuously across the body, but every continuously across the body, but every continuously across the body, but every area needs to be surveiled, right? And area needs to be surveiled, right? And area needs to be surveiled, right? And so you have these checkpoints everywhere so you have these checkpoints everywhere so you have these checkpoints everywhere along the lymph system where viruses, along the lymph system where viruses, along the lymph system where viruses, bacteria, other foreign invaders can be bacteria, other foreign invaders can be bacteria, other foreign invaders can be evaluated and combed by your immune evaluated and combed by your immune evaluated and combed by your immune system. Now does that mean that if you system. Now does that mean that if you system. Now does that mean that if you have for instance uh sore lymph nodes in have for instance uh sore lymph nodes in have for instance uh sore lymph nodes in your left armpit that you necessarily your left armpit that you necessarily your left armpit that you necessarily have something wrong with your left arm? have something wrong with your left arm? have something wrong with your left arm? No, not necessarily because of the way No, not necessarily because of the way No, not necessarily because of the way the lymphatic drainage occurs. However, the lymphatic drainage occurs. However, the lymphatic drainage occurs. However, many people who have a sore lymph node many people who have a sore lymph node many people who have a sore lymph node in their in their armpit will, you know, in their in their armpit will, you know, in their in their armpit will, you know, they'll kind of rub it and that makes they'll kind of rub it and that makes they'll kind of rub it and that makes perfect sense. The way the pain system perfect sense. The way the pain system perfect sense. The way the pain system works, we have a natural reflex to rub works, we have a natural reflex to rub works, we have a natural reflex to rub to provide, you know, sort of broadly to provide, you know, sort of broadly to provide, you know, sort of broadly distributed um medium pressure to an distributed um medium pressure to an distributed um medium pressure to an area that's in pain, it actually area that's in pain, it actually area that's in pain, it actually deactivates some of the uh pain response deactivates some of the uh pain response deactivates some of the uh pain response within that area. So, like the rubbing within that area. So, like the rubbing within that area. So, like the rubbing of a wound, like we don't just rub our of a wound, like we don't just rub our of a wound, like we don't just rub our boooos because uh we learned to do that boooos because uh we learned to do that boooos because uh we learned to do that when we were kids. It actually shuts when we were kids. It actually shuts when we were kids. It actually shuts down some of the nerves that transmit down some of the nerves that transmit down some of the nerves that transmit pain. So, that's why we have that pain. So, that's why we have that pain. So, that's why we have that reflex. But you want to make sure that reflex. But you want to make sure that reflex. But you want to make sure that you don't squeeze your lymph nodes or you don't squeeze your lymph nodes or you don't squeeze your lymph nodes or put too much pressure on them because put too much pressure on them because put too much pressure on them because again your immune system is fighting again your immune system is fighting again your immune system is fighting things within those lymph nodes or is things within those lymph nodes or is things within those lymph nodes or is evaluating whether or not something evaluating whether or not something evaluating whether or not something needs to be destroyed by your immune needs to be destroyed by your immune needs to be destroyed by your immune system within those lymph nodes. Now system within those lymph nodes. Now system within those lymph nodes. Now some soreness can exist in the lymph some soreness can exist in the lymph some soreness can exist in the lymph nodes simply as a matter of swelling of nodes simply as a matter of swelling of nodes simply as a matter of swelling of the lymph nodes and that doesn't the lymph nodes and that doesn't the lymph nodes and that doesn't necessarily reflect infection. Okay, it necessarily reflect infection. Okay, it necessarily reflect infection. Okay, it can but it doesn't necessarily reflect can but it doesn't necessarily reflect can but it doesn't necessarily reflect infection. If it's of course coupled infection. If it's of course coupled infection. If it's of course coupled with symptoms, you know, stuffy nose, with symptoms, you know, stuffy nose, with symptoms, you know, stuffy nose, lethargy, things of that sort, chances lethargy, things of that sort, chances lethargy, things of that sort, chances are you're battling something. And if are you're battling something. And if are you're battling something. And if you do notice that your lymph nodes are you do notice that your lymph nodes are you do notice that your lymph nodes are particularly swollen and you haven't particularly swollen and you haven't particularly swollen and you haven't done, for instance, like a really hard done, for instance, like a really hard done, for instance, like a really hard workout recently or not slept as much as workout recently or not slept as much as workout recently or not slept as much as usual recently, then you may be at the usual recently, then you may be at the usual recently, then you may be at the threshold of potentially getting sick threshold of potentially getting sick threshold of potentially getting sick and you want to take some measures to and you want to take some measures to and you want to take some measures to get some extra rest, extra hydration. get some extra rest, extra hydration. get some extra rest, extra hydration. Probably don't want to exercise too hard Probably don't want to exercise too hard Probably don't want to exercise too hard those days. We've talked about this in those days. We've talked about this in those days. We've talked about this in previous episodes. You're feeling a previous episodes. You're feeling a previous episodes. You're feeling a little rund down, not sick. Exercise can little rund down, not sick. Exercise can little rund down, not sick. Exercise can probably help you. You're a little probably help you. You're a little probably help you. You're a little sleepd deprived one night. Exercise sleepd deprived one night. Exercise sleepd deprived one night. Exercise definitely can help you. Two night sleep definitely can help you. Two night sleep definitely can help you. Two night sleep deprivation and you certainly don't want deprivation and you certainly don't want deprivation and you certainly don't want to be exercising with a ton of intensity to be exercising with a ton of intensity to be exercising with a ton of intensity because you will get sick. So those sore because you will get sick. So those sore because you will get sick. So those sore lymph nodes are a flag that your system lymph nodes are a flag that your system lymph nodes are a flag that your system is combating something. They're a flag is combating something. They're a flag is combating something. They're a flag that your immune cells are being that your immune cells are being that your immune cells are being recruited to that area. The lymph is recruited to that area. The lymph is recruited to that area. The lymph is staying in those areas longer because staying in those areas longer because staying in those areas longer because your immune system is trying to fight your immune system is trying to fight your immune system is trying to fight something back. So you should pay something back. So you should pay something back. So you should pay attention to that. But you don't want to attention to that. But you don't want to attention to that. But you don't want to be squeezing those lymph nodes. And as a be squeezing those lymph nodes. And as a be squeezing those lymph nodes. And as a general theme, I should have mentioned general theme, I should have mentioned general theme, I should have mentioned this earlier. If you've ever had deep this earlier. If you've ever had deep this earlier. If you've ever had deep tissue massage, right, you may notice tissue massage, right, you may notice tissue massage, right, you may notice afterwards, even if you weren't lying afterwards, even if you weren't lying afterwards, even if you weren't lying face down in that uh halo like thing face down in that uh halo like thing face down in that uh halo like thing where your face is there constricting where your face is there constricting where your face is there constricting your breathing a little bit, those your breathing a little bit, those your breathing a little bit, those things aren't that bad. They're actually things aren't that bad. They're actually things aren't that bad. They're actually kind of pleasant. Lie on your stomach, kind of pleasant. Lie on your stomach, kind of pleasant. Lie on your stomach, get a get a massage. But if you've ever get a get a massage. But if you've ever get a get a massage. But if you've ever had a deep tissue massage, you may had a deep tissue massage, you may had a deep tissue massage, you may notice afterwards that your face is kind notice afterwards that your face is kind notice afterwards that your face is kind of puffy and you feel a little bit of puffy and you feel a little bit of puffy and you feel a little bit inflamed. And they'll often say, "Oh, inflamed. And they'll often say, "Oh, inflamed. And they'll often say, "Oh, you know, make sure to drink a lot of you know, make sure to drink a lot of you know, make sure to drink a lot of water." Uh it turns out that deep tissue water." Uh it turns out that deep tissue water." Uh it turns out that deep tissue massage can encourage enough movement massage can encourage enough movement massage can encourage enough movement along those deeper lymphatic vessels and along those deeper lymphatic vessels and along those deeper lymphatic vessels and can push things through the lymph nodes can push things through the lymph nodes can push things through the lymph nodes earlier than it would have been pushed earlier than it would have been pushed earlier than it would have been pushed through and in some sense generate an through and in some sense generate an through and in some sense generate an inflammation response. Not a major one inflammation response. Not a major one inflammation response. Not a major one but a minor one. And usually this but a minor one. And usually this but a minor one. And usually this resolves within a couple of hours if resolves within a couple of hours if resolves within a couple of hours if you're up and walking around a bit. you're up and walking around a bit. you're up and walking around a bit. Again, gently pushing through the Again, gently pushing through the Again, gently pushing through the lymphatic flow as it's supposed to be lymphatic flow as it's supposed to be lymphatic flow as it's supposed to be pushed through. The point here is that pushed through. The point here is that pushed through. The point here is that your lymph nodes are a site for your lymph nodes are a site for your lymph nodes are a site for combating infection. You don't want to combating infection. You don't want to combating infection. You don't want to push things through them any faster than push things through them any faster than push things through them any faster than it normally would occur, but you also it normally would occur, but you also it normally would occur, but you also don't want accumulation of lymph to don't want accumulation of lymph to don't want accumulation of lymph to occur in the nodes too long. And the way occur in the nodes too long. And the way occur in the nodes too long. And the way you ensure that it doesn't happen for you ensure that it doesn't happen for you ensure that it doesn't happen for too long is to keep the general too long is to keep the general too long is to keep the general lymphatic circulation going. And we've lymphatic circulation going. And we've lymphatic circulation going. And we've talked about ways to do that earlier talked about ways to do that earlier talked about ways to do that earlier in our discussion about earlier in our discussion about earlier in our discussion about lympadeema, which is the swelling of lympadeema, which is the swelling of lympadeema, which is the swelling of typically the lower limbs that can typically the lower limbs that can typically the lower limbs that can occur. for instance, in people who are occur. for instance, in people who are occur. for instance, in people who are being treated for breast cancer or for being treated for breast cancer or for being treated for breast cancer or for other cancers where the lymph nodes are other cancers where the lymph nodes are other cancers where the lymph nodes are intentionally destroyed by chemo or intentionally destroyed by chemo or intentionally destroyed by chemo or radiation therapy and that's because radiation therapy and that's because radiation therapy and that's because cancer cells can actually get into the cancer cells can actually get into the cancer cells can actually get into the lymph nodes and they can proliferate lymph nodes and they can proliferate lymph nodes and they can proliferate there. We often hear that you know the there. We often hear that you know the there. We often hear that you know the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes and cancer has spread to the lymph nodes and cancer has spread to the lymph nodes and that's one of the reasons why often the that's one of the reasons why often the that's one of the reasons why often the lymph nodes are removed prior to the lymph nodes are removed prior to the lymph nodes are removed prior to the spreading or early in the spreading of a spreading or early in the spreading of a spreading or early in the spreading of a cancer to try and prevent the broader cancer to try and prevent the broader cancer to try and prevent the broader migration or so-called metastasis of migration or so-called metastasis of migration or so-called metastasis of that cancer to other tissues. that cancer to other tissues. that cancer to other tissues. The lymphatic system is targeted in this The lymphatic system is targeted in this The lymphatic system is targeted in this way because if you think about it, the way because if you think about it, the way because if you think about it, the lymphatic system is in a position to lymphatic system is in a position to lymphatic system is in a position to distribute all sorts of things including distribute all sorts of things including distribute all sorts of things including bad things like cancer cells that could bad things like cancer cells that could bad things like cancer cells that could proliferate further in other tissues. So proliferate further in other tissues. So proliferate further in other tissues. So that's why lymph nodes and vessels are that's why lymph nodes and vessels are that's why lymph nodes and vessels are often intentionally destroyed as part of often intentionally destroyed as part of often intentionally destroyed as part of cancer treatment and as a consequence cancer treatment and as a consequence cancer treatment and as a consequence there's less drainage leading to there's less drainage leading to there's less drainage leading to so-called lympadeema. Now lympadeema can so-called lympadeema. Now lympadeema can so-called lympadeema. Now lympadeema can occur for other reasons and it has occur for other reasons and it has occur for other reasons and it has various stages. You know it's actually various stages. You know it's actually various stages. You know it's actually been mapped out. I'll provide a link to been mapped out. I'll provide a link to been mapped out. I'll provide a link to this but you know there's stage one, this but you know there's stage one, this but you know there's stage one, two, three and four. And to briefly two, three and four. And to briefly two, three and four. And to briefly summarize, you know, stage one is summarize, you know, stage one is summarize, you know, stage one is asymptomatic. So the lymphatic system asymptomatic. So the lymphatic system asymptomatic. So the lymphatic system has some abnormal uh flow and but no has some abnormal uh flow and but no has some abnormal uh flow and but no real fluid buildup in a tissue that you real fluid buildup in a tissue that you real fluid buildup in a tissue that you necessarily see. Might be just slight necessarily see. Might be just slight necessarily see. Might be just slight swelling. In stage two, you see swelling swelling. In stage two, you see swelling swelling. In stage two, you see swelling due to accumulation of the lymph fluid. due to accumulation of the lymph fluid. due to accumulation of the lymph fluid. Um and that may subside if you elevate Um and that may subside if you elevate Um and that may subside if you elevate that limb. So if you're getting some that limb. So if you're getting some that limb. So if you're getting some swelling of the ankles for instance, you swelling of the ankles for instance, you swelling of the ankles for instance, you put your legs up and it disappears put your legs up and it disappears put your legs up and it disappears after, you know, putting your legs up after, you know, putting your legs up after, you know, putting your legs up for, you know, 20 or 30 minutes, then for, you know, 20 or 30 minutes, then for, you know, 20 or 30 minutes, then it's so-called stage two lympadeema. it's so-called stage two lympadeema. it's so-called stage two lympadeema. Stage three and four are where you get a Stage three and four are where you get a Stage three and four are where you get a more permanent swelling. So an more permanent swelling. So an more permanent swelling. So an accumulation of fluid and waste products accumulation of fluid and waste products accumulation of fluid and waste products in that interstitial space that in that interstitial space that in that interstitial space that extracellular space and that's when extracellular space and that's when extracellular space and that's when things start to become problematic things start to become problematic things start to become problematic because that buildup of fluid and waste because that buildup of fluid and waste because that buildup of fluid and waste products leads to a local immune products leads to a local immune products leads to a local immune response which then causes thickening of response which then causes thickening of response which then causes thickening of the tissue above it which then makes it the tissue above it which then makes it the tissue above it which then makes it even harder to clear out waste products even harder to clear out waste products even harder to clear out waste products and the whole thing starts to cascade. and the whole thing starts to cascade. and the whole thing starts to cascade. And this is a particular problem again And this is a particular problem again And this is a particular problem again for people being treated for cancers for people being treated for cancers for people being treated for cancers where the lymphatic vessels or the lymph where the lymphatic vessels or the lymph where the lymphatic vessels or the lymph nodes are intentionally destroyed. And nodes are intentionally destroyed. And nodes are intentionally destroyed. And that's why these people often need a that's why these people often need a that's why these people often need a fair amount of lymphatic manual drainage fair amount of lymphatic manual drainage fair amount of lymphatic manual drainage or massage, it's sometimes called, in or massage, it's sometimes called, in or massage, it's sometimes called, in order to encourage the movement of the order to encourage the movement of the order to encourage the movement of the lymph fluid out. And as I mentioned lymph fluid out. And as I mentioned lymph fluid out. And as I mentioned earlier, there are drugs being developed earlier, there are drugs being developed earlier, there are drugs being developed to try and treat lympadeema through to try and treat lympadeema through to try and treat lympadeema through non-manual massage techniques. But non-manual massage techniques. But non-manual massage techniques. But that's still very much in development. that's still very much in development. that's still very much in development. But there's great hope for that because But there's great hope for that because But there's great hope for that because as you can imagine, not everyone has as you can imagine, not everyone has as you can imagine, not everyone has access to proper lymphatic massage for access to proper lymphatic massage for access to proper lymphatic massage for lympadeema. But it's a very important lympadeema. But it's a very important lympadeema. But it's a very important aspect of cancer treatment and aspect of cancer treatment and aspect of cancer treatment and management of cancer treatment. management of cancer treatment. management of cancer treatment. Lympadeema is something that we should Lympadeema is something that we should Lympadeema is something that we should all be mindful of even minor lympadeema. all be mindful of even minor lympadeema. all be mindful of even minor lympadeema. And this means even if you're not And this means even if you're not And this means even if you're not dealing with cancer treatment, you dealing with cancer treatment, you dealing with cancer treatment, you should be cognizant of whether or not should be cognizant of whether or not should be cognizant of whether or not you're getting some limb swelling due to you're getting some limb swelling due to you're getting some limb swelling due to lympadema. A little bit fine. You put lympadema. A little bit fine. You put lympadema. A little bit fine. You put your feet up. You know, we'll talk about your feet up. You know, we'll talk about your feet up. You know, we'll talk about ways to clear it from your brain in a ways to clear it from your brain in a ways to clear it from your brain in a few minutes, but you know, lympadeema few minutes, but you know, lympadeema few minutes, but you know, lympadeema and that buildup causes a number of and that buildup causes a number of and that buildup causes a number of problems. First of all, the waste problems. First of all, the waste problems. First of all, the waste product in the interstatial fluid that's product in the interstatial fluid that's product in the interstatial fluid that's accumulating there because you're not accumulating there because you're not accumulating there because you're not getting enough lymph drainage can cause getting enough lymph drainage can cause getting enough lymph drainage can cause local inflammation which can give way to local inflammation which can give way to local inflammation which can give way to more global in inflammation. It [snorts] more global in inflammation. It [snorts] more global in inflammation. It [snorts] also so happens that you get a also so happens that you get a also so happens that you get a thickening of the tissue in that area in thickening of the tissue in that area in thickening of the tissue in that area in response to that inflammation and that response to that inflammation and that response to that inflammation and that thickening of the tissue causes a thickening of the tissue causes a thickening of the tissue causes a hypoxia or a low oxygen availability for hypoxia or a low oxygen availability for hypoxia or a low oxygen availability for the cells in that area. So that now the cells in that area. So that now the cells in that area. So that now you've got more cells that get less you've got more cells that get less you've got more cells that get less oxygen that they need and the whole oxygen that they need and the whole oxygen that they need and the whole thing starts to cascade. So while I'm thing starts to cascade. So while I'm thing starts to cascade. So while I'm not trying to alarm anybody, you do want not trying to alarm anybody, you do want not trying to alarm anybody, you do want to do things to encourage that clearance to do things to encourage that clearance to do things to encourage that clearance of fluid and waste products from the of fluid and waste products from the of fluid and waste products from the interstitial space into the lymphatic interstitial space into the lymphatic interstitial space into the lymphatic system. And we talked about some of the system. And we talked about some of the system. And we talked about some of the things you can do for that earlier. things you can do for that earlier. things you can do for that earlier. There are other tools, by the way, that There are other tools, by the way, that There are other tools, by the way, that are more sophisticated like for are more sophisticated like for are more sophisticated like for instance, they have compression boots. instance, they have compression boots. instance, they have compression boots. If you've ever been on a plane or you've If you've ever been on a plane or you've If you've ever been on a plane or you've been running a lot or basically using been running a lot or basically using been running a lot or basically using the tissues of your lower body or upper the tissues of your lower body or upper the tissues of your lower body or upper body a lot, if you've ever run a 10K or body a lot, if you've ever run a 10K or body a lot, if you've ever run a 10K or a half marathon or a marathon, the a half marathon or a marathon, the a half marathon or a marathon, the heaviness of your legs, the soreness of heaviness of your legs, the soreness of heaviness of your legs, the soreness of your legs the next day, I highly your legs the next day, I highly your legs the next day, I highly recommend you get into a pool and tread recommend you get into a pool and tread recommend you get into a pool and tread some water, do some light swimming. some water, do some light swimming. some water, do some light swimming. Again, not an intense workout, but Again, not an intense workout, but Again, not an intense workout, but compression boots can be very helpful compression boots can be very helpful compression boots can be very helpful because they basically fill up with air because they basically fill up with air because they basically fill up with air and compress your lower limbs and then and compress your lower limbs and then and compress your lower limbs and then pulse your lower limbs to move that pulse your lower limbs to move that pulse your lower limbs to move that lymphatic fluid up toward the drainage lymphatic fluid up toward the drainage lymphatic fluid up toward the drainage system back into your venus blood system back into your venus blood system back into your venus blood supply. These uh lymphatic boots can be supply. These uh lymphatic boots can be supply. These uh lymphatic boots can be very useful. There is some cost to very useful. There is some cost to very useful. There is some cost to them um but if you have access to them, them um but if you have access to them, them um but if you have access to them, those can be great. If not, just try and those can be great. If not, just try and those can be great. If not, just try and walk around a lot, put your legs up, do walk around a lot, put your legs up, do walk around a lot, put your legs up, do anything you can to get that lymphatic anything you can to get that lymphatic anything you can to get that lymphatic flow going. You do not want too much flow going. You do not want too much flow going. You do not want too much buildup of fluid and waste products in buildup of fluid and waste products in buildup of fluid and waste products in the interstitial space to occur for too the interstitial space to occur for too the interstitial space to occur for too long. And if you've been using a tissue long. And if you've been using a tissue long. And if you've been using a tissue a lot, there's going to be a lot of a lot, there's going to be a lot of a lot, there's going to be a lot of buildup of cellular waste products. buildup of cellular waste products. buildup of cellular waste products. Which brings us to the glimpmphatic Which brings us to the glimpmphatic Which brings us to the glimpmphatic system, which is basically just the system, which is basically just the system, which is basically just the lymphatic system for the brain. In fact, lymphatic system for the brain. In fact, lymphatic system for the brain. In fact, as beautiful as the system is and as beautiful as the system is and as beautiful as the system is and as delighted I am and everybody else is delighted I am and everybody else is delighted I am and everybody else is that in 2012 it was finally verified that in 2012 it was finally verified that in 2012 it was finally verified that the brain also has a lymphatic that the brain also has a lymphatic that the brain also has a lymphatic system. I don't like the branding. I system. I don't like the branding. I system. I don't like the branding. I don't like the naming. Yes, ga are don't like the naming. Yes, ga are don't like the naming. Yes, ga are involved but by calling it the involved but by calling it the involved but by calling it the glimpmphatic system people think that glimpmphatic system people think that glimpmphatic system people think that it's entirely different and in fact it's entirely different and in fact it's entirely different and in fact it's just somewhat different from the rest of just somewhat different from the rest of just somewhat different from the rest of the lymphatic system. And I think this the lymphatic system. And I think this the lymphatic system. And I think this so-called lymphatic system, which is the so-called lymphatic system, which is the so-called lymphatic system, which is the lymphatic drainage system of the brain, lymphatic drainage system of the brain, lymphatic drainage system of the brain, is so important to all of us. If you is so important to all of us. If you is so important to all of us. If you understand a little bit about how it's understand a little bit about how it's understand a little bit about how it's designed, its architecture, there are designed, its architecture, there are designed, its architecture, there are some very straightforward protocols that some very straightforward protocols that some very straightforward protocols that we'll discuss in a moment that will we'll discuss in a moment that will we'll discuss in a moment that will allow you to experience less brain fog, allow you to experience less brain fog, allow you to experience less brain fog, less swelling of your face in the less swelling of your face in the less swelling of your face in the morning, less bags underneath your eyes, morning, less bags underneath your eyes, morning, less bags underneath your eyes, and in general, improved wakefulness and in general, improved wakefulness and in general, improved wakefulness and cognition. And that just cascades into cognition. And that just cascades into cognition. And that just cascades into everything we know about how to support everything we know about how to support everything we know about how to support health. I'd like to take a quick break health. I'd like to take a quick break health. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor 8. Eight and acknowledge our sponsor 8. Eight and acknowledge our sponsor 8. Eight makes smart mattress covers with makes smart mattress covers with makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking cooling, heating, and sleep tracking cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure capacity. One of the best ways to ensure capacity. One of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to make sure a great night's sleep is to make sure a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping that the temperature of your sleeping that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's environment is correct. And that's environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply because in order to fall and stay deeply because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually asleep, your body temperature actually asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and order to wake up feeling refreshed and order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature energized, your body temperature energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the 3°. Eight automatically regulates the 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the temperature of your bed throughout the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. night according to your unique needs. night according to your unique needs. Eightlee has just launched their latest Eightlee has just launched their latest Eightlee has just launched their latest model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has several new important features. One of several new important features. One of several new important features. One of these new features is called Autopilot. these new features is called Autopilot. these new features is called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI engine that learns Autopilot is an AI engine that learns Autopilot is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns to adjust the your sleep patterns to adjust the your sleep patterns to adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It also across different sleep stages. It also across different sleep stages. It also elevates your head if you're snoring and elevates your head if you're snoring and elevates your head if you're snoring and it makes other shifts to optimize your it makes other shifts to optimize your it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an integrated speaker that syncs to the integrated speaker that syncs to the integrated speaker that syncs to the EightLe app and can play audio to EightLe app and can play audio to EightLe app and can play audio to support relaxation and recovery. The support relaxation and recovery. The support relaxation and recovery. The audio catalog includes several NSDR, audio catalog includes several NSDR, audio catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest scripts that I non-sleep deep rest scripts that I non-sleep deep rest scripts that I worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If you're not familiar, NSDR involves you're not familiar, NSDR involves you're not familiar, NSDR involves listening to an audio script that walks listening to an audio script that walks listening to an audio script that walks you through a deep body relaxation you through a deep body relaxation you through a deep body relaxation combined with some very simple breathing combined with some very simple breathing combined with some very simple breathing exercises. It's an extremely powerful exercises. It's an extremely powerful exercises. It's an extremely powerful tool that anyone can benefit from the tool that anyone can benefit from the tool that anyone can benefit from the first time and every time. If you'd like first time and every time. If you'd like first time and every time. If you'd like to try eight, go to try eight, go to try eight, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. Okay, the glimpmphatic system, which is Okay, the glimpmphatic system, which is Okay, the glimpmphatic system, which is the proper name for the lymphatic system the proper name for the lymphatic system the proper name for the lymphatic system of the brain. I was sort of joking of the brain. I was sort of joking of the brain. I was sort of joking earlier. I just want to make the point earlier. I just want to make the point earlier. I just want to make the point that our brain does have a lymphatic that our brain does have a lymphatic that our brain does have a lymphatic system. Up until 2012, no scientist, no system. Up until 2012, no scientist, no system. Up until 2012, no scientist, no physician believed that there was a physician believed that there was a physician believed that there was a lymphatic system for the brain, that lymphatic system for the brain, that lymphatic system for the brain, that lymphatic clearance or flow or any of lymphatic clearance or flow or any of lymphatic clearance or flow or any of that occurred in the brain. It was that occurred in the brain. It was that occurred in the brain. It was assumed that it was not because it had assumed that it was not because it had assumed that it was not because it had not been discovered. Except there was not been discovered. Except there was not been discovered. Except there was one scientist who had discovered it one scientist who had discovered it one scientist who had discovered it earlier and was told that she was wrong earlier and was told that she was wrong earlier and was told that she was wrong about it. We'll return to that a little about it. We'll return to that a little about it. We'll return to that a little bit later. But the point is that in bit later. But the point is that in bit later. But the point is that in 2012, a neuroscientist by the name of 2012, a neuroscientist by the name of 2012, a neuroscientist by the name of Mike Ntergard, who studies GA, a form of Mike Ntergard, who studies GA, a form of Mike Ntergard, who studies GA, a form of support cell that also plays an active support cell that also plays an active support cell that also plays an active role in brain function and plasticity, role in brain function and plasticity, role in brain function and plasticity, etc., she discovered that the brain has etc., she discovered that the brain has etc., she discovered that the brain has a system for clearing out waste that by a system for clearing out waste that by a system for clearing out waste that by all accounts looks a lot like the all accounts looks a lot like the all accounts looks a lot like the lymphatic clearance system in the rest lymphatic clearance system in the rest lymphatic clearance system in the rest of the body and that it involves these of the body and that it involves these of the body and that it involves these cells we call GA. I'll just briefly cells we call GA. I'll just briefly cells we call GA. I'll just briefly describe the system because it's describe the system because it's describe the system because it's incredible. It's beautiful in its incredible. It's beautiful in its incredible. It's beautiful in its organization. And if you understand that organization. And if you understand that organization. And if you understand that organization just a little bit, you'll organization just a little bit, you'll organization just a little bit, you'll be in a position to resolve some things be in a position to resolve some things be in a position to resolve some things that chances are you and many other that chances are you and many other that chances are you and many other people you know suffer from. things like people you know suffer from. things like people you know suffer from. things like brain fog, things like puffiness of the brain fog, things like puffiness of the brain fog, things like puffiness of the face and under the eyes when you wake up face and under the eyes when you wake up face and under the eyes when you wake up in the morning, things like changes in the morning, things like changes in the morning, things like changes in your cosmetic appearance that occur your cosmetic appearance that occur your cosmetic appearance that occur throughout the day and when you don't throughout the day and when you don't throughout the day and when you don't sleep as well as you might have wished sleep as well as you might have wished sleep as well as you might have wished you had slept the night before. In fact, you had slept the night before. In fact, you had slept the night before. In fact, let's just do a little mental experiment let's just do a little mental experiment let's just do a little mental experiment for a moment. Have you ever had a poor for a moment. Have you ever had a poor for a moment. Have you ever had a poor night's sleep and compared the way that night's sleep and compared the way that night's sleep and compared the way that you look after a poor night's sleep you look after a poor night's sleep you look after a poor night's sleep versus after a great night's sleep? Just versus after a great night's sleep? Just versus after a great night's sleep? Just next time that happens, take a picture next time that happens, take a picture next time that happens, take a picture of yourself, right? You don't have to of yourself, right? You don't have to of yourself, right? You don't have to show it to anybody. Just take a picture show it to anybody. Just take a picture show it to anybody. Just take a picture of yourself after a great night's sleep of yourself after a great night's sleep of yourself after a great night's sleep and take a picture, ideally in the same and take a picture, ideally in the same and take a picture, ideally in the same location, under the same lighting, but location, under the same lighting, but location, under the same lighting, but even if it's under different lighting, even if it's under different lighting, even if it's under different lighting, of yourself after a poor night's sleep of yourself after a poor night's sleep of yourself after a poor night's sleep where you either didn't sleep at all or where you either didn't sleep at all or where you either didn't sleep at all or you got maybe two hours less than usual you got maybe two hours less than usual you got maybe two hours less than usual sleep. And you will see that you look sleep. And you will see that you look sleep. And you will see that you look very different. Your eyes will be very different. Your eyes will be very different. Your eyes will be sagging. You have those bags under your sagging. You have those bags under your sagging. You have those bags under your eyes. the eyebrows generally drop. eyes. the eyebrows generally drop. eyes. the eyebrows generally drop. There's a kind of a change in the tone There's a kind of a change in the tone There's a kind of a change in the tone of the eyes. You'll notice that's very of the eyes. You'll notice that's very of the eyes. You'll notice that's very typical. And any creases or wrinkles typical. And any creases or wrinkles typical. And any creases or wrinkles that you have will become more apparent. that you have will become more apparent. that you have will become more apparent. You go like, if you think about it, You go like, if you think about it, You go like, if you think about it, that's wild. You sleep two hours less or that's wild. You sleep two hours less or that's wild. You sleep two hours less or three hours less than usual or you get three hours less than usual or you get three hours less than usual or you get one poor night's sleep and you look one poor night's sleep and you look one poor night's sleep and you look very, very different. And equally very, very different. And equally very, very different. And equally impressive is if you then get a great impressive is if you then get a great impressive is if you then get a great night's sleep the next night, you know, night's sleep the next night, you know, night's sleep the next night, you know, bounce back and you look yourself bounce back and you look yourself bounce back and you look yourself again as we say and your mind also again as we say and your mind also again as we say and your mind also parallels these changes, right? If you parallels these changes, right? If you parallels these changes, right? If you get 3 hours less than your usual get 3 hours less than your usual get 3 hours less than your usual allocation of sleep, your brain just allocation of sleep, your brain just allocation of sleep, your brain just does not work as well. We know that. And does not work as well. We know that. And does not work as well. We know that. And you don't feel as well. You're more you don't feel as well. You're more you don't feel as well. You're more reactive. You're more likely to have reactive. You're more likely to have reactive. You're more likely to have kind of attention deficit like uh kind of attention deficit like uh kind of attention deficit like uh symptoms, right? You might not have symptoms, right? You might not have symptoms, right? You might not have full-blown ADHD, but you'll you tend to full-blown ADHD, but you'll you tend to full-blown ADHD, but you'll you tend to be a bit more moody. Um, you're be a bit more moody. Um, you're be a bit more moody. Um, you're certainly more susceptible to certainly more susceptible to certainly more susceptible to infections, but at the level of the infections, but at the level of the infections, but at the level of the brain, your brain is not the same as brain, your brain is not the same as brain, your brain is not the same as when you get a great night's sleep, get when you get a great night's sleep, get when you get a great night's sleep, get a great night's sleep, and you're just a great night's sleep, and you're just a great night's sleep, and you're just right back where you normally are. And right back where you normally are. And right back where you normally are. And if you don't sleep well for a few nights if you don't sleep well for a few nights if you don't sleep well for a few nights or many nights, you'll notice that your or many nights, you'll notice that your or many nights, you'll notice that your appearance will very rapidly change. I'm appearance will very rapidly change. I'm appearance will very rapidly change. I'm not trying to scare people, right? We not trying to scare people, right? We not trying to scare people, right? We have lots of episodes on how to get have lots of episodes on how to get have lots of episodes on how to get great sleep. We have zerocost toolkit on great sleep. We have zerocost toolkit on great sleep. We have zerocost toolkit on how to get great sleep. All that's how to get great sleep. All that's how to get great sleep. All that's available at hubmanlab.com. Just put available at hubmanlab.com. Just put available at hubmanlab.com. Just put sleep, sleep toolkit, perfect your sleep, sleep toolkit, perfect your sleep, sleep toolkit, perfect your sleep, all that and you'll find all sleep, all that and you'll find all sleep, all that and you'll find all those tools in whatever format you want. those tools in whatever format you want. those tools in whatever format you want. But what is it about sleep that is so But what is it about sleep that is so But what is it about sleep that is so marketkedly changing our appearance and marketkedly changing our appearance and marketkedly changing our appearance and the way that our brain works? And the way that our brain works? And the way that our brain works? And the answer is the clearance of waste answer is the clearance of waste answer is the clearance of waste products from your brain which occurs products from your brain which occurs products from your brain which occurs through essentially what is the through essentially what is the through essentially what is the lymphatic system of your brain during lymphatic system of your brain during lymphatic system of your brain during sleep doesn't get the opportunity to do sleep doesn't get the opportunity to do sleep doesn't get the opportunity to do that when you don't get enough sleep. It that when you don't get enough sleep. It that when you don't get enough sleep. It is that straightforward. So let me is that straightforward. So let me is that straightforward. So let me explain this brain lymphatic system and explain this brain lymphatic system and explain this brain lymphatic system and how you can get it to operate at its how you can get it to operate at its how you can get it to operate at its best. And I'm not just going to tell you best. And I'm not just going to tell you best. And I'm not just going to tell you to do that by getting enough sleep. You to do that by getting enough sleep. You to do that by getting enough sleep. You certainly should try to do that. But certainly should try to do that. But certainly should try to do that. But there are some things that you can do to there are some things that you can do to there are some things that you can do to encourage better lymphatic clearance encourage better lymphatic clearance encourage better lymphatic clearance within the brain while you sleep and within the brain while you sleep and within the brain while you sleep and maybe even get by with a little less maybe even get by with a little less maybe even get by with a little less sleep than you think you need, but sleep than you think you need, but sleep than you think you need, but making that sleep better suited for making that sleep better suited for making that sleep better suited for lymphatic clearance within the brain. lymphatic clearance within the brain. lymphatic clearance within the brain. Okay. So, it wasn't even two decades ago Okay. So, it wasn't even two decades ago Okay. So, it wasn't even two decades ago that this system was discovered of that this system was discovered of that this system was discovered of clearing out a waste products from the clearing out a waste products from the clearing out a waste products from the brain. And what Dr. Nedagard so brain. And what Dr. Nedagard so brain. And what Dr. Nedagard so beautifully hypothesized was there has beautifully hypothesized was there has beautifully hypothesized was there has to be a system for this, right? There to be a system for this, right? There to be a system for this, right? There has to be a system. Why? Because your has to be a system. Why? Because your has to be a system. Why? Because your brain cells are some of the most brain cells are some of the most brain cells are some of the most metabolically active cells in your metabolically active cells in your metabolically active cells in your entire body, right? You know, your brain entire body, right? You know, your brain entire body, right? You know, your brain is just a small portion of your total is just a small portion of your total is just a small portion of your total body weight and volume, but it has a body weight and volume, but it has a body weight and volume, but it has a super high metabolism. The cells there super high metabolism. The cells there super high metabolism. The cells there need things. They need oxygen. They need things. They need oxygen. They need things. They need oxygen. They need glucose. Even if you're on a keto diet, glucose. Even if you're on a keto diet, glucose. Even if you're on a keto diet, they need nutrients, and they're kicking they need nutrients, and they're kicking they need nutrients, and they're kicking out waste products like crazy. And that out waste products like crazy. And that out waste products like crazy. And that stuff has to get cleared from the brain. stuff has to get cleared from the brain. stuff has to get cleared from the brain. Now, you have a fluid within your brain Now, you have a fluid within your brain Now, you have a fluid within your brain called cerebral spinal fluid that moves called cerebral spinal fluid that moves called cerebral spinal fluid that moves within the so-called ventricles of the within the so-called ventricles of the within the so-called ventricles of the brain. So the space is within the brain brain. So the space is within the brain brain. So the space is within the brain and really your whole brain is bathed in and really your whole brain is bathed in and really your whole brain is bathed in cerebral spinal fluid. Your brain is cerebral spinal fluid. Your brain is cerebral spinal fluid. Your brain is floating in this stuff and it floating in this stuff and it floating in this stuff and it essentially has access to all the cells essentially has access to all the cells essentially has access to all the cells in your brain. So as your cells make in your brain. So as your cells make in your brain. So as your cells make waste, it's picked up by the cerebral waste, it's picked up by the cerebral waste, it's picked up by the cerebral spinal fluid. Now the cerebral spinal fluid. Now the cerebral spinal fluid. Now the cerebral spinal fluid is circulated, right? You create fluid is circulated, right? You create fluid is circulated, right? You create the cerebral spinal fluid. It's actually the cerebral spinal fluid. It's actually the cerebral spinal fluid. It's actually manufactured in a very interesting manufactured in a very interesting manufactured in a very interesting tissue kind of collection of tissues tissue kind of collection of tissues tissue kind of collection of tissues broadly referred to as the koid plexus. broadly referred to as the koid plexus. broadly referred to as the koid plexus. But you know there's stuff like But you know there's stuff like But you know there's stuff like meninges. If you go to medical school or meninges. If you go to medical school or meninges. If you go to medical school or you become a neuroscientist you'll learn you become a neuroscientist you'll learn you become a neuroscientist you'll learn all about the details of these things. all about the details of these things. all about the details of these things. But for today's discussion understand But for today's discussion understand But for today's discussion understand that the cerebral spinal fluid is made that the cerebral spinal fluid is made that the cerebral spinal fluid is made it bathes your brain and it can collect it bathes your brain and it can collect it bathes your brain and it can collect the waste products from the brain. the waste products from the brain. the waste products from the brain. Beautiful observations by Dr. Nedergard Beautiful observations by Dr. Nedergard Beautiful observations by Dr. Nedergard and others found that in animal models and others found that in animal models and others found that in animal models and now we know this is also true in and now we know this is also true in and now we know this is also true in humans. When you go to sleep at night humans. When you go to sleep at night humans. When you go to sleep at night the vascule that goes into your brain the vascule that goes into your brain the vascule that goes into your brain because of course your brain does get because of course your brain does get because of course your brain does get artery inflow. Okay, you have to give artery inflow. Okay, you have to give artery inflow. Okay, you have to give blood supply, oxygenated blood to the blood supply, oxygenated blood to the blood supply, oxygenated blood to the brain and actually comes up from the brain and actually comes up from the brain and actually comes up from the bottom of the brain. There's a structure bottom of the brain. There's a structure bottom of the brain. There's a structure down there called the circle of willis. down there called the circle of willis. down there called the circle of willis. So your brain is actually resting on So your brain is actually resting on So your brain is actually resting on kind of a little trampoline of uh of kind of a little trampoline of uh of kind of a little trampoline of uh of vascule down at the bottom. If you ever vascule down at the bottom. If you ever vascule down at the bottom. If you ever flip o over a brain and the vascule is flip o over a brain and the vascule is flip o over a brain and the vascule is intact, there's a little circle down intact, there's a little circle down intact, there's a little circle down there called the circle of Willis. And there called the circle of Willis. And there called the circle of Willis. And those arteries, remember, they're thick. those arteries, remember, they're thick. those arteries, remember, they're thick. They generate a lot of pressure. So your They generate a lot of pressure. So your They generate a lot of pressure. So your brain is kind of bouncing on those like brain is kind of bouncing on those like brain is kind of bouncing on those like a little, you know, kind of rebounding a little, you know, kind of rebounding a little, you know, kind of rebounding itself. Seriously. And then the vascule itself. Seriously. And then the vascule itself. Seriously. And then the vascule climbs up along the top of the brain and climbs up along the top of the brain and climbs up along the top of the brain and it makes basically a right angle and it makes basically a right angle and it makes basically a right angle and then dive into the brain and then it then dive into the brain and then it then dive into the brain and then it branches out to basically make sure that branches out to basically make sure that branches out to basically make sure that all the cells and areas of the brain get all the cells and areas of the brain get all the cells and areas of the brain get blood supply for oxygen and nutrients blood supply for oxygen and nutrients blood supply for oxygen and nutrients and so forth. Now that's the case during and so forth. Now that's the case during and so forth. Now that's the case during the daytime and it's also the case at the daytime and it's also the case at the daytime and it's also the case at night. However, during sleep, what night. However, during sleep, what night. However, during sleep, what happens is the areas around the happens is the areas around the happens is the areas around the vasculature that goes into the brain vasculature that goes into the brain vasculature that goes into the brain literally spreads out. They call it the literally spreads out. They call it the literally spreads out. They call it the pervascular space. Literally, it's as if pervascular space. Literally, it's as if pervascular space. Literally, it's as if every bit of vasculature has a little every bit of vasculature has a little every bit of vasculature has a little area around it where there aren't area around it where there aren't area around it where there aren't neurons and that space gets 60% larger neurons and that space gets 60% larger neurons and that space gets 60% larger in sleep. It literally clears away so in sleep. It literally clears away so in sleep. It literally clears away so that there's big tubes or big areas that there's big tubes or big areas that there's big tubes or big areas along the blood vessels where cerebral along the blood vessels where cerebral along the blood vessels where cerebral spinal fluid, this fluid that's bathing spinal fluid, this fluid that's bathing spinal fluid, this fluid that's bathing the brain, can then run up to the brain, can then run up to the brain, can then run up to the surface of the brain and out to the surface of the brain and out to the surface of the brain and out to the areas of the brain away from the cells areas of the brain away from the cells areas of the brain away from the cells and then literally get cleared out of and then literally get cleared out of and then literally get cleared out of the brain and into the venous blood the brain and into the venous blood the brain and into the venous blood supply. Okay, that's a very general supply. Okay, that's a very general supply. Okay, that's a very general description of how this works, but I description of how this works, but I description of how this works, but I want to put a slightly more detailed want to put a slightly more detailed want to put a slightly more detailed picture into your mind because this is picture into your mind because this is picture into your mind because this is amazing, right? Now you have these amazing, right? Now you have these amazing, right? Now you have these cells, these glyo cells called cells, these glyo cells called cells, these glyo cells called aststerytes. They're a bunch of aststerytes. They're a bunch of aststerytes. They're a bunch of different glyo cells, but astroittes are different glyo cells, but astroittes are different glyo cells, but astroittes are one of them. And the aststerytes have one of them. And the aststerytes have one of them. And the aststerytes have what little called end feet. And the end what little called end feet. And the end what little called end feet. And the end can touch the synapses, the connection can touch the synapses, the connection can touch the synapses, the connection points between neurons, and they can points between neurons, and they can points between neurons, and they can also touch the vascule. And at night also touch the vascule. And at night also touch the vascule. And at night when you go to sleep, what these when you go to sleep, what these when you go to sleep, what these aststerytes do is they literally push aststerytes do is they literally push aststerytes do is they literally push out and create more pervascular space. out and create more pervascular space. out and create more pervascular space. Perry just means near, near the Perry just means near, near the Perry just means near, near the vasculature. They create more vasculature. They create more vasculature. They create more pervascular space and they express a pervascular space and they express a pervascular space and they express a protein a channel which is really cool protein a channel which is really cool protein a channel which is really cool called aquaporin 4. Someone won the called aquaporin 4. Someone won the called aquaporin 4. Someone won the Nobel Prize for discovering aquaporin 4 Nobel Prize for discovering aquaporin 4 Nobel Prize for discovering aquaporin 4 and aquaporin 4 is under circadian and aquaporin 4 is under circadian and aquaporin 4 is under circadian regulation. So it tends to be more regulation. So it tends to be more regulation. So it tends to be more active at night and when you go to sleep active at night and when you go to sleep active at night and when you go to sleep you basically create these spaces around you basically create these spaces around you basically create these spaces around the vasculature so that all the waste the vasculature so that all the waste the vasculature so that all the waste that's built up in the cerebral spinal that's built up in the cerebral spinal that's built up in the cerebral spinal fluid can flow out along the vasculature fluid can flow out along the vasculature fluid can flow out along the vasculature and get cleared from the brain. Now and get cleared from the brain. Now and get cleared from the brain. Now there's a whole process by which it goes there's a whole process by which it goes there's a whole process by which it goes out and then from the brain and then it out and then from the brain and then it out and then from the brain and then it travels in different ducts and different travels in different ducts and different travels in different ducts and different pathways. It even can travel along your pathways. It even can travel along your pathways. It even can travel along your cranial nerves out of your brain stem cranial nerves out of your brain stem cranial nerves out of your brain stem and out but it eventually all joins up and out but it eventually all joins up and out but it eventually all joins up in the blood supply just like the rest in the blood supply just like the rest in the blood supply just like the rest of the lymphatic flow. So this is of the lymphatic flow. So this is of the lymphatic flow. So this is incredible. While you sleep you clear incredible. While you sleep you clear incredible. While you sleep you clear out the garbage from your brain. out the garbage from your brain. out the garbage from your brain. Although I don't really like calling it Although I don't really like calling it Although I don't really like calling it garbage because it's the natural garbage because it's the natural garbage because it's the natural byproduct of healthy cellular function. byproduct of healthy cellular function. byproduct of healthy cellular function. But I find it so interesting that people But I find it so interesting that people But I find it so interesting that people didn't think that there was a lymphatic didn't think that there was a lymphatic didn't think that there was a lymphatic system in the brain or at least they system in the brain or at least they system in the brain or at least they couldn't find it. But Dr. Netagard found couldn't find it. But Dr. Netagard found couldn't find it. But Dr. Netagard found it. And I'll just briefly tell you she it. And I'll just briefly tell you she it. And I'll just briefly tell you she wasn't the first one to find it. The wasn't the first one to find it. The wasn't the first one to find it. The first person to find it, this is just first person to find it, this is just first person to find it, this is just kind of brief science uh anecdote kind of brief science uh anecdote kind of brief science uh anecdote here, but it's pretty important to hear. here, but it's pretty important to hear. here, but it's pretty important to hear. The first person to find it was a woman The first person to find it was a woman The first person to find it was a woman by the name of Patricia Grady. She was by the name of Patricia Grady. She was by the name of Patricia Grady. She was at the University of Maryland and she at the University of Maryland and she at the University of Maryland and she was doing some experiments and she was doing some experiments and she was doing some experiments and she discovered that the brain has something discovered that the brain has something discovered that the brain has something kind of like a lymphatic system. Okay, kind of like a lymphatic system. Okay, kind of like a lymphatic system. Okay, she was doing some injections of this she was doing some injections of this she was doing some injections of this dye which gets circulated and she dye which gets circulated and she dye which gets circulated and she noticed some of this dye was making it noticed some of this dye was making it noticed some of this dye was making it you know along the pervascular areas and you know along the pervascular areas and you know along the pervascular areas and now into the surface of the brain and so now into the surface of the brain and so now into the surface of the brain and so on. basically the same observation that on. basically the same observation that on. basically the same observation that was made in 2012 but much earlier and was made in 2012 but much earlier and was made in 2012 but much earlier and she talked to her colleagues about it she talked to her colleagues about it she talked to her colleagues about it and she talked about it at meetings and she talked about it at meetings and she talked about it at meetings and other groups in particular I won't other groups in particular I won't other groups in particular I won't mention names two very large uh famous mention names two very large uh famous mention names two very large uh famous scientific groups tried to replicate her scientific groups tried to replicate her scientific groups tried to replicate her work but in a different experimental work but in a different experimental work but in a different experimental model and they tried to image the model and they tried to image the model and they tried to image the movement of dye out of the brain at movement of dye out of the brain at movement of dye out of the brain at night and they did not observe it but night and they did not observe it but night and they did not observe it but the reason they didn't observe it was the reason they didn't observe it was the reason they didn't observe it was not because they were bad scientists but not because they were bad scientists but not because they were bad scientists but they made a mistake they weren't aware they made a mistake they weren't aware they made a mistake they weren't aware of which is they created a little hole of which is they created a little hole of which is they created a little hole in the skull in order to image the in the skull in order to image the in the skull in order to image the movement of the die in the brain and movement of the die in the brain and movement of the die in the brain and they didn't close that hole in the skull they didn't close that hole in the skull they didn't close that hole in the skull with a lens or something else to keep with a lens or something else to keep with a lens or something else to keep the pressure in. So all the pressure was the pressure in. So all the pressure was the pressure in. So all the pressure was gone so the lymph couldn't move along at gone so the lymph couldn't move along at gone so the lymph couldn't move along at all. They didn't observe it. They all. They didn't observe it. They all. They didn't observe it. They concluded it wasn't there and everyone concluded it wasn't there and everyone concluded it wasn't there and everyone believed them not her because you know believed them not her because you know believed them not her because you know they were the more famous larger groups. they were the more famous larger groups. they were the more famous larger groups. She moved off to a different field. She moved off to a different field. She moved off to a different field. Fortunately, she ended up at the Fortunately, she ended up at the Fortunately, she ended up at the National Institutes of Health, funded a National Institutes of Health, funded a National Institutes of Health, funded a lot of great work, including the later lot of great work, including the later lot of great work, including the later work that Dr. Netagard work that Dr. Netagard work that Dr. Netagard used to discover that there is in fact a used to discover that there is in fact a used to discover that there is in fact a lymphatic system in the brain. So, give lymphatic system in the brain. So, give lymphatic system in the brain. So, give credit where credit's due. And also credit where credit's due. And also credit where credit's due. And also remember, just because somebody observes remember, just because somebody observes remember, just because somebody observes something and somebody else doesn't does something and somebody else doesn't does something and somebody else doesn't does not mean that it doesn't exist. not mean that it doesn't exist. not mean that it doesn't exist. Going back to the lymphatic system, how Going back to the lymphatic system, how Going back to the lymphatic system, how can you encourage better clearance of can you encourage better clearance of can you encourage better clearance of waste product from your brain at night, waste product from your brain at night, waste product from your brain at night, which is something you absolutely want which is something you absolutely want which is something you absolutely want to do if you want to have less brain fog to do if you want to have less brain fog to do if you want to have less brain fog and wake up from sleep, perhaps even and wake up from sleep, perhaps even and wake up from sleep, perhaps even less sleep than you think you need less sleep than you think you need less sleep than you think you need feeling fresh and cognitively focused, feeling fresh and cognitively focused, feeling fresh and cognitively focused, etc. Well, it turns out there have been etc. Well, it turns out there have been etc. Well, it turns out there have been a number of studies looking at sleeping a number of studies looking at sleeping a number of studies looking at sleeping position. Every animal, or at least every mammal Every animal, or at least every mammal Every animal, or at least every mammal puts its head down to sleep. Okay, my puts its head down to sleep. Okay, my puts its head down to sleep. Okay, my bulldog Costello because he had a big bulldog Costello because he had a big bulldog Costello because he had a big thick skull, he used to put his chin thick skull, he used to put his chin thick skull, he used to put his chin down and he'd sleep basically with his down and he'd sleep basically with his down and he'd sleep basically with his chin along the floor. I saw a picture of chin along the floor. I saw a picture of chin along the floor. I saw a picture of giraffes. I don't know if they all sleep giraffes. I don't know if they all sleep giraffes. I don't know if they all sleep like this will actually put their head like this will actually put their head like this will actually put their head down and sleep perhaps because lying on down and sleep perhaps because lying on down and sleep perhaps because lying on their side is tough. Some animals sleep their side is tough. Some animals sleep their side is tough. Some animals sleep on their side. Some animals sleep on their side. Some animals sleep on their side. Some animals sleep on their back. Humans, of course, can sleep their back. Humans, of course, can sleep their back. Humans, of course, can sleep in any of those different in any of those different in any of those different configurations. But all mammals make configurations. But all mammals make configurations. But all mammals make some attempt to put their head down in some attempt to put their head down in some attempt to put their head down in sleep. Okay, so what sleeping position sleep. Okay, so what sleeping position sleep. Okay, so what sleeping position is best for humans to encourage is best for humans to encourage is best for humans to encourage lymphatic drainage? And it turns out the lymphatic drainage? And it turns out the lymphatic drainage? And it turns out the answer is to sleep on your side. Okay, answer is to sleep on your side. Okay, answer is to sleep on your side. Okay, there haven't been a ton of systematic there haven't been a ton of systematic there haven't been a ton of systematic studies of this, but if you were to studies of this, but if you were to studies of this, but if you were to compare sleeping on your back, sleeping compare sleeping on your back, sleeping compare sleeping on your back, sleeping on your stomach, or sleeping on your on your stomach, or sleeping on your on your stomach, or sleeping on your side as it relates to the efficiency of side as it relates to the efficiency of side as it relates to the efficiency of lymphatic drainage, you would say that lymphatic drainage, you would say that lymphatic drainage, you would say that sleeping on your side is best. So much sleeping on your side is best. So much sleeping on your side is best. So much so that there are even people, believe so that there are even people, believe so that there are even people, believe it or not, in sleep studies that are it or not, in sleep studies that are it or not, in sleep studies that are putting on what uh equates to like a putting on what uh equates to like a putting on what uh equates to like a fanny pack and putting the fanny in the fanny pack and putting the fanny in the fanny pack and putting the fanny in the fanny position. I know everyone carries fanny position. I know everyone carries fanny position. I know everyone carries the fanny pack up front, so it's not the fanny pack up front, so it's not the fanny pack up front, so it's not really a fanny pack. I don't know, use really a fanny pack. I don't know, use really a fanny pack. I don't know, use your imagination what it should be your imagination what it should be your imagination what it should be called. But in any case, there are called. But in any case, there are called. But in any case, there are studies where people are taking the studies where people are taking the studies where people are taking the fanny pack, putting it behind them so fanny pack, putting it behind them so fanny pack, putting it behind them so that they can't roll onto their back, at that they can't roll onto their back, at that they can't roll onto their back, at least not easily in sleep at night, least not easily in sleep at night, least not easily in sleep at night, forcing them to sleep on their side. forcing them to sleep on their side. forcing them to sleep on their side. Either right or left side does not seem Either right or left side does not seem Either right or left side does not seem to matter. to matter. to matter. So if you want to experiment with this, So if you want to experiment with this, So if you want to experiment with this, you can. I'm a back sleeper, sometimes a you can. I'm a back sleeper, sometimes a you can. I'm a back sleeper, sometimes a side sleeper, what they call, I think side sleeper, what they call, I think side sleeper, what they call, I think it's like crawling soldier stance where it's like crawling soldier stance where it's like crawling soldier stance where I find myself, you know, if I wake up I find myself, you know, if I wake up I find myself, you know, if I wake up with one arm bent and one extended, not with one arm bent and one extended, not with one arm bent and one extended, not like reaching out for the wall or like reaching out for the wall or like reaching out for the wall or something like that, one knee bent. But something like that, one knee bent. But something like that, one knee bent. But I actually have been making some effort I actually have been making some effort I actually have been making some effort to sleep on my side as a reflection of to sleep on my side as a reflection of to sleep on my side as a reflection of what I learned in the preparation for what I learned in the preparation for what I learned in the preparation for this episode and the papers that I uh this episode and the papers that I uh this episode and the papers that I uh read about glimpy clearance. And I'm read about glimpy clearance. And I'm read about glimpy clearance. And I'm going to make more of an effort to do going to make more of an effort to do going to make more of an effort to do that because I personally would like to that because I personally would like to that because I personally would like to get by with a little less sleep. I love get by with a little less sleep. I love get by with a little less sleep. I love getting eight hours. I generally get getting eight hours. I generally get getting eight hours. I generally get somewhere between 6 and 7. I feel pretty somewhere between 6 and 7. I feel pretty somewhere between 6 and 7. I feel pretty good, but I've noticed with each good, but I've noticed with each good, but I've noticed with each successive year that I wake up a little successive year that I wake up a little successive year that I wake up a little bit foggier from that six or seven hours bit foggier from that six or seven hours bit foggier from that six or seven hours of sleep than I did previously. And I of sleep than I did previously. And I of sleep than I did previously. And I haven't changed anything else haven't changed anything else haven't changed anything else dramatically. What is changing? My age. dramatically. What is changing? My age. dramatically. What is changing? My age. What changes with age? The amount of What changes with age? The amount of What changes with age? The amount of inflammatory molecules that you release inflammatory molecules that you release inflammatory molecules that you release in the brain as a consequence of its in the brain as a consequence of its in the brain as a consequence of its normal levels of activity. And this has normal levels of activity. And this has normal levels of activity. And this has a detrimental feedback loop, right? same a detrimental feedback loop, right? same a detrimental feedback loop, right? same level of mental attention, same level of level of mental attention, same level of level of mental attention, same level of mental demand, more inflammatory uh mental demand, more inflammatory uh mental demand, more inflammatory uh response because of more waste product response because of more waste product response because of more waste product created, more clearance of that waste created, more clearance of that waste created, more clearance of that waste product. Therefore, it's a good thing product. Therefore, it's a good thing product. Therefore, it's a good thing for brain health. So much so that there for brain health. So much so that there for brain health. So much so that there are really nice studies showing that a are really nice studies showing that a are really nice studies showing that a if you impair glimpmphatic clearance by if you impair glimpmphatic clearance by if you impair glimpmphatic clearance by disrupting sleep or use some other disrupting sleep or use some other disrupting sleep or use some other method to impair glimpmphatic clearance method to impair glimpmphatic clearance method to impair glimpmphatic clearance like disrupt the aquaporn 4 channel that like disrupt the aquaporn 4 channel that like disrupt the aquaporn 4 channel that you get more buildup of things like you get more buildup of things like you get more buildup of things like amalloid plaques things associated with amalloid plaques things associated with amalloid plaques things associated with dementia like diseases like Alzheimer's dementia like diseases like Alzheimer's dementia like diseases like Alzheimer's but also more buildup of inflammatory but also more buildup of inflammatory but also more buildup of inflammatory molecules like interlucans and TNF alpha molecules like interlucans and TNF alpha molecules like interlucans and TNF alpha generally which make the brain more generally which make the brain more generally which make the brain more susceptible to micro strokes and at a susceptible to micro strokes and at a susceptible to micro strokes and at a very low level are probably what's very low level are probably what's very low level are probably what's relating to this thing that we call relating to this thing that we call relating to this thing that we call brain fog. So, I really would encourage brain fog. So, I really would encourage brain fog. So, I really would encourage everyone to try and emphasize side everyone to try and emphasize side everyone to try and emphasize side sleeping if you can. If you are sleeping if you can. If you are sleeping if you can. If you are sleeping your normal ration or even if you're not your normal ration or even if you're not your normal ration or even if you're not getting your normal ration of sleep to getting your normal ration of sleep to getting your normal ration of sleep to really try and optimize your sleep really try and optimize your sleep really try and optimize your sleep environment a bit in order to improve environment a bit in order to improve environment a bit in order to improve glimpy clearance. Couple of things that glimpy clearance. Couple of things that glimpy clearance. Couple of things that we know reduce lymphatic clearance are we know reduce lymphatic clearance are we know reduce lymphatic clearance are alcohol intake in the day and night alcohol intake in the day and night alcohol intake in the day and night before which reduces REM sleep which before which reduces REM sleep which before which reduces REM sleep which reduces glimpy clearance. We know that reduces glimpy clearance. We know that reduces glimpy clearance. We know that exercise actually can have a beneficial exercise actually can have a beneficial exercise actually can have a beneficial effect on lymphatic clearance provided effect on lymphatic clearance provided effect on lymphatic clearance provided it's not too late in the day, not too it's not too late in the day, not too it's not too late in the day, not too much caffeine or anything with that much caffeine or anything with that much caffeine or anything with that exercise to impair your sleep. But exercise to impair your sleep. But exercise to impair your sleep. But cardiovascular exercise in particular cardiovascular exercise in particular cardiovascular exercise in particular can improve glimpy clearance later that can improve glimpy clearance later that can improve glimpy clearance later that night. We know that keeping your sleep night. We know that keeping your sleep night. We know that keeping your sleep environment cool which optimizes sleep. environment cool which optimizes sleep. environment cool which optimizes sleep. All the things that promote sleep will All the things that promote sleep will All the things that promote sleep will promote lymphatic clearance. But there promote lymphatic clearance. But there promote lymphatic clearance. But there are a couple things in particular are a couple things in particular are a couple things in particular sleeping on your side as well as perhaps sleeping on your side as well as perhaps sleeping on your side as well as perhaps elevating your feet a bit maybe five to elevating your feet a bit maybe five to elevating your feet a bit maybe five to 10 degrees just putting a pillow 10 degrees just putting a pillow 10 degrees just putting a pillow underneath your feet to get a little bit underneath your feet to get a little bit underneath your feet to get a little bit of elevation the feet for more lymphatic of elevation the feet for more lymphatic of elevation the feet for more lymphatic clearance in the legs and some people clearance in the legs and some people clearance in the legs and some people have even hypothesized that sleeping on have even hypothesized that sleeping on have even hypothesized that sleeping on your side at with a pillow that isn't your side at with a pillow that isn't your side at with a pillow that isn't super flat so your head at least isn't super flat so your head at least isn't super flat so your head at least isn't tilted down. Remember the lymphatic tilted down. Remember the lymphatic tilted down. Remember the lymphatic system fights gravity all the time. So system fights gravity all the time. So system fights gravity all the time. So you don't want your head falling back at you don't want your head falling back at you don't want your head falling back at the very least. And maybe instead of the very least. And maybe instead of the very least. And maybe instead of sleeping flat or having your head sleeping flat or having your head sleeping flat or having your head falling back, you have your head falling back, you have your head falling back, you have your head slightly tilted up. Usually a pillow slightly tilted up. Usually a pillow slightly tilted up. Usually a pillow will accomplish that. So all of these will accomplish that. So all of these will accomplish that. So all of these things are very simple to implement. things are very simple to implement. things are very simple to implement. They're essentially zero cost to They're essentially zero cost to They're essentially zero cost to implement. But all the studies of implement. But all the studies of implement. But all the studies of disrupting sleep and looking at disrupting sleep and looking at disrupting sleep and looking at glymphatic clearance and waste products glymphatic clearance and waste products glymphatic clearance and waste products and the downstream effects on cognition and the downstream effects on cognition and the downstream effects on cognition and brain longevity all point in the and brain longevity all point in the and brain longevity all point in the same direction. You need the waste same direction. You need the waste same direction. You need the waste cleared out of your brain at night, cleared out of your brain at night, cleared out of your brain at night, which means getting great sleep. And you which means getting great sleep. And you which means getting great sleep. And you also need the lymphatic system to be also need the lymphatic system to be also need the lymphatic system to be positioned literally pun intended for positioned literally pun intended for positioned literally pun intended for you to get the maximal amount of you to get the maximal amount of you to get the maximal amount of lymphatic clearance while you sleep. And lymphatic clearance while you sleep. And lymphatic clearance while you sleep. And as it relates to the cosmetic effects as it relates to the cosmetic effects as it relates to the cosmetic effects that I think most people want. I don't that I think most people want. I don't that I think most people want. I don't think anyone wants to wake up with puffy think anyone wants to wake up with puffy think anyone wants to wake up with puffy eyes and puffy face. Sleeping with your eyes and puffy face. Sleeping with your eyes and puffy face. Sleeping with your head a little bit elevated will also head a little bit elevated will also head a little bit elevated will also assist there. Okay. I talked to two assist there. Okay. I talked to two assist there. Okay. I talked to two dermatologists who confirmed that a dermatologists who confirmed that a dermatologists who confirmed that a lot of the puffiness that people are lot of the puffiness that people are lot of the puffiness that people are concerned about with their eyes in the concerned about with their eyes in the concerned about with their eyes in the morning and they feel like they need to, morning and they feel like they need to, morning and they feel like they need to, you know, ice underneath their eyes, you know, ice underneath their eyes, you know, ice underneath their eyes, some people even sell these patches some people even sell these patches some people even sell these patches that go on the eyes. It's kind of that go on the eyes. It's kind of that go on the eyes. It's kind of interesting those patches. By the way, interesting those patches. By the way, interesting those patches. By the way, uh the dermatologist I spoke to said the uh the dermatologist I spoke to said the uh the dermatologist I spoke to said the reason those patches probably work is reason those patches probably work is reason those patches probably work is they just provide some gentle pressure they just provide some gentle pressure they just provide some gentle pressure to encourage the lymph out of that area. to encourage the lymph out of that area. to encourage the lymph out of that area. Right? Maybe as simple as that, Right? Maybe as simple as that, Right? Maybe as simple as that, something you probably could accomplish something you probably could accomplish something you probably could accomplish with your fingers just as easily, but it with your fingers just as easily, but it with your fingers just as easily, but it makes sense why those stickers would makes sense why those stickers would makes sense why those stickers would probably help. A lot of them are lined probably help. A lot of them are lined probably help. A lot of them are lined with other things these days, you know, with other things these days, you know, with other things these days, you know, peptides and collagen and things to make peptides and collagen and things to make peptides and collagen and things to make them more attractive as a commercial them more attractive as a commercial them more attractive as a commercial product, but you don't necessarily need product, but you don't necessarily need product, but you don't necessarily need those. And there is this business of those. And there is this business of those. And there is this business of lymphatic massage and fascial massage lymphatic massage and fascial massage lymphatic massage and fascial massage for the face. And there I have to say for the face. And there I have to say for the face. And there I have to say there are some very striking there are some very striking there are some very striking examples of before and afters of people examples of before and afters of people examples of before and afters of people who do just a little bit of uh who do just a little bit of uh who do just a little bit of uh pressure-based and you know very pressure-based and you know very pressure-based and you know very specific meaning in the proper order and specific meaning in the proper order and specific meaning in the proper order and in the proper locations for the neck. We in the proper locations for the neck. We in the proper locations for the neck. We already talked about why the neck and already talked about why the neck and already talked about why the neck and clavicle region is so important under clavicle region is so important under clavicle region is so important under the jaw, the face, for the lymphatic the jaw, the face, for the lymphatic the jaw, the face, for the lymphatic system and for the fascia which as we system and for the fascia which as we system and for the fascia which as we talked about earlier is intimately talked about earlier is intimately talked about earlier is intimately related to those lymphatic vessels and related to those lymphatic vessels and related to those lymphatic vessels and especially in the face the lymphatic especially in the face the lymphatic especially in the face the lymphatic vessels that is the lymphatic vessels that is the lymphatic vessels that is the lymphatic capillaries that intervate the capillaries that intervate the capillaries that intervate the eyelids around the eyes. Those are going eyelids around the eyes. Those are going eyelids around the eyes. Those are going to be tiny and very easy to be tiny and very easy to be tiny and very easy to impinge to pinch shut. So the degree of impinge to pinch shut. So the degree of impinge to pinch shut. So the degree of pressure that one requires at different pressure that one requires at different pressure that one requires at different locations in the face and the proper locations in the face and the proper locations in the face and the proper order to do all that is indeed very order to do all that is indeed very order to do all that is indeed very important and the before and afters of important and the before and afters of important and the before and afters of people's kind of let's just call it what people's kind of let's just call it what people's kind of let's just call it what it is youthfulness and um kind of levels it is youthfulness and um kind of levels it is youthfulness and um kind of levels of alertness appearance uh the height of alertness appearance uh the height of alertness appearance uh the height of the natural kind of resting place for the natural kind of resting place for the natural kind of resting place for the eyebrows the you know as opposed to the eyebrows the you know as opposed to the eyebrows the you know as opposed to sunken eyes and sunken eyebrows you know sunken eyes and sunken eyebrows you know sunken eyes and sunken eyebrows you know open eyes and uh even what appears to be open eyes and uh even what appears to be open eyes and uh even what appears to be like the cheekbones those can undergo like the cheekbones those can undergo like the cheekbones those can undergo very traumatic shifts with proper very traumatic shifts with proper very traumatic shifts with proper fascial and lymphatic massage and those fascial and lymphatic massage and those fascial and lymphatic massage and those approaches are out there. So, one person approaches are out there. So, one person approaches are out there. So, one person who's considered one of the best experts who's considered one of the best experts who's considered one of the best experts in this area and who has tutorials about in this area and who has tutorials about in this area and who has tutorials about this, how you can use fascial and lymph this, how you can use fascial and lymph this, how you can use fascial and lymph drainage and massage for the face in drainage and massage for the face in drainage and massage for the face in order to make it look more youthful. Uh, order to make it look more youthful. Uh, order to make it look more youthful. Uh, is somebody by the way I have no is somebody by the way I have no is somebody by the way I have no financial relationship to is Anastasia financial relationship to is Anastasia financial relationship to is Anastasia Beauty Fascia. It's an account on Beauty Fascia. It's an account on Beauty Fascia. It's an account on Instagram. I believe there are also Instagram. I believe there are also Instagram. I believe there are also accounts on other social media channels. accounts on other social media channels. accounts on other social media channels. Put a link to it in the show not Put a link to it in the show not Put a link to it in the show not captions. the before and afters that she captions. the before and afters that she captions. the before and afters that she shows there of the people who apply shows there of the people who apply shows there of the people who apply these methods which are non-surgical, these methods which are non-surgical, these methods which are non-surgical, non-drug, non Botox methods, she makes non-drug, non Botox methods, she makes non-drug, non Botox methods, she makes it very clear that's the case are it very clear that's the case are it very clear that's the case are absolutely striking. I mean you see some absolutely striking. I mean you see some absolutely striking. I mean you see some before and afters after you know 2 before and afters after you know 2 before and afters after you know 2 weeks, 30 days, 60 days that are like weeks, 30 days, 60 days that are like weeks, 30 days, 60 days that are like absolutely striking really when you go how could striking really when you go how could striking really when you go how could that possibly be? Well, when you learn that possibly be? Well, when you learn that possibly be? Well, when you learn how the lymphatic system works, when you how the lymphatic system works, when you how the lymphatic system works, when you understand about how lymph can pull, how understand about how lymph can pull, how understand about how lymph can pull, how fluid can accumulate in the interstatial fluid can accumulate in the interstatial fluid can accumulate in the interstatial space, if it's not getting cleared by space, if it's not getting cleared by space, if it's not getting cleared by the lymphatic system, and when you the lymphatic system, and when you the lymphatic system, and when you understand the both superficial vessels understand the both superficial vessels understand the both superficial vessels and deeper vessels of the lymphatic and deeper vessels of the lymphatic and deeper vessels of the lymphatic system are related to light touch at the system are related to light touch at the system are related to light touch at the surface in the proper directions and the surface in the proper directions and the surface in the proper directions and the drainage out of the head and neck, as drainage out of the head and neck, as drainage out of the head and neck, as well as accessing the deeper lymphatic well as accessing the deeper lymphatic well as accessing the deeper lymphatic vessels that are associated with the vessels that are associated with the vessels that are associated with the fascia. It all makes perfect sense. fascia. It all makes perfect sense. fascia. It all makes perfect sense. There's absolutely no reason why those There's absolutely no reason why those There's absolutely no reason why those sorts of results couldn't be sorts of results couldn't be sorts of results couldn't be accomplished, but the order of accomplished, but the order of accomplished, but the order of operations for something like that is operations for something like that is operations for something like that is very important. It's not the case that very important. It's not the case that very important. It's not the case that one can just rub under the eyes and, you one can just rub under the eyes and, you one can just rub under the eyes and, you know, rub a bit on the forehead or hold know, rub a bit on the forehead or hold know, rub a bit on the forehead or hold up the eyebrows. If it were, of course, up the eyebrows. If it were, of course, up the eyebrows. If it were, of course, everyone would be doing it. So, it's everyone would be doing it. So, it's everyone would be doing it. So, it's nice that there are people such as nice that there are people such as nice that there are people such as Anastasia Beauty Fascia who are Anastasia Beauty Fascia who are Anastasia Beauty Fascia who are providing the methods for people to do providing the methods for people to do providing the methods for people to do that. So, if you're interested in those that. So, if you're interested in those that. So, if you're interested in those methods, again, I have no financial methods, again, I have no financial methods, again, I have no financial relationship to them whatsoever, relationship to them whatsoever, relationship to them whatsoever, but makes sense why they could, should, but makes sense why they could, should, but makes sense why they could, should, and indeed appear to work. I'd like to and indeed appear to work. I'd like to and indeed appear to work. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one take a quick break and acknowledge one take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching became a Function member after searching became a Function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to for the most comprehensive approach to for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 lab testing. Function provides over 100 lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for from harmful plastics, and tests for from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 only provides testing of over 100 only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of consumption. I'd been eating a lot of consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat tuna, while also making an effort to eat tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. The to get early access to function. The to get early access to function. The other thing about the lymphatic system other thing about the lymphatic system other thing about the lymphatic system and appearance, not just puffiness of and appearance, not just puffiness of and appearance, not just puffiness of the face, but swelling, you know, we the face, but swelling, you know, we the face, but swelling, you know, we talk about water retention, edimema, and talk about water retention, edimema, and talk about water retention, edimema, and we uh generally don't want that, right? we uh generally don't want that, right? we uh generally don't want that, right? Most people don't want water retention. Most people don't want water retention. Most people don't want water retention. You can clear a lot of water retention You can clear a lot of water retention You can clear a lot of water retention simply by hydrating well. You know, simply by hydrating well. You know, simply by hydrating well. You know, you're going to urinate more. You're you're going to urinate more. You're you're going to urinate more. You're going to balance the amount of fluid and going to balance the amount of fluid and going to balance the amount of fluid and salt appropriately. I've done an entire salt appropriately. I've done an entire salt appropriately. I've done an entire episode about this. You talk about episode about this. You talk about episode about this. You talk about kidney function, eldoststerone, etc. But kidney function, eldoststerone, etc. But kidney function, eldoststerone, etc. But the point is this, a lot of fluid the point is this, a lot of fluid the point is this, a lot of fluid accumulation occurs in the interstatial accumulation occurs in the interstatial accumulation occurs in the interstatial space because the lymphatic flow is not space because the lymphatic flow is not space because the lymphatic flow is not sufficient. The rate of the lymphatic sufficient. The rate of the lymphatic sufficient. The rate of the lymphatic flow is not sufficient, I should say. flow is not sufficient, I should say. flow is not sufficient, I should say. Hydration will definitely support Hydration will definitely support Hydration will definitely support lymphatic flow and drainage. Okay, this lymphatic flow and drainage. Okay, this lymphatic flow and drainage. Okay, this is one of the major reasons why you need is one of the major reasons why you need is one of the major reasons why you need to make sure you're drinking enough to make sure you're drinking enough to make sure you're drinking enough water. It's very important to maintain water. It's very important to maintain water. It's very important to maintain proper blood volume and your lymphatic proper blood volume and your lymphatic proper blood volume and your lymphatic flow will be improved. How much is flow will be improved. How much is flow will be improved. How much is enough water? We've talked about that in enough water? We've talked about that in enough water? We've talked about that in previous episodes. If you're exercising previous episodes. If you're exercising previous episodes. If you're exercising or sweating a lot, you can use the or sweating a lot, you can use the or sweating a lot, you can use the galpin equation. I'll put that in the galpin equation. I'll put that in the galpin equation. I'll put that in the show note captions if you really want to show note captions if you really want to show note captions if you really want to get technical. For most people, the best get technical. For most people, the best get technical. For most people, the best thing to do is the following. When you thing to do is the following. When you thing to do is the following. When you wake up, drink 16 to 32 ounces of water wake up, drink 16 to 32 ounces of water wake up, drink 16 to 32 ounces of water in addition to whatever other fluids you in addition to whatever other fluids you in addition to whatever other fluids you happen to be drinking. Yerberba mate if happen to be drinking. Yerberba mate if happen to be drinking. Yerberba mate if you're me, coffee perhaps if you're you you're me, coffee perhaps if you're you you're me, coffee perhaps if you're you or both for me on some days if I really or both for me on some days if I really or both for me on some days if I really need to get caffeinated but also drink need to get caffeinated but also drink need to get caffeinated but also drink enough water and then just make sure enough water and then just make sure enough water and then just make sure that every hour or two you drink 8 to 16 that every hour or two you drink 8 to 16 that every hour or two you drink 8 to 16 ounces of water. Might seem like a lot. ounces of water. Might seem like a lot. ounces of water. Might seem like a lot. Yes, you might take a few extra trips to Yes, you might take a few extra trips to Yes, you might take a few extra trips to the restroom, but by doing that, you can the restroom, but by doing that, you can the restroom, but by doing that, you can ensure that your blood volume, your ensure that your blood volume, your ensure that your blood volume, your sodium balance, as well as your sodium balance, as well as your sodium balance, as well as your lymphatic system are operating about as lymphatic system are operating about as lymphatic system are operating about as well as they could be as long as you're well as they could be as long as you're well as they could be as long as you're doing all the other things that we doing all the other things that we doing all the other things that we talked about to encourage your lymphatic talked about to encourage your lymphatic talked about to encourage your lymphatic system to be flowing along. So, by now system to be flowing along. So, by now system to be flowing along. So, by now you're probably realizing that a lot of you're probably realizing that a lot of you're probably realizing that a lot of the things that you and other people are the things that you and other people are the things that you and other people are already doing are probably helping you already doing are probably helping you already doing are probably helping you in part through the lymphatic system. in part through the lymphatic system. in part through the lymphatic system. Okay? I think we all know that we should Okay? I think we all know that we should Okay? I think we all know that we should hydrate well. I just gave you another hydrate well. I just gave you another hydrate well. I just gave you another reason why you should hydrate well reason why you should hydrate well reason why you should hydrate well because of its effects on the lymphatic because of its effects on the lymphatic because of its effects on the lymphatic system. Most everybody knows that we system. Most everybody knows that we system. Most everybody knows that we should be doing cardiovascular exercise should be doing cardiovascular exercise should be doing cardiovascular exercise and resistance exercise every week. and resistance exercise every week. and resistance exercise every week. Okay? For some people be a bit more of Okay? For some people be a bit more of Okay? For some people be a bit more of one versus the other. Some people are one versus the other. Some people are one versus the other. Some people are doing an equal amount of both. You do doing an equal amount of both. You do doing an equal amount of both. You do resistance training to strengthen your resistance training to strengthen your resistance training to strengthen your muscles, your bones, your tendons to muscles, your bones, your tendons to muscles, your bones, your tendons to offset loss of power, speed, and muscle offset loss of power, speed, and muscle offset loss of power, speed, and muscle that occurs as you age. Also for the that occurs as you age. Also for the that occurs as you age. Also for the aesthetic reasons for many people. aesthetic reasons for many people. aesthetic reasons for many people. Cardiovascular exercise also for Cardiovascular exercise also for Cardiovascular exercise also for aesthetic reasons but also of course to aesthetic reasons but also of course to aesthetic reasons but also of course to improve the functioning of your improve the functioning of your improve the functioning of your cardiovascular system, your heart, cardiovascular system, your heart, cardiovascular system, your heart, right? Most people believe that you do right? Most people believe that you do right? Most people believe that you do cardio to improve your heart function. cardio to improve your heart function. cardio to improve your heart function. You increase stroke volume in your You increase stroke volume in your You increase stroke volume in your heart, for instance. How much blood you heart, for instance. How much blood you heart, for instance. How much blood you can beat out to your body by can beat out to your body by can beat out to your body by strengthening and in some cases even strengthening and in some cases even strengthening and in some cases even enlarging your heart a bit. What most enlarging your heart a bit. What most enlarging your heart a bit. What most people probably don't realize is that people probably don't realize is that people probably don't realize is that many of the positive effects of many of the positive effects of many of the positive effects of exercise, in particular, cardiovascular exercise, in particular, cardiovascular exercise, in particular, cardiovascular exercise occur because cardiovascular exercise occur because cardiovascular exercise occur because cardiovascular exercise promotes what's called exercise promotes what's called exercise promotes what's called lymphonneogenesis. The growth of new lymphonneogenesis. The growth of new lymphonneogenesis. The growth of new lymphatic vessels that intervate the lymphatic vessels that intervate the lymphatic vessels that intervate the heart, remove waste products from the cells of remove waste products from the cells of remove waste products from the cells of the heart. Remember, your heart cells the heart. Remember, your heart cells the heart. Remember, your heart cells are active all the time, generating tons are active all the time, generating tons are active all the time, generating tons of waste, also consuming tons of oxygen of waste, also consuming tons of oxygen of waste, also consuming tons of oxygen and nutrients. And that needs to be and nutrients. And that needs to be and nutrients. And that needs to be cleared out. And as we age, our heart cleared out. And as we age, our heart cleared out. And as we age, our heart gets less efficient at clearing out that gets less efficient at clearing out that gets less efficient at clearing out that waste. Cardiovascular exercise increases waste. Cardiovascular exercise increases waste. Cardiovascular exercise increases literally the number of lymphatic literally the number of lymphatic literally the number of lymphatic vessels that allow the drainage of those vessels that allow the drainage of those vessels that allow the drainage of those toxins away from the heart which greatly toxins away from the heart which greatly toxins away from the heart which greatly supports the cells of the heart. But supports the cells of the heart. But supports the cells of the heart. But also because this whole thing is a loop, also because this whole thing is a loop, also because this whole thing is a loop, if you remember the lymphatic system if you remember the lymphatic system if you remember the lymphatic system feeds back to the venus blood supply. feeds back to the venus blood supply. feeds back to the venus blood supply. Then that blood gets oxygenated, it goes Then that blood gets oxygenated, it goes Then that blood gets oxygenated, it goes back to the heart. The heart of course back to the heart. The heart of course back to the heart. The heart of course is supplied its own blood system, right? is supplied its own blood system, right? is supplied its own blood system, right? The heart also needs oxygen and blood The heart also needs oxygen and blood The heart also needs oxygen and blood supply. That's why we have so-called supply. That's why we have so-called supply. That's why we have so-called coronary arteries, right? The arteries coronary arteries, right? The arteries coronary arteries, right? The arteries that serve the heart itself. So, by that serve the heart itself. So, by that serve the heart itself. So, by increasing the amount of lymphatic increasing the amount of lymphatic increasing the amount of lymphatic vessels, you can increase the amount of vessels, you can increase the amount of vessels, you can increase the amount of lymphatic drainage from the heart and lymphatic drainage from the heart and lymphatic drainage from the heart and the whole system functions much better. the whole system functions much better. the whole system functions much better. In fact, there are several papers and In fact, there are several papers and In fact, there are several papers and I'll link to these in the show note I'll link to these in the show note I'll link to these in the show note captions. I'll just read you the titles captions. I'll just read you the titles captions. I'll just read you the titles of these. Uh they make obvious what the of these. Uh they make obvious what the of these. Uh they make obvious what the conclusions are. One is lymphogenesis conclusions are. One is lymphogenesis conclusions are. One is lymphogenesis contributes to exercise induced contributes to exercise induced contributes to exercise induced physiological cardiac growth. the actual physiological cardiac growth. the actual physiological cardiac growth. the actual growth of the heart is enabled by the growth of the heart is enabled by the growth of the heart is enabled by the development of these new lymph vessels development of these new lymph vessels development of these new lymph vessels to the heart that are induced by to the heart that are induced by to the heart that are induced by exercise. So that's really cool. And in exercise. So that's really cool. And in exercise. So that's really cool. And in addition, I hate to break it to you, but addition, I hate to break it to you, but addition, I hate to break it to you, but for all of us, your heart gets less for all of us, your heart gets less for all of us, your heart gets less healthy as you age, even if you stay healthy as you age, even if you stay healthy as you age, even if you stay very healthy as you age. In part, that's very healthy as you age. In part, that's very healthy as you age. In part, that's due to inflammation from the buildup of due to inflammation from the buildup of due to inflammation from the buildup of waste products within the heart. There waste products within the heart. There waste products within the heart. There are other reasons for this too, but it are other reasons for this too, but it are other reasons for this too, but it has now been demonstrated, and here I'm has now been demonstrated, and here I'm has now been demonstrated, and here I'm quoting the title of this paper. Again, quoting the title of this paper. Again, quoting the title of this paper. Again, I'll put a link to it in the show not I'll put a link to it in the show not I'll put a link to it in the show not captions. Exercise induced cardiac captions. Exercise induced cardiac captions. Exercise induced cardiac lymphatic remodeling mitigates lymphatic remodeling mitigates lymphatic remodeling mitigates inflammation in the aging heart. So, inflammation in the aging heart. So, inflammation in the aging heart. So, this isn't the addition of new lymphatic this isn't the addition of new lymphatic this isn't the addition of new lymphatic vessels. This is remodeling the vessels. This is remodeling the vessels. This is remodeling the branching and extension of existing branching and extension of existing branching and extension of existing lymphatic vessels into areas that they lymphatic vessels into areas that they lymphatic vessels into areas that they weren't before. So, they can pull waste weren't before. So, they can pull waste weren't before. So, they can pull waste from the cells in those area. So the from the cells in those area. So the from the cells in those area. So the exact opposite of lympadeema where exact opposite of lympadeema where exact opposite of lympadeema where there's not enough drainage and there's not enough drainage and there's not enough drainage and there's buildup of waste products and fluid and buildup of waste products and fluid and buildup of waste products and fluid and you end up with a bunch of issues there you end up with a bunch of issues there you end up with a bunch of issues there of local inflammation that makes that of local inflammation that makes that of local inflammation that makes that tissue sick and then eventually can tissue sick and then eventually can tissue sick and then eventually can spread to other tissues. It's quite spread to other tissues. It's quite spread to other tissues. It's quite serious. This is the exact opposite of serious. This is the exact opposite of serious. This is the exact opposite of that. You're getting more entry of the that. You're getting more entry of the that. You're getting more entry of the lymphatic vessels. You're getting new lymphatic vessels. You're getting new lymphatic vessels. You're getting new lymphatic vessels from cardiovascular lymphatic vessels from cardiovascular lymphatic vessels from cardiovascular exercise and as a consequence more exercise and as a consequence more exercise and as a consequence more clearance of waste product from the clearance of waste product from the clearance of waste product from the heart and the heart can function better. heart and the heart can function better. heart and the heart can function better. So much so that at least the conclusion So much so that at least the conclusion So much so that at least the conclusion of this paper was that it significantly of this paper was that it significantly of this paper was that it significantly contributes to the offset of contributes to the offset of contributes to the offset of inflammation of the aging heart. So inflammation of the aging heart. So inflammation of the aging heart. So again, this isn't pushing you to again, this isn't pushing you to again, this isn't pushing you to necessarily do something you're not necessarily do something you're not necessarily do something you're not doing already. If you're doing your doing already. If you're doing your doing already. If you're doing your cardio, keep up your cardio. You should cardio, keep up your cardio. You should cardio, keep up your cardio. You should also be resistance training. We all also be resistance training. We all also be resistance training. We all should. But if you're not doing should. But if you're not doing should. But if you're not doing cardiovascular exercise and you're just cardiovascular exercise and you're just cardiovascular exercise and you're just lifting, I know a number of people that lifting, I know a number of people that lifting, I know a number of people that do that. They think, well, my heart rate do that. They think, well, my heart rate do that. They think, well, my heart rate gets up and, you know, I can I can hop gets up and, you know, I can I can hop gets up and, you know, I can I can hop on the bike every once in a while and I on the bike every once in a while and I on the bike every once in a while and I don't get too fatigued. my V2 max is don't get too fatigued. my V2 max is don't get too fatigued. my V2 max is decent and this sort of thing. Yeah. decent and this sort of thing. Yeah. decent and this sort of thing. Yeah. Well, resistance training has its own Well, resistance training has its own Well, resistance training has its own set of benefits and it probably can set of benefits and it probably can set of benefits and it probably can positively impact the lymphatic system positively impact the lymphatic system positively impact the lymphatic system as well. But there's just now oh so much as well. But there's just now oh so much as well. But there's just now oh so much data supporting the fact that regular data supporting the fact that regular data supporting the fact that regular cardiovascular exercise can really cardiovascular exercise can really cardiovascular exercise can really improve heart function by improving improve heart function by improving improve heart function by improving lymphogenesis and the growth and lymphogenesis and the growth and lymphogenesis and the growth and extension of existing lymphatic vessels extension of existing lymphatic vessels extension of existing lymphatic vessels into areas of the heart that they into areas of the heart that they into areas of the heart that they weren't before or that they were slowly weren't before or that they were slowly weren't before or that they were slowly receding from. So I really encourage you receding from. So I really encourage you receding from. So I really encourage you to keep up that cardiovascular exercise to keep up that cardiovascular exercise to keep up that cardiovascular exercise if you're already doing it and if you're if you're already doing it and if you're if you're already doing it and if you're not to start and if keeping your heart not to start and if keeping your heart not to start and if keeping your heart healthy is not incentive enough. Turns healthy is not incentive enough. Turns healthy is not incentive enough. Turns out that here I quote again aerobic out that here I quote again aerobic out that here I quote again aerobic exercise improves clearance of amaloid exercise improves clearance of amaloid exercise improves clearance of amaloid beta by the lymphatic system and this is beta by the lymphatic system and this is beta by the lymphatic system and this is in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease but this is just one example of many but this is just one example of many but this is just one example of many examples whereby as I talked about many examples whereby as I talked about many examples whereby as I talked about before exercise improves sleep before exercise improves sleep before exercise improves sleep improves lymphatic clearance which improves lymphatic clearance which improves lymphatic clearance which clears away toxins in the brain which clears away toxins in the brain which clears away toxins in the brain which can offset age related dementia and a can offset age related dementia and a can offset age related dementia and a bunch of other negative effects like bunch of other negative effects like bunch of other negative effects like brain fog. But in addition to that, brain fog. But in addition to that, brain fog. But in addition to that, exercise has direct effects in exercise has direct effects in exercise has direct effects in increasing the amount of glimpy increasing the amount of glimpy increasing the amount of glimpy clearance that's occurring in those clearance that's occurring in those clearance that's occurring in those pervascular spaces of the brain while pervascular spaces of the brain while pervascular spaces of the brain while you sleep. So more and more evidence you sleep. So more and more evidence you sleep. So more and more evidence that we should yes get enough sleep, but that we should yes get enough sleep, but that we should yes get enough sleep, but we should also exercise not just because we should also exercise not just because we should also exercise not just because it improves our sleep, but because it improves our sleep, but because it improves our sleep, but because it can improve lymphatic clearance from the can improve lymphatic clearance from the can improve lymphatic clearance from the brain. And this is probably the major brain. And this is probably the major brain. And this is probably the major reason in my opinion why cardiovascular reason in my opinion why cardiovascular reason in my opinion why cardiovascular exercise done regularly improves brain exercise done regularly improves brain exercise done regularly improves brain function. I know people love to talk function. I know people love to talk function. I know people love to talk about BDNAP, brain derived neutrophic about BDNAP, brain derived neutrophic about BDNAP, brain derived neutrophic factor. I've worked on brain derived factor. I've worked on brain derived factor. I've worked on brain derived neutrophic factor. I know a lot about neutrophic factor. I know a lot about neutrophic factor. I know a lot about brain growth factors. I think it's super brain growth factors. I think it's super brain growth factors. I think it's super interesting and indeed I think that interesting and indeed I think that interesting and indeed I think that highintensity interval training, highintensity interval training, highintensity interval training, anything where you experience a burn, a anything where you experience a burn, a anything where you experience a burn, a lactate accumulation in the muscles, lactate accumulation in the muscles, lactate accumulation in the muscles, yes, can stimulate more BDNF. And I yes, can stimulate more BDNF. And I yes, can stimulate more BDNF. And I think there's oh so much evidence that think there's oh so much evidence that think there's oh so much evidence that that's great. But I think when you look that's great. But I think when you look that's great. But I think when you look at the literature carefully, most of the at the literature carefully, most of the at the literature carefully, most of the positive effects of regular positive effects of regular positive effects of regular cardiovascular exercise on brain cardiovascular exercise on brain cardiovascular exercise on brain function, working memory, declarative memory, uh working memory, declarative memory, uh working memory, declarative memory, uh you know, focus ability and a number of you know, focus ability and a number of you know, focus ability and a number of other things occur because you're other things occur because you're other things occur because you're getting excellent glimpmphatic clearance getting excellent glimpmphatic clearance getting excellent glimpmphatic clearance during sleep and you're getting just during sleep and you're getting just during sleep and you're getting just more clearance of waste products even in more clearance of waste products even in more clearance of waste products even in wakefulness. So here we are again. wakefulness. So here we are again. wakefulness. So here we are again. Exercise, exercise, sleep, Exercise, exercise, sleep, Exercise, exercise, sleep, sleep. And to really hit on this sleep, sleep. And to really hit on this sleep, sleep. And to really hit on this theme of things that you may already be theme of things that you may already be theme of things that you may already be doing, and if you're not, you probably doing, and if you're not, you probably doing, and if you're not, you probably should. I want to just briefly mention should. I want to just briefly mention should. I want to just briefly mention one or two other things. First of all, one or two other things. First of all, one or two other things. First of all, this wouldn't be a Huberman Lab podcast this wouldn't be a Huberman Lab podcast this wouldn't be a Huberman Lab podcast episode if we didn't talk about light. episode if we didn't talk about light. episode if we didn't talk about light. And no, I'm not going to tell you to get And no, I'm not going to tell you to get And no, I'm not going to tell you to get morning sunlight in your eyes to set morning sunlight in your eyes to set morning sunlight in your eyes to set your circadian rhythm and boost your circadian rhythm and boost your circadian rhythm and boost your morning cortisol because I've said that morning cortisol because I've said that morning cortisol because I've said that many times before and you should already many times before and you should already many times before and you should already be doing that. And if you're not, you be doing that. And if you're not, you be doing that. And if you're not, you should do it. However, there is a place should do it. However, there is a place should do it. However, there is a place for light in particular longwavelength for light in particular longwavelength for light in particular longwavelength light in supporting lymphatic health. So light in supporting lymphatic health. So light in supporting lymphatic health. So perhaps you know, perhaps you don't. perhaps you know, perhaps you don't. perhaps you know, perhaps you don't. Light has many different wavelengths. Light has many different wavelengths. Light has many different wavelengths. Short wavelengths tend to be things like Short wavelengths tend to be things like Short wavelengths tend to be things like UV, blue light, green light. Longer UV, blue light, green light. Longer UV, blue light, green light. Longer wavelength light is red light, near wavelength light is red light, near wavelength light is red light, near infrared, and infrared light. You can't infrared, and infrared light. You can't infrared, and infrared light. You can't see infrared light. Pit vipers can. You see infrared light. Pit vipers can. You see infrared light. Pit vipers can. You can't. However, long wavelength light can't. However, long wavelength light can't. However, long wavelength light and short wavelength light and short wavelength light and short wavelength light and everything in between does come from the everything in between does come from the everything in between does come from the sun. When the sun is low in the sky, sun. When the sun is low in the sky, sun. When the sun is low in the sky, such as near sunrise and around sunset, such as near sunrise and around sunset, such as near sunrise and around sunset, you see more of the long wavelength you see more of the long wavelength you see more of the long wavelength light in the form of oranges, reds, light in the form of oranges, reds, light in the form of oranges, reds, pinks, and so forth. And anytime the sun pinks, and so forth. And anytime the sun pinks, and so forth. And anytime the sun is out, you can feel the warmth of the is out, you can feel the warmth of the is out, you can feel the warmth of the sun, especially when there's not too sun, especially when there's not too sun, especially when there's not too much overcast clouds in the way. And much overcast clouds in the way. And much overcast clouds in the way. And that warmth from the sun, that's that warmth from the sun, that's that warmth from the sun, that's infrared light. Okay? The light you infrared light. Okay? The light you infrared light. Okay? The light you can't see but feels warm, that's can't see but feels warm, that's can't see but feels warm, that's infrared light. The red light, of infrared light. The red light, of infrared light. The red light, of course, is red light. Near infrared is course, is red light. Near infrared is course, is red light. Near infrared is somewhere in between. Turns out that the somewhere in between. Turns out that the somewhere in between. Turns out that the long wavelengths of light that come from long wavelengths of light that come from long wavelengths of light that come from the sun or that come from so-called red the sun or that come from so-called red the sun or that come from so-called red light devices, which most commonly are light devices, which most commonly are light devices, which most commonly are not just red light, but they're red not just red light, but they're red not just red light, but they're red light, near infrared, and infrared, what light, near infrared, and infrared, what light, near infrared, and infrared, what we refer to as somewhere between about we refer to as somewhere between about we refer to as somewhere between about 620 and maybe a,000 nanometers. So 620 and maybe a,000 nanometers. So 620 and maybe a,000 nanometers. So that's long wavelengths. that's long wavelengths. that's long wavelengths. By comparison, short wavelengths would By comparison, short wavelengths would By comparison, short wavelengths would be down in the 300s and 400s and 500s. be down in the 300s and 400s and 500s. be down in the 300s and 400s and 500s. But the long wavelength light of say 620 But the long wavelength light of say 620 But the long wavelength light of say 620 nmters all the way out to usually it's nmters all the way out to usually it's nmters all the way out to usually it's about 850 nmters that comes from a red about 850 nmters that comes from a red about 850 nmters that comes from a red light device near infrared light device light device near infrared light device light device near infrared light device infrared light device that can penetrate infrared light device that can penetrate infrared light device that can penetrate deep into the skin. So it has effects on deep into the skin. So it has effects on deep into the skin. So it has effects on the skin. It has effects deep to the skin. It has effects deep to the skin. It has effects deep to the skin and there are a lot of different skin and there are a lot of different skin and there are a lot of different ways that it can affect our health but ways that it can affect our health but ways that it can affect our health but one of the main ways is that it improves one of the main ways is that it improves one of the main ways is that it improves the mitochondrial function of cells. the mitochondrial function of cells. the mitochondrial function of cells. Now, there's a lot of data out there now Now, there's a lot of data out there now Now, there's a lot of data out there now showing that red light exposure from a showing that red light exposure from a showing that red light exposure from a red light device and even from the sun red light device and even from the sun red light device and even from the sun can improve wound healing in the skin, can improve wound healing in the skin, can improve wound healing in the skin, reduce symptoms of acne and can reduce symptoms of acne and can reduce symptoms of acne and can reduce inflammation. There are now also data inflammation. There are now also data inflammation. There are now also data showing that longwavelength light showing that longwavelength light showing that longwavelength light exposure can reduce lympadeema in exposure can reduce lympadeema in exposure can reduce lympadeema in conditions like people who are being conditions like people who are being conditions like people who are being treated for breast cancer or can simply treated for breast cancer or can simply treated for breast cancer or can simply reduce inflammation for people that are reduce inflammation for people that are reduce inflammation for people that are not suffering from cancer or full-blown not suffering from cancer or full-blown not suffering from cancer or full-blown lympadeema but have some puffiness of lympadeema but have some puffiness of lympadeema but have some puffiness of the face or some other tissue that's the face or some other tissue that's the face or some other tissue that's experiencing swelling. Long wavelength experiencing swelling. Long wavelength experiencing swelling. Long wavelength light can help. And that much of that light can help. And that much of that light can help. And that much of that effect is by way of improvements of effect is by way of improvements of effect is by way of improvements of blood flow to that area as well as blood flow to that area as well as blood flow to that area as well as improvements in mitochondrial function. improvements in mitochondrial function. improvements in mitochondrial function. And that's because the long wavelength And that's because the long wavelength And that's because the long wavelength light can actually have impact on the light can actually have impact on the light can actually have impact on the skin itself and deep to the skin. And skin itself and deep to the skin. And skin itself and deep to the skin. And I've talked about the mechanism before, I've talked about the mechanism before, I've talked about the mechanism before, but to make a long story short, the long but to make a long story short, the long but to make a long story short, the long wavelength light, those photons can wavelength light, those photons can wavelength light, those photons can actually impact the electrons on actually impact the electrons on actually impact the electrons on mitochondria and, for lack of a better mitochondria and, for lack of a better mitochondria and, for lack of a better way to put it, charge the mitochondria, way to put it, charge the mitochondria, way to put it, charge the mitochondria, which leads to more ATP, more cellular which leads to more ATP, more cellular which leads to more ATP, more cellular energy, and so forth. What's interesting energy, and so forth. What's interesting energy, and so forth. What's interesting is that there are now more and more data is that there are now more and more data is that there are now more and more data showing that longwavelength light showing that longwavelength light showing that longwavelength light exposure to the skin can reduce exposure to the skin can reduce exposure to the skin can reduce inflammation, improve skin appearance, inflammation, improve skin appearance, inflammation, improve skin appearance, reduce acne, etc. in part by improving reduce acne, etc. in part by improving reduce acne, etc. in part by improving the function of the lymphatic system and the function of the lymphatic system and the function of the lymphatic system and it does that apparently through the same it does that apparently through the same it does that apparently through the same mechanism that it does to improve skin mechanism that it does to improve skin mechanism that it does to improve skin cells and the circulatory system for cells and the circulatory system for cells and the circulatory system for blood meaning the capillaries and blood meaning the capillaries and blood meaning the capillaries and blood vessels and so forth. So when we hear vessels and so forth. So when we hear vessels and so forth. So when we hear that red light devices near infrared that red light devices near infrared that red light devices near infrared light devices and infrared saunas and light devices and infrared saunas and light devices and infrared saunas and getting some low solar angle sunlight on getting some low solar angle sunlight on getting some low solar angle sunlight on our skin either near sunrise and perhaps our skin either near sunrise and perhaps our skin either near sunrise and perhaps also in the evening at sunset or in the also in the evening at sunset or in the also in the evening at sunset or in the late afternoon is beneficial for our late afternoon is beneficial for our late afternoon is beneficial for our skin. It appears that quote unquote skin. It appears that quote unquote skin. It appears that quote unquote benefit for the skin is direct to the benefit for the skin is direct to the benefit for the skin is direct to the skin cells, also to the vascular cells skin cells, also to the vascular cells skin cells, also to the vascular cells that are delivering blood and also to that are delivering blood and also to that are delivering blood and also to the lymphatic vessels that are removing the lymphatic vessels that are removing the lymphatic vessels that are removing waste from the general area. So the waste from the general area. So the waste from the general area. So the point is that long wavelength light point is that long wavelength light point is that long wavelength light exposure either from a device or from exposure either from a device or from exposure either from a device or from low solar angle sunlight can reduce low solar angle sunlight can reduce low solar angle sunlight can reduce inflammation in your skin and can inflammation in your skin and can inflammation in your skin and can improve appearance and in part that improve appearance and in part that improve appearance and in part that effect is occurring through the effect is occurring through the effect is occurring through the lymphatic system. And in terms of lymphatic system. And in terms of lymphatic system. And in terms of protocols, the typical kind of, you protocols, the typical kind of, you protocols, the typical kind of, you know, 10 to 30 minutes of morning know, 10 to 30 minutes of morning know, 10 to 30 minutes of morning sunlight viewing as well as getting some sunlight viewing as well as getting some sunlight viewing as well as getting some long wavelength light on your skin at a long wavelength light on your skin at a long wavelength light on your skin at a time where the UV index isn't too high, time where the UV index isn't too high, time where the UV index isn't too high, so maybe in the late afternoon or so maybe in the late afternoon or so maybe in the late afternoon or evening can be very beneficial. If evening can be very beneficial. If evening can be very beneficial. If you're trying to decide whether or not you're trying to decide whether or not you're trying to decide whether or not to get long wavelength light exposure to get long wavelength light exposure to get long wavelength light exposure for sake of appearance and lymphatic for sake of appearance and lymphatic for sake of appearance and lymphatic clearance from a device or from the sun, clearance from a device or from the sun, clearance from a device or from the sun, just keep in mind that the sun always just keep in mind that the sun always just keep in mind that the sun always includes some UV in it, right? UV includes some UV in it, right? UV includes some UV in it, right? UV exposure is going to be highest in the exposure is going to be highest in the exposure is going to be highest in the middle of the day, less when the sun is middle of the day, less when the sun is middle of the day, less when the sun is low in the sky, near sunrise, and near low in the sky, near sunrise, and near low in the sky, near sunrise, and near sunset. A long wavelength light device sunset. A long wavelength light device sunset. A long wavelength light device that delivers red light, near infrared, that delivers red light, near infrared, that delivers red light, near infrared, and infrared light, of course, has no UV and infrared light, of course, has no UV and infrared light, of course, has no UV in it. So, you're just purely getting in it. So, you're just purely getting in it. So, you're just purely getting the benefits of the long wavelength the benefits of the long wavelength the benefits of the long wavelength light for your lymphatic system and the light for your lymphatic system and the light for your lymphatic system and the other systems that are local to the other systems that are local to the other systems that are local to the skin. Okay, so we've taken quite the skin. Okay, so we've taken quite the skin. Okay, so we've taken quite the tour through the lymphatic system. And tour through the lymphatic system. And tour through the lymphatic system. And I'm guessing for most of you, this is I'm guessing for most of you, this is I'm guessing for most of you, this is the first time that you've explored or the first time that you've explored or the first time that you've explored or heard about the lymphatic system in heard about the lymphatic system in heard about the lymphatic system in depth. And I just want to underscore depth. And I just want to underscore depth. And I just want to underscore again what an incredible system it is. again what an incredible system it is. again what an incredible system it is. It's intimately related to every organ It's intimately related to every organ It's intimately related to every organ and tissue in our entire body. And it's and tissue in our entire body. And it's and tissue in our entire body. And it's crucial for the removal of waste from crucial for the removal of waste from crucial for the removal of waste from those tissues and it's crucial for those tissues and it's crucial for those tissues and it's crucial for immune surveillance. So if nothing else, immune surveillance. So if nothing else, immune surveillance. So if nothing else, I hope that you can now thoroughly I hope that you can now thoroughly I hope that you can now thoroughly appreciate this incredible system that appreciate this incredible system that appreciate this incredible system that is the lymphatic system. It's not just a is the lymphatic system. It's not just a is the lymphatic system. It's not just a passive system and yet as you recall, it passive system and yet as you recall, it passive system and yet as you recall, it does not have a pump. So you need to do does not have a pump. So you need to do does not have a pump. So you need to do things to help move that lymphatic fluid things to help move that lymphatic fluid things to help move that lymphatic fluid along to support all its critical roles. along to support all its critical roles. along to support all its critical roles. In researching this episode, I In researching this episode, I In researching this episode, I personally was just blown away by how personally was just blown away by how personally was just blown away by how many important roles the lymphatic many important roles the lymphatic many important roles the lymphatic system plays. And I was surprised that I system plays. And I was surprised that I system plays. And I was surprised that I hadn't heard about a lot of these hadn't heard about a lot of these hadn't heard about a lot of these important roles before. And I think in important roles before. And I think in important roles before. And I think in large part that's because it's only large part that's because it's only large part that's because it's only recently in the last decade and a half recently in the last decade and a half recently in the last decade and a half or so that we've really come to or so that we've really come to or so that we've really come to appreciate just how critical the appreciate just how critical the appreciate just how critical the lymphatic system is. for instance, in lymphatic system is. for instance, in lymphatic system is. for instance, in the brain and the relationship between the brain and the relationship between the brain and the relationship between brain and body dynamics and the brain and body dynamics and the brain and body dynamics and the circulatory system that make it central circulatory system that make it central circulatory system that make it central to everything. So, I'm amazed by it. I to everything. So, I'm amazed by it. I to everything. So, I'm amazed by it. I hope you're amazed by it. And I hope you hope you're amazed by it. And I hope you hope you're amazed by it. And I hope you will indeed take action to support your will indeed take action to support your will indeed take action to support your lymphatic system because it's super lymphatic system because it's super lymphatic system because it's super important. If you're learning from andor important. If you're learning from andor important. If you're learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review, and you can now leave five-star review, and you can now leave five-star review, and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you for tuning in for today's discussion you for tuning in for today's discussion you for tuning in for today's discussion about the lymphatic system and all the about the lymphatic system and all the about the lymphatic system and all the incredible ways that it supports your incredible ways that it supports your incredible ways that it supports your health and the things that you can do to health and the things that you can do to health and the things that you can do to support your lymphatic system. And last, support your lymphatic system. And last, support your lymphatic system. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for but certainly not least, thank you for but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. your interest in science. your interest in science. [music]