Every single opthalmologist knows about Every single opthalmologist knows about Every single opthalmologist knows about cataract. &gt;&gt; Yes. Most common form of blindness. &gt;&gt; Yes. Most common form of blindness. &gt;&gt; Yes. Most common form of blindness. &gt;&gt; So it would be rare for you to go to an &gt;&gt; So it would be rare for you to go to an &gt;&gt; So it would be rare for you to go to an opthalmologist with cataract and not get opthalmologist with cataract and not get opthalmologist with cataract and not get diagnosed. Correct. diagnosed. Correct. diagnosed. Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; So why is it that the leading cause of &gt;&gt; So why is it that the leading cause of &gt;&gt; So why is it that the leading cause of infertility on this planet? 90% of women infertility on this planet? 90% of women infertility on this planet? 90% of women are not diagnosed. Women's health is are not diagnosed. Women's health is are not diagnosed. Women's health is very different than other fields of very different than other fields of very different than other fields of medicine. It's very it's a different medicine. It's very it's a different medicine. It's very it's a different monster. It's that cataract patient that monster. It's that cataract patient that monster. It's that cataract patient that goes to 20 goes to 20 goes to 20 opthalmologist and she keeps saying, "I opthalmologist and she keeps saying, "I opthalmologist and she keeps saying, "I can't see." And the opthalmologist says, can't see." And the opthalmologist says, can't see." And the opthalmologist says, "You're crazy. There's nothing wrong "You're crazy. There's nothing wrong "You're crazy. There's nothing wrong with you." Welcome to the Hubberman Lab with you." Welcome to the Hubberman Lab with you." Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and podcast, where we discuss science and podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Tais Aliyabati, an today is Dr. Tais Aliyabati, an today is Dr. Tais Aliyabati, an obstitrician, gynecologist, and surgeon obstitrician, gynecologist, and surgeon obstitrician, gynecologist, and surgeon and one of the most sought-after experts and one of the most sought-after experts and one of the most sought-after experts and trusted voices in women's health. and trusted voices in women's health. and trusted voices in women's health. Today we discuss crucial topics in Today we discuss crucial topics in Today we discuss crucial topics in women's reproductive and general health, women's reproductive and general health, women's reproductive and general health, including PCOS, endometriosis, breast including PCOS, endometriosis, breast including PCOS, endometriosis, breast cancer, pmenopause, and menopause. Dr. cancer, pmenopause, and menopause. Dr. cancer, pmenopause, and menopause. Dr. Aliabati explains why so many cases Dr. Aliabati explains why so many cases Dr. Aliabati explains why so many cases of PCOS and endometriosis go undiagnosed of PCOS and endometriosis go undiagnosed of PCOS and endometriosis go undiagnosed and how many physicians unfortunately and how many physicians unfortunately and how many physicians unfortunately write off things like pain, hair write off things like pain, hair write off things like pain, hair thinning, mood changes, and other thinning, mood changes, and other thinning, mood changes, and other symptoms as normal when in fact they symptoms as normal when in fact they symptoms as normal when in fact they reflect larger underlying issues that reflect larger underlying issues that reflect larger underlying issues that can impair fertility and lead to can impair fertility and lead to can impair fertility and lead to bodywide health complications. And she bodywide health complications. And she bodywide health complications. And she explains the key things to do to explains the key things to do to explains the key things to do to diagnose and treat PCOS and diagnose and treat PCOS and diagnose and treat PCOS and endometriosis. Everything from how to endometriosis. Everything from how to endometriosis. Everything from how to adjust insulin sensitivity to hormone adjust insulin sensitivity to hormone adjust insulin sensitivity to hormone replacement, over-the-counter, and replacement, over-the-counter, and replacement, over-the-counter, and prescription-based protocols. As you'll prescription-based protocols. As you'll prescription-based protocols. As you'll soon hear, Dr. Aliabati is incredibly soon hear, Dr. Aliabati is incredibly soon hear, Dr. Aliabati is incredibly passionate about women's health and has passionate about women's health and has passionate about women's health and has developed various zerocost online tools developed various zerocost online tools developed various zerocost online tools that women of any age can use to assess that women of any age can use to assess that women of any age can use to assess their risk for things like breast their risk for things like breast their risk for things like breast cancer, PCOS, and endometriosis. I cancer, PCOS, and endometriosis. I cancer, PCOS, and endometriosis. I should also emphasize that today's should also emphasize that today's should also emphasize that today's discussion is relevant to women of all discussion is relevant to women of all discussion is relevant to women of all ages. Many of the conditions we discuss ages. Many of the conditions we discuss ages. Many of the conditions we discuss are starting to show up in women even in are starting to show up in women even in are starting to show up in women even in their mid- teens and 20s and can carry their mid- teens and 20s and can carry their mid- teens and 20s and can carry serious health risks. Dr. Aliabati makes serious health risks. Dr. Aliabati makes serious health risks. Dr. Aliabati makes very clear that often these issues can very clear that often these issues can very clear that often these issues can be resolved, but that it requires be resolved, but that it requires be resolved, but that it requires knowing the telltale signs and taking knowing the telltale signs and taking knowing the telltale signs and taking the appropriate steps. She explains that the appropriate steps. She explains that the appropriate steps. She explains that alas, many doctors and even OBGYNS are alas, many doctors and even OBGYNS are alas, many doctors and even OBGYNS are unaware of those telltale markers. So, unaware of those telltale markers. So, unaware of those telltale markers. So, what you're about to hear is an what you're about to hear is an what you're about to hear is an extremely eye-opening conversation that extremely eye-opening conversation that extremely eye-opening conversation that thanks to Dr. Aliabati's passion for thanks to Dr. Aliabati's passion for thanks to Dr. Aliabati's passion for and expertise in women's health could and expertise in women's health could and expertise in women's health could very well save someone's mental and very well save someone's mental and very well save someone's mental and physical health, their fertility, and in physical health, their fertility, and in physical health, their fertility, and in the case of breast cancer screening, the case of breast cancer screening, the case of breast cancer screening, even their life. Before we begin, I'd even their life. Before we begin, I'd even their life. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost my desire and effort to bring zerocost my desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer information about science to consumer information about science to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Tais And now for my discussion with Dr. Tais And now for my discussion with Dr. Tais Aliabati. Dr. Tais Aliabati. Welcome. Aliabati. Dr. Tais Aliabati. Welcome. Aliabati. Dr. Tais Aliabati. Welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you for having me. &gt;&gt; Thank you for having me. &gt;&gt; Thank you for having me. &gt;&gt; Super excited to talk about today's &gt;&gt; Super excited to talk about today's &gt;&gt; Super excited to talk about today's topics and there are a lot of them topics and there are a lot of them topics and there are a lot of them because I think these days we hear a because I think these days we hear a because I think these days we hear a tremendous amount about how fertility tremendous amount about how fertility tremendous amount about how fertility rates are dropping. We hear that sperm rates are dropping. We hear that sperm rates are dropping. We hear that sperm counts are dropping. We hear that things counts are dropping. We hear that things counts are dropping. We hear that things like PCOS, which he'll explain to us, like PCOS, which he'll explain to us, like PCOS, which he'll explain to us, are on the rise. I'm curious if they're are on the rise. I'm curious if they're are on the rise. I'm curious if they're on the rise or they're just being on the rise or they're just being on the rise or they're just being detected or not detected as much. Let's detected or not detected as much. Let's detected or not detected as much. Let's start off quite simply and just bracket start off quite simply and just bracket start off quite simply and just bracket for people what the sort of standard for people what the sort of standard for people what the sort of standard trajectory of fertility looks like for trajectory of fertility looks like for trajectory of fertility looks like for the quote unquote average woman. I the quote unquote average woman. I the quote unquote average woman. I realize there's no such thing as an realize there's no such thing as an realize there's no such thing as an average woman, but I think we hear so average woman, but I think we hear so average woman, but I think we hear so much these days about people are waiting much these days about people are waiting much these days about people are waiting to have kids, some people are freezing to have kids, some people are freezing to have kids, some people are freezing eggs early, all this. If we were to just eggs early, all this. If we were to just eggs early, all this. If we were to just march through and say, you know, um what march through and say, you know, um what march through and say, you know, um what fraction of healthy women are fertile in fraction of healthy women are fertile in fraction of healthy women are fertile in their say 20 to 25, 25 to 30 and march their say 20 to 25, 25 to 30 and march their say 20 to 25, 25 to 30 and march that forward just to give people a sense that forward just to give people a sense that forward just to give people a sense of what the data and your experience of what the data and your experience of what the data and your experience really tell us. really tell us. really tell us. &gt;&gt; First of all, before I go there, I want &gt;&gt; First of all, before I go there, I want &gt;&gt; First of all, before I go there, I want to tell you something. I want to tell to tell you something. I want to tell to tell you something. I want to tell you how excited I am to be here today. you how excited I am to be here today. you how excited I am to be here today. And I'll tell you why. Because I've been And I'll tell you why. Because I've been And I'll tell you why. Because I've been in women's health for 30 years. And one in women's health for 30 years. And one in women's health for 30 years. And one thing I learned is that women's symptoms thing I learned is that women's symptoms thing I learned is that women's symptoms get dismissed, minimized, or completely get dismissed, minimized, or completely get dismissed, minimized, or completely ignored, right? It's normalized. These ignored, right? It's normalized. These ignored, right? It's normalized. These women, every time they complain, they women, every time they complain, they women, every time they complain, they say, "It's in your head. You're anxious. say, "It's in your head. You're anxious. say, "It's in your head. You're anxious. You're stressed. Um, you know, it's You're stressed. Um, you know, it's You're stressed. Um, you know, it's normal. It's part of being a woman." And normal. It's part of being a woman." And normal. It's part of being a woman." And behind these dismissals are millions and behind these dismissals are millions and behind these dismissals are millions and millions of women suffering undiagnosed millions of women suffering undiagnosed millions of women suffering undiagnosed PCOS, endometriosis, PCOS, endometriosis, PCOS, endometriosis, chronic pelvic pain, infertility, which chronic pelvic pain, infertility, which chronic pelvic pain, infertility, which we're going to cover right now, and so we're going to cover right now, and so we're going to cover right now, and so many other issues because no one takes many other issues because no one takes many other issues because no one takes the time to listen to them. And um the time to listen to them. And um the time to listen to them. And um the reason I'm so excited to be on this reason I'm so excited to be on this reason I'm so excited to be on this podcast is I want to shed light on these podcast is I want to shed light on these podcast is I want to shed light on these topics, especially endometriosis and topics, especially endometriosis and topics, especially endometriosis and PCOS, because they're the top leading PCOS, because they're the top leading PCOS, because they're the top leading causes of infertility on this planet. causes of infertility on this planet. causes of infertility on this planet. Majority of these patients are never Majority of these patients are never Majority of these patients are never diagnosed. Majority. diagnosed. Majority. diagnosed. Majority. And that's why I'm so excited to be here And that's why I'm so excited to be here And that's why I'm so excited to be here and I love talking about fertility and I love talking about fertility and I love talking about fertility because the reason these women end up in because the reason these women end up in because the reason these women end up in a fertility clinic in the first place a fertility clinic in the first place a fertility clinic in the first place Majority of them have undiagnosed PCOS Majority of them have undiagnosed PCOS Majority of them have undiagnosed PCOS and endometriosis. and endometriosis. and endometriosis. So we are born with certain number of So we are born with certain number of So we are born with certain number of eggs, millions of them. And we don't eggs, millions of them. And we don't eggs, millions of them. And we don't make more eggs after we're born. And as make more eggs after we're born. And as make more eggs after we're born. And as we go through life, we start losing we go through life, we start losing we go through life, we start losing these eggs until at about menopause, we these eggs until at about menopause, we these eggs until at about menopause, we have about a thousand of them left. So have about a thousand of them left. So have about a thousand of them left. So as we get older, the number goes down, as we get older, the number goes down, as we get older, the number goes down, but the quality also declines. The issue but the quality also declines. The issue but the quality also declines. The issue is PCOS and endometriosis is PCOS and endometriosis is PCOS and endometriosis affect your egg count and your egg affect your egg count and your egg affect your egg count and your egg quality. So because 90% of these quality. So because 90% of these quality. So because 90% of these patients are never diagnosed. What patients are never diagnosed. What patients are never diagnosed. What happens is they start losing their eggs. happens is they start losing their eggs. happens is they start losing their eggs. Let's say take an endometriosis patients Let's say take an endometriosis patients Let's say take an endometriosis patients which we're going to get into it. But which we're going to get into it. But which we're going to get into it. But they start losing these eggs. The they start losing these eggs. The they start losing these eggs. The quality starts shooting down. Some of quality starts shooting down. Some of quality starts shooting down. Some of them by age 30 they have zero eggs left. them by age 30 they have zero eggs left. them by age 30 they have zero eggs left. And these are patients who bounce from And these are patients who bounce from And these are patients who bounce from doctor to doctor and their symptoms are doctor to doctor and their symptoms are doctor to doctor and their symptoms are dismissed. They're being told that their dismissed. They're being told that their dismissed. They're being told that their painful period is normal, that their painful period is normal, that their painful period is normal, that their painful sex is in their head, that painful sex is in their head, that painful sex is in their head, that they're exaggerating their pain, and they're exaggerating their pain, and they're exaggerating their pain, and meanwhile their ovarian reserve is meanwhile their ovarian reserve is meanwhile their ovarian reserve is completely depleting, and no one is completely depleting, and no one is completely depleting, and no one is addressing that. Andrew, I've always addressing that. Andrew, I've always addressing that. Andrew, I've always said this, and I really mean it. If said this, and I really mean it. If said this, and I really mean it. If every 20-year-old in this country would every 20-year-old in this country would every 20-year-old in this country would go through my office once at age 20, I go through my office once at age 20, I go through my office once at age 20, I would shut down these fertility clinics. would shut down these fertility clinics. would shut down these fertility clinics. Because where do these patients end up? Because where do these patients end up? Because where do these patients end up? In fertility clinics. That's why these In fertility clinics. That's why these In fertility clinics. That's why these doctors are so busy. And that's why doctors are so busy. And that's why doctors are so busy. And that's why these patients go bankrupt, selling these patients go bankrupt, selling these patients go bankrupt, selling their homes, selling everything they their homes, selling everything they their homes, selling everything they have to pay for an IVF cycle that could have to pay for an IVF cycle that could have to pay for an IVF cycle that could have been completely blocked had they have been completely blocked had they have been completely blocked had they been diagnosed correctly and treated at been diagnosed correctly and treated at been diagnosed correctly and treated at a very young age. And I'm talking a very young age. And I'm talking a very young age. And I'm talking sometimes I treat 13y olds with sometimes I treat 13y olds with sometimes I treat 13y olds with endometriosis. I have right now in my endometriosis. I have right now in my endometriosis. I have right now in my practice a girl at 14 with endometriosis practice a girl at 14 with endometriosis practice a girl at 14 with endometriosis whose egg count is the egg count of a whose egg count is the egg count of a whose egg count is the egg count of a 40year-old. That's why you can't I can't sit here That's why you can't I can't sit here That's why you can't I can't sit here and generalize that if you're in your and generalize that if you're in your and generalize that if you're in your 20s you're going to be fine. It's not 20s you're going to be fine. It's not 20s you're going to be fine. It's not true. You need to know at a very young true. You need to know at a very young true. You need to know at a very young age, every girl on this planet needs to age, every girl on this planet needs to age, every girl on this planet needs to be screened be screened be screened for endometriosis, for endometriosis, for endometriosis, for PCOS, and they need to know their for PCOS, and they need to know their for PCOS, and they need to know their egg count. Egg count, AMH, antimmalarian egg count. Egg count, AMH, antimmalarian egg count. Egg count, AMH, antimmalarian hormone, is a simple blood test. It's hormone, is a simple blood test. It's hormone, is a simple blood test. It's covered by most insuranceances. It needs covered by most insuranceances. It needs covered by most insuranceances. It needs to be offered if you don't want to offer to be offered if you don't want to offer to be offered if you don't want to offer it to your young patients because, you it to your young patients because, you it to your young patients because, you know, teenagers are tricky because they know, teenagers are tricky because they know, teenagers are tricky because they have so many eggs. But if they're have so many eggs. But if they're have so many eggs. But if they're complaining of severe pain, if they're complaining of severe pain, if they're complaining of severe pain, if they're missing school, if you're have if you as missing school, if you're have if you as missing school, if you're have if you as a parent, you have to go pick them up a parent, you have to go pick them up a parent, you have to go pick them up from school, the nurse is calling you, from school, the nurse is calling you, from school, the nurse is calling you, they don't want to take their test they don't want to take their test they don't want to take their test because they're rolled up in bed from because they're rolled up in bed from because they're rolled up in bed from pain. That patient, even at 14, deserves pain. That patient, even at 14, deserves pain. That patient, even at 14, deserves an egg count check because for these an egg count check because for these an egg count check because for these patients, sometimes by age 16, I freeze patients, sometimes by age 16, I freeze patients, sometimes by age 16, I freeze their eggs. their eggs. their eggs. &gt;&gt; Incredible. So I'm going to reframe my &gt;&gt; Incredible. So I'm going to reframe my &gt;&gt; Incredible. So I'm going to reframe my question on the basis of what you just question on the basis of what you just question on the basis of what you just said um and ask is the typical plot that said um and ask is the typical plot that said um and ask is the typical plot that we see of you know this x number of uh we see of you know this x number of uh we see of you know this x number of uh or x percentage of women of a given or x percentage of women of a given or x percentage of women of a given age bracket are of this fertile or not age bracket are of this fertile or not age bracket are of this fertile or not fertile meaning how many trials or times fertile meaning how many trials or times fertile meaning how many trials or times it would take in order to successfully it would take in order to successfully it would take in order to successfully um get pregnant carry a baby to turn. um get pregnant carry a baby to turn. um get pregnant carry a baby to turn. Should we either discard or think Should we either discard or think Should we either discard or think differently about the data that we see differently about the data that we see differently about the data that we see plotted out? Like if I were to go into plotted out? Like if I were to go into plotted out? Like if I were to go into one of the AI platforms and ask, I'm one of the AI platforms and ask, I'm one of the AI platforms and ask, I'm sure it would generate a plot for me. sure it would generate a plot for me. sure it would generate a plot for me. What I'm hearing from you is that What I'm hearing from you is that What I'm hearing from you is that because PCOS and endometriosis are not because PCOS and endometriosis are not because PCOS and endometriosis are not taken into account. The textbook picture taken into account. The textbook picture taken into account. The textbook picture is a false picture of fertility as a is a false picture of fertility as a is a false picture of fertility as a function of age. function of age. function of age. &gt;&gt; Correct. And that's why I have a patient &gt;&gt; Correct. And that's why I have a patient &gt;&gt; Correct. And that's why I have a patient who came to me, she was 24, severe pain. who came to me, she was 24, severe pain. who came to me, she was 24, severe pain. She said, I listened to your podcast. I She said, I listened to your podcast. I She said, I listened to your podcast. I went to my doctor and I asked her, my went to my doctor and I asked her, my went to my doctor and I asked her, my gynecologist, and I said, "I have really gynecologist, and I said, "I have really gynecologist, and I said, "I have really bad painful periods and I think I have bad painful periods and I think I have bad painful periods and I think I have endometriosis. Can you check my egg endometriosis. Can you check my egg endometriosis. Can you check my egg count?" You know what the doctor told count?" You know what the doctor told count?" You know what the doctor told her? Her gynecologist, "You're too her? Her gynecologist, "You're too her? Her gynecologist, "You're too young. It would be malpractice for me to young. It would be malpractice for me to young. It would be malpractice for me to check your egg count because at 24, you check your egg count because at 24, you check your egg count because at 24, you should not have any issues and you have should not have any issues and you have should not have any issues and you have no problems getting pregnant." I operate no problems getting pregnant." I operate no problems getting pregnant." I operate on stage 4 endometriosis patients at age on stage 4 endometriosis patients at age on stage 4 endometriosis patients at age 18. That's why I'm here. That's why I want That's why I'm here. That's why I want That's why I'm here. That's why I want to grab this mic. And that's why I want to grab this mic. And that's why I want to grab this mic. And that's why I want to just focus first on PCOS and then to just focus first on PCOS and then to just focus first on PCOS and then focus on endometriosis. focus on endometriosis. focus on endometriosis. Cuz these two conditions, you don't need Cuz these two conditions, you don't need Cuz these two conditions, you don't need a doctor to diagnose you. If you listen a doctor to diagnose you. If you listen a doctor to diagnose you. If you listen to this podcast, by the time you and I to this podcast, by the time you and I to this podcast, by the time you and I are done, whoever is listening, if it's are done, whoever is listening, if it's are done, whoever is listening, if it's a parent, if it's your sister, if it's a parent, if it's your sister, if it's a parent, if it's your sister, if it's yourself, if it's your daughter, you're yourself, if it's your daughter, you're yourself, if it's your daughter, you're going to be able to diagnose these going to be able to diagnose these going to be able to diagnose these conditions, the leading causes of conditions, the leading causes of conditions, the leading causes of infertility on this planet. It can be infertility on this planet. It can be infertility on this planet. It can be diagnosed by the time we're done. You're diagnosed by the time we're done. You're diagnosed by the time we're done. You're going to walk on the street and you're going to walk on the street and you're going to walk on the street and you're going to say, "I think that woman has going to say, "I think that woman has going to say, "I think that woman has PCOS." I'm serious. I'm serious. I'm serious. That my patients are so smart. They That my patients are so smart. They That my patients are so smart. They literally send their friends. They're literally send their friends. They're literally send their friends. They're like, "I'm sending you my cousin because like, "I'm sending you my cousin because like, "I'm sending you my cousin because she has endometriosis." Patients are she has endometriosis." Patients are she has endometriosis." Patients are diagnosing when doctors are not. diagnosing when doctors are not. diagnosing when doctors are not. &gt;&gt; Incredible. &gt;&gt; Incredible. &gt;&gt; Incredible. &gt;&gt; That's why I'm looking forward to these &gt;&gt; That's why I'm looking forward to these &gt;&gt; That's why I'm looking forward to these robotic doctors. I read that China has robotic doctors. I read that China has robotic doctors. I read that China has this robotic hospital. I'm like, "Praise this robotic hospital. I'm like, "Praise this robotic hospital. I'm like, "Praise the Lord. These robots are not going to the Lord. These robots are not going to the Lord. These robots are not going to dismiss women. If you tell a robot, sex dismiss women. If you tell a robot, sex dismiss women. If you tell a robot, sex hurts, I stay in bed, I end up in the emergency I stay in bed, I end up in the emergency I stay in bed, I end up in the emergency room every time I have my period," the room every time I have my period," the room every time I have my period," the robot will not call you crazy. The robot will not call you crazy. The robot will not call you crazy. The robot will say, "You probably have will say, "You probably have will say, "You probably have endometriosis." But let's work it up. But let's work it up. But let's work it up. &gt;&gt; Glucose is a key player in how our body &gt;&gt; Glucose is a key player in how our body &gt;&gt; Glucose is a key player in how our body functions, not just in the long term, functions, not just in the long term, functions, not just in the long term, but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain function, mood, and energy levels, and function, mood, and energy levels, and function, mood, and energy levels, and it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from Lingo. I absolutely love it and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it and I'm thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive and physical performance do too. In and physical performance do too. In and physical performance do too. In fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Visit hellolingo.com/huberman Visit hellolingo.com/huberman Visit hellolingo.com/huberman for more information. Today's episode is for more information. Today's episode is for more information. Today's episode is also brought to us by ourplace. Ourplace also brought to us by ourplace. Ourplace also brought to us by ourplace. Ourplace makes my favorite pots, pans, and other makes my favorite pots, pans, and other makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are such as PASES or forever chemicals are such as PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and well as utensils, appliances, and well as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As countless other kitchen products. As countless other kitchen products. As I've discussed before on this podcast, I've discussed before on this podcast, I've discussed before on this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like these PASES or forever chemicals like these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health Teflon have been linked to major health Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Our why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Our why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Our products are made with the highest products are made with the highest products are made with the highest quality materials and are all PAS and quality materials and are all PAS and quality materials and are all PAS and toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it, and it always puts a and steaks in it, and it always puts a and steaks in it, and it always puts a really nice sear on the meat. But again, really nice sear on the meat. But again, really nice sear on the meat. But again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it, and I use it safe. I love it, and I use it safe. I love it, and I use it constantly. Our Place now has a full constantly. Our Place now has a full constantly. Our Place now has a full line of titanium Pro cookwware that uses line of titanium Pro cookwware that uses line of titanium Pro cookwware that uses the firstofits-kind titanium non-stick the firstofits-kind titanium non-stick the firstofits-kind titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code hubman. Right now, and use the code hubman. Right now, and use the code hubman. Right now, HourPlace is having their biggest sale HourPlace is having their biggest sale HourPlace is having their biggest sale of the year. You can get up to 35% off of the year. You can get up to 35% off of the year. You can get up to 35% off all products now through January 12th, all products now through January 12th, all products now through January 12th, 2026. With a 100-day risk-free trial, 2026. With a 100-day risk-free trial, 2026. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can free shipping, and free returns, you can free shipping, and free returns, you can try HourPlace with zero risk, and you try HourPlace with zero risk, and you try HourPlace with zero risk, and you can see why more than 1 million people can see why more than 1 million people can see why more than 1 million people have made the switch to ourplace kitchen have made the switch to ourplace kitchen have made the switch to ourplace kitchen wear. Again, that's from wear. Again, that's from wear. Again, that's from hourplace.com/huberman to get up to 35% off. to get up to 35% off. to get up to 35% off. &gt;&gt; Well, clearly you're on an important &gt;&gt; Well, clearly you're on an important &gt;&gt; Well, clearly you're on an important mission and clearly it's good that we mission and clearly it's good that we mission and clearly it's good that we reframe the question that I initially reframe the question that I initially reframe the question that I initially asked and start with PCOS and then asked and start with PCOS and then asked and start with PCOS and then endometriosis. But before I do that, I endometriosis. But before I do that, I endometriosis. But before I do that, I just want to um just give a reflection just want to um just give a reflection just want to um just give a reflection which is u one of the takeaways from which is u one of the takeaways from which is u one of the takeaways from what you just said and just one there what you just said and just one there what you just said and just one there are many but one of them is that are many but one of them is that are many but one of them is that &gt;&gt; most young women learn about the &gt;&gt; most young women learn about the &gt;&gt; most young women learn about the menstrual cycle. I think they also make menstrual cycle. I think they also make menstrual cycle. I think they also make an attempt to teach boys about the an attempt to teach boys about the an attempt to teach boys about the menstrual cycle when we were in high menstrual cycle when we were in high menstrual cycle when we were in high school. They they try to teach school. They they try to teach school. They they try to teach everybody. Whether or not it sinks in to everybody. Whether or not it sinks in to everybody. Whether or not it sinks in to the males brains is a question of to the males brains is a question of to the males brains is a question of debate, but most every woman learns at debate, but most every woman learns at debate, but most every woman learns at some point about the menstrual cycle. It some point about the menstrual cycle. It some point about the menstrual cycle. It sounds to me like female health sounds to me like female health sounds to me like female health education should also include education should also include education should also include education about PCOS and endometriosis at a very about PCOS and endometriosis at a very about PCOS and endometriosis at a very young age. young age. young age. &gt;&gt; Mandatory. It should be mandatory. &gt;&gt; Mandatory. It should be mandatory. &gt;&gt; Mandatory. It should be mandatory. &gt;&gt; And currently I it's not. In fact, many &gt;&gt; And currently I it's not. In fact, many &gt;&gt; And currently I it's not. In fact, many um female listeners of this podcast, I um female listeners of this podcast, I um female listeners of this podcast, I believe, um either suffer from or know believe, um either suffer from or know believe, um either suffer from or know somebody who suffers from PCOS or somebody who suffers from PCOS or somebody who suffers from PCOS or endometriosis. I know this cuz I get endometriosis. I know this cuz I get endometriosis. I know this cuz I get asked a lot uh to cover these topics, asked a lot uh to cover these topics, asked a lot uh to cover these topics, which is one of the reasons you're here. which is one of the reasons you're here. which is one of the reasons you're here. And the other thing is that I'm And the other thing is that I'm And the other thing is that I'm certain that many do not that many do certain that many do not that many do certain that many do not that many do not because they came up through an not because they came up through an not because they came up through an education system where that just didn't education system where that just didn't education system where that just didn't happen. So, we can start this important happen. So, we can start this important happen. So, we can start this important initiative now. Um what is PCOS? Very initiative now. Um what is PCOS? Very initiative now. Um what is PCOS? Very good question. So PCOS is the most good question. So PCOS is the most good question. So PCOS is the most common hormone disorder in women in the common hormone disorder in women in the common hormone disorder in women in the reproductive age. The most common. So reproductive age. The most common. So reproductive age. The most common. So we're not talking about some rare we're not talking about some rare we're not talking about some rare diagnosis. Number one, it affects 15% of diagnosis. Number one, it affects 15% of diagnosis. Number one, it affects 15% of women in this country. If you go to women in this country. If you go to women in this country. If you go to Middle Eastern countries, that number Middle Eastern countries, that number Middle Eastern countries, that number can go north of 20%. can go north of 20%. can go north of 20%. Studies show that 70% of these patients Studies show that 70% of these patients Studies show that 70% of these patients are never diagnosed. I tell you today are never diagnosed. I tell you today are never diagnosed. I tell you today that number is over 90%. that number is over 90%. that number is over 90%. Majority of these patients are never Majority of these patients are never Majority of these patients are never diagnosed or even when they're diagnosed or even when they're diagnosed or even when they're diagnosed, they're not being treated diagnosed, they're not being treated diagnosed, they're not being treated correctly. I listen to podcasts on PCOS correctly. I listen to podcasts on PCOS correctly. I listen to podcasts on PCOS where doctors come and uh you know, where doctors come and uh you know, where doctors come and uh you know, whoever's interviewing them ask them, whoever's interviewing them ask them, whoever's interviewing them ask them, "So, what do we do for PCOS?" And the "So, what do we do for PCOS?" And the "So, what do we do for PCOS?" And the answer is we give birth control. That's answer is we give birth control. That's answer is we give birth control. That's not true. Birth control is just one tiny not true. Birth control is just one tiny not true. Birth control is just one tiny little aspect of the entire treatment little aspect of the entire treatment little aspect of the entire treatment plan and that's why patients get plan and that's why patients get plan and that's why patients get frustrated. So when it comes to frustrated. So when it comes to frustrated. So when it comes to diagnosing PCOS, right, you need to meet diagnosing PCOS, right, you need to meet diagnosing PCOS, right, you need to meet two out of three criteria. The first one two out of three criteria. The first one two out of three criteria. The first one being symptoms of high testosterone or being symptoms of high testosterone or being symptoms of high testosterone or high androgens. What are those? Facial high androgens. What are those? Facial high androgens. What are those? Facial hair, body hair, the most common acne, hair, body hair, the most common acne, hair, body hair, the most common acne, oily skin or male pattern hair thinning oily skin or male pattern hair thinning oily skin or male pattern hair thinning which a lot of women complain of. Number which a lot of women complain of. Number which a lot of women complain of. Number two is basically uh ovulation two is basically uh ovulation two is basically uh ovulation dysfunction. These are women with dysfunction. These are women with dysfunction. These are women with irregular periods. They get their irregular periods. They get their irregular periods. They get their periods um over like you know 35 days. periods um over like you know 35 days. periods um over like you know 35 days. It's not regular 28 days or they get It's not regular 28 days or they get It's not regular 28 days or they get about eight periods per year. These are about eight periods per year. These are about eight periods per year. These are patients who usually come to the doctor patients who usually come to the doctor patients who usually come to the doctor and when you ask them how your periods and when you ask them how your periods and when you ask them how your periods are, they can't really tell. They tell are, they can't really tell. They tell are, they can't really tell. They tell you it's irregular. I can't quite you it's irregular. I can't quite you it's irregular. I can't quite pinpoint when I'm going to get my pinpoint when I'm going to get my pinpoint when I'm going to get my period. And number three is PCOS looking period. And number three is PCOS looking period. And number three is PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound. Polycystic ovary ovaries on ultrasound. Polycystic ovary ovaries on ultrasound. Polycystic ovary syndrome does not mean cyst. That's a syndrome does not mean cyst. That's a syndrome does not mean cyst. That's a bad name. bad name. bad name. &gt;&gt; It's a very specific finding on &gt;&gt; It's a very specific finding on &gt;&gt; It's a very specific finding on ultrasound. When you see almost like 20 ultrasound. When you see almost like 20 ultrasound. When you see almost like 20 plus follicles in the ovary and these plus follicles in the ovary and these plus follicles in the ovary and these are follicles. They look like string of are follicles. They look like string of are follicles. They look like string of pearl. It's very specific to PCOS. The pearl. It's very specific to PCOS. The pearl. It's very specific to PCOS. The issue is doctors don't recognize it. issue is doctors don't recognize it. issue is doctors don't recognize it. they dismiss it and they look at the they dismiss it and they look at the they dismiss it and they look at the ovary and they like they say, "Oh, you ovary and they like they say, "Oh, you ovary and they like they say, "Oh, you have so many eggs you have no issues have so many eggs you have no issues have so many eggs you have no issues with fertility." So PCOS looking ovaries with fertility." So PCOS looking ovaries with fertility." So PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound does not mean cyst. To on ultrasound does not mean cyst. To on ultrasound does not mean cyst. To this day, doctors tell patients, "I this day, doctors tell patients, "I this day, doctors tell patients, "I don't see a cyst on your ovary, so you don't see a cyst on your ovary, so you don't see a cyst on your ovary, so you don't have PCOS." don't have PCOS." don't have PCOS." So PCOS is an ultrasound finding. So PCOS is an ultrasound finding. So PCOS is an ultrasound finding. However, in 2023, they added another However, in 2023, they added another However, in 2023, they added another criteria to this third um criteria, criteria to this third um criteria, criteria to this third um criteria, which is elevated egg count or elevated which is elevated egg count or elevated which is elevated egg count or elevated AMH. So, women who have very high AMH, AMH. So, women who have very high AMH, AMH. So, women who have very high AMH, that is a telltale sign for PCOS. And that is a telltale sign for PCOS. And that is a telltale sign for PCOS. And that's what we were talking about before that's what we were talking about before that's what we were talking about before this podcast. this podcast. this podcast. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because so many women who are &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because so many women who are &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because so many women who are interested in and concerned about their interested in and concerned about their interested in and concerned about their fertility will go in and get their AMH fertility will go in and get their AMH fertility will go in and get their AMH measured. And so many just have in mind measured. And so many just have in mind measured. And so many just have in mind to that you just want the higher to that you just want the higher to that you just want the higher numbers. Higher is better, right? numbers. Higher is better, right? numbers. Higher is better, right? &gt;&gt; The higher is better. But in case of &gt;&gt; The higher is better. But in case of &gt;&gt; The higher is better. But in case of PCOS, higher does not mean good quality PCOS, higher does not mean good quality PCOS, higher does not mean good quality eggs. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; We're going to talk about that. So you &gt;&gt; We're going to talk about that. So you &gt;&gt; We're going to talk about that. So you need to meet two of these three need to meet two of these three need to meet two of these three criteria. &gt;&gt; Only two of the three. You don't need &gt;&gt; Only two of the three. You don't need &gt;&gt; Only two of the three. You don't need all three. all three. all three. &gt;&gt; No. So if you have irregular periods, &gt;&gt; No. So if you have irregular periods, &gt;&gt; No. So if you have irregular periods, right, and you have uh PCOS looking right, and you have uh PCOS looking right, and you have uh PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound, you meet the ovaries on ultrasound, you meet the ovaries on ultrasound, you meet the criteria. If you have uh irregular criteria. If you have uh irregular criteria. If you have uh irregular periods and you have symptoms of high periods and you have symptoms of high periods and you have symptoms of high testosterone, you qualify. Now, let me testosterone, you qualify. Now, let me testosterone, you qualify. Now, let me tell you, you do not need to have a high tell you, you do not need to have a high tell you, you do not need to have a high testosterone in the blood to get the testosterone in the blood to get the testosterone in the blood to get the diagnosis of PCOS. If you do, great. diagnosis of PCOS. If you do, great. diagnosis of PCOS. If you do, great. Then you qualify for that high Then you qualify for that high Then you qualify for that high testosterone symptom or in blood. But testosterone symptom or in blood. But testosterone symptom or in blood. But you do not need to have a high you do not need to have a high you do not need to have a high testosterone in your blood. And that's testosterone in your blood. And that's testosterone in your blood. And that's why a lot of doctors tell their why a lot of doctors tell their why a lot of doctors tell their patients, well, I checked your hormones patients, well, I checked your hormones patients, well, I checked your hormones and your testosterone is normal. That's and your testosterone is normal. That's and your testosterone is normal. That's not one of the diagnostic criteria. not one of the diagnostic criteria. not one of the diagnostic criteria. So if you're sitting at home, if you So if you're sitting at home, if you So if you're sitting at home, if you have irregular period, if you have a have irregular period, if you have a have irregular period, if you have a daughter who gets laser of, you know, daughter who gets laser of, you know, daughter who gets laser of, you know, constantly is lasering her face, she has constantly is lasering her face, she has constantly is lasering her face, she has acne, she's on spirolactone, she takes acne, she's on spirolactone, she takes acne, she's on spirolactone, she takes Accutane, these are criteria. She meets Accutane, these are criteria. She meets Accutane, these are criteria. She meets the criteria of PCOS. PCOS patients have the criteria of PCOS. PCOS patients have the criteria of PCOS. PCOS patients have mood disorder. If you listen to them, mood disorder. If you listen to them, mood disorder. If you listen to them, they struggle from with anxiety, they struggle from with anxiety, they struggle from with anxiety, depression. They're moody people. Uh 75% depression. They're moody people. Uh 75% depression. They're moody people. Uh 75% of them gain weight. 25% of them are of them gain weight. 25% of them are of them gain weight. 25% of them are very lean. I see a lot of eating very lean. I see a lot of eating very lean. I see a lot of eating disorder or disordered eating in my PCOS disorder or disordered eating in my PCOS disorder or disordered eating in my PCOS patients. I would literally tell you patients. I would literally tell you patients. I would literally tell you that 60 70% of my PCOS patients have that 60 70% of my PCOS patients have that 60 70% of my PCOS patients have disordered eating. You want to find PCOS disordered eating. You want to find PCOS disordered eating. You want to find PCOS patients, go knock on the doors of these patients, go knock on the doors of these patients, go knock on the doors of these eating disorder centers. They're sitting eating disorder centers. They're sitting eating disorder centers. They're sitting behind those doors, undiagnosed, and behind those doors, undiagnosed, and behind those doors, undiagnosed, and it's the leading cause of infertility. it's the leading cause of infertility. it's the leading cause of infertility. So this is the big picture of PCOS. So this is the big picture of PCOS. So this is the big picture of PCOS. So imagine these women who are walking imagine these women who are walking imagine these women who are walking around, they're gaining weight, they around, they're gaining weight, they around, they're gaining weight, they can't lose it, they're anxious, they can't lose it, they're anxious, they can't lose it, they're anxious, they can't get pregnant, they have acne, hair can't get pregnant, they have acne, hair can't get pregnant, they have acne, hair loss, facial hair, body hair, their loss, facial hair, body hair, their loss, facial hair, body hair, their periods are irregular. They go to the periods are irregular. They go to the periods are irregular. They go to the doctor and what do they hear? There's doctor and what do they hear? There's doctor and what do they hear? There's nothing wrong with you. Eat less. You nothing wrong with you. Eat less. You nothing wrong with you. Eat less. You probably need to exercise more. That's probably need to exercise more. That's probably need to exercise more. That's all they hear. all they hear. all they hear. What do they do? They put them in eating What do they do? They put them in eating What do they do? They put them in eating disorder centers when they're a teenager disorder centers when they're a teenager disorder centers when they're a teenager and they feed them pizza and they say, and they feed them pizza and they say, and they feed them pizza and they say, "If you don't eat this pizza, that means "If you don't eat this pizza, that means "If you don't eat this pizza, that means your eating disorder is not better." I your eating disorder is not better." I your eating disorder is not better." I did a podcast with a patient of mine, did a podcast with a patient of mine, did a podcast with a patient of mine, Phoebe. She said in this eating disorder Phoebe. She said in this eating disorder Phoebe. She said in this eating disorder center, every day they would put pizza center, every day they would put pizza center, every day they would put pizza in front of her. And she would say, "I I in front of her. And she would say, "I I in front of her. And she would say, "I I eat this pizza, but when I eat it, I eat this pizza, but when I eat it, I eat this pizza, but when I eat it, I get sick. I can't I feel awful when I get sick. I can't I feel awful when I get sick. I can't I feel awful when I have this pizza." You know what they have this pizza." You know what they have this pizza." You know what they would tell her? See, you have an eating would tell her? See, you have an eating would tell her? See, you have an eating disorder. you're not ready to go. No, disorder. you're not ready to go. No, disorder. you're not ready to go. No, she had PCOS. But at least if you she had PCOS. But at least if you she had PCOS. But at least if you diagnose and validate them, you can diagnose and validate them, you can diagnose and validate them, you can start helping them better. start helping them better. start helping them better. I have several questions. Um you I have several questions. Um you I have several questions. Um you mentioned irregular periods and um I mentioned irregular periods and um I mentioned irregular periods and um I think to most people that means that think to most people that means that think to most people that means that whatever cycle length they are whatever cycle length they are whatever cycle length they are accustomed to 28 days or 30 days or even accustomed to 28 days or 30 days or even accustomed to 28 days or 30 days or even you know 22 days that it's regular um you know 22 days that it's regular um you know 22 days that it's regular um and that if it changes by you know plus and that if it changes by you know plus and that if it changes by you know plus or minus 5 days or so for you know more or minus 5 days or so for you know more or minus 5 days or so for you know more than 2 or 3 months out of the year then than 2 or 3 months out of the year then than 2 or 3 months out of the year then you would call that irregular. Okay. But you would call that irregular. Okay. But you would call that irregular. Okay. But if a given how young you're seeing PCOS if a given how young you're seeing PCOS if a given how young you're seeing PCOS in your clinic and given that women in your clinic and given that women in your clinic and given that women start menrating at let's say in the in start menrating at let's say in the in start menrating at let's say in the in their in their mid- teens early teens I their in their mid- teens early teens I their in their mid- teens early teens I mean I know the age is getting pushed mean I know the age is getting pushed mean I know the age is getting pushed back and but it's going to vary but I back and but it's going to vary but I back and but it's going to vary but I could imagine I I've only lived as a could imagine I I've only lived as a could imagine I I've only lived as a male so I'm really uh truly male so I'm really uh truly male so I'm really uh truly imagining here but I could only imagine imagining here but I could only imagine imagining here but I could only imagine that for a lot of women cycle regularity that for a lot of women cycle regularity that for a lot of women cycle regularity is something that they're still figuring is something that they're still figuring is something that they're still figuring out at the stage when they could already out at the stage when they could already out at the stage when they could already have PCO. OS, maybe not full-blown PCOS, have PCO. OS, maybe not full-blown PCOS, have PCO. OS, maybe not full-blown PCOS, but more milder forms of PCOS. And so but more milder forms of PCOS. And so but more milder forms of PCOS. And so this notion of regular periods versus this notion of regular periods versus this notion of regular periods versus irregular periods, it could be quite irregular periods, it could be quite irregular periods, it could be quite confusing for someone to figure out. Um, confusing for someone to figure out. Um, confusing for someone to figure out. Um, if it's happening on a backdrop of PCOS, if it's happening on a backdrop of PCOS, if it's happening on a backdrop of PCOS, uh, and then that of course leaves aside uh, and then that of course leaves aside uh, and then that of course leaves aside all the, you know, stress and food all the, you know, stress and food all the, you know, stress and food induced regulation of menstrual cycle induced regulation of menstrual cycle induced regulation of menstrual cycle length etc. So it seems like a very length etc. So it seems like a very length etc. So it seems like a very difficult thing to identify. So that's difficult thing to identify. So that's difficult thing to identify. So that's actually you brought up a very good actually you brought up a very good actually you brought up a very good point and I want to make that very clear point and I want to make that very clear point and I want to make that very clear for teenagers you have to be very for teenagers you have to be very for teenagers you have to be very careful very cautious diagnosing them careful very cautious diagnosing them careful very cautious diagnosing them with PCOS. Why? As you said when you with PCOS. Why? As you said when you with PCOS. Why? As you said when you first start having your periods your first start having your periods your first start having your periods your periods are irregular and if you do an periods are irregular and if you do an periods are irregular and if you do an ultrasound these young ovaries have tons ultrasound these young ovaries have tons ultrasound these young ovaries have tons of follicles. So actually the PCOS um uh of follicles. So actually the PCOS um uh of follicles. So actually the PCOS um uh PCOS morphology does is not used for PCOS morphology does is not used for PCOS morphology does is not used for teenagers. For teenagers to get the teenagers. For teenagers to get the teenagers. For teenagers to get the diagnosis of PCOS they need to have diagnosis of PCOS they need to have diagnosis of PCOS they need to have criteria one which is the irregular criteria one which is the irregular criteria one which is the irregular period and criteria two which is the period and criteria two which is the period and criteria two which is the high androgen symptoms. You do not use high androgen symptoms. You do not use high androgen symptoms. You do not use the AMH or PCOS morphology on ultrasound the AMH or PCOS morphology on ultrasound the AMH or PCOS morphology on ultrasound as a diagnostic criteria. Number one. as a diagnostic criteria. Number one. as a diagnostic criteria. Number one. Number two, you want to be very careful Number two, you want to be very careful Number two, you want to be very careful diagnosing these patients because you diagnosing these patients because you diagnosing these patients because you don't want to label them at a very young don't want to label them at a very young don't want to label them at a very young age. So what I do with these patients, I age. So what I do with these patients, I age. So what I do with these patients, I do a hormone panel and these are do a hormone panel and these are do a hormone panel and these are patients who usually at a very young age patients who usually at a very young age patients who usually at a very young age they end up on Accutane for their acne. they end up on Accutane for their acne. they end up on Accutane for their acne. You give them spirolactone and it's not You give them spirolactone and it's not You give them spirolactone and it's not working. They complain of hair loss. working. They complain of hair loss. working. They complain of hair loss. They're gaining weight. They're showing They're gaining weight. They're showing They're gaining weight. They're showing signs of an eating disorder. They're signs of an eating disorder. They're signs of an eating disorder. They're anxious. They're not feeling well. they anxious. They're not feeling well. they anxious. They're not feeling well. they have really bad I see a lot of PMDD with have really bad I see a lot of PMDD with have really bad I see a lot of PMDD with my PCOS patients. So you look at the big my PCOS patients. So you look at the big my PCOS patients. So you look at the big picture and I tend to not label them but picture and I tend to not label them but picture and I tend to not label them but I will treat them. And uh you know in uh I will treat them. And uh you know in uh I will treat them. And uh you know in uh um 2014 I started using GLP1s on my um 2014 I started using GLP1s on my um 2014 I started using GLP1s on my patients for weight loss for PCOS. 2014 patients for weight loss for PCOS. 2014 patients for weight loss for PCOS. 2014 11 years ago. 11 years ago. 11 years ago. &gt;&gt; I think most people don't realize that &gt;&gt; I think most people don't realize that &gt;&gt; I think most people don't realize that these peptides were out there. They these peptides were out there. They these peptides were out there. They weren't as commonly discussed. they were weren't as commonly discussed. they were weren't as commonly discussed. they were sort of considered a little bit niche, a sort of considered a little bit niche, a sort of considered a little bit niche, a little bit, you know, was certainly little bit, you know, was certainly little bit, you know, was certainly cutting edge. Incredible. Okay. A cutting edge. Incredible. Okay. A cutting edge. Incredible. Okay. A question that I just um have to ask is question that I just um have to ask is question that I just um have to ask is because PCOS is diagnosed, if it's because PCOS is diagnosed, if it's because PCOS is diagnosed, if it's diagnosed properly, by this kind of diagnosed properly, by this kind of diagnosed properly, by this kind of amalgam of different features and amalgam of different features and amalgam of different features and you mentioned by ultrasound, this kind you mentioned by ultrasound, this kind you mentioned by ultrasound, this kind of characteristic lining up of the of characteristic lining up of the of characteristic lining up of the follicles. I have to ask what might follicles. I have to ask what might follicles. I have to ask what might sound like a politically incorrect sound like a politically incorrect sound like a politically incorrect question, but I'm going to ask it question, but I'm going to ask it question, but I'm going to ask it anyway. Do you think that male OBGYNS anyway. Do you think that male OBGYNS anyway. Do you think that male OBGYNS more often make this mistake than female more often make this mistake than female more often make this mistake than female OBGYNS or is this an equally distributed OBGYNS or is this an equally distributed OBGYNS or is this an equally distributed problem in the OBGYn community? problem in the OBGYn community? problem in the OBGYn community? &gt;&gt; Equal. &gt;&gt; Equal. &gt;&gt; Equal. 90% of these patients, let me tell you, 90% of these patients, let me tell you, 90% of these patients, let me tell you, are never diagnosed. A a lot of are never diagnosed. A a lot of are never diagnosed. A a lot of gynecologists don't do a pelvic gynecologists don't do a pelvic gynecologists don't do a pelvic ultrasound, which I want to change that ultrasound, which I want to change that ultrasound, which I want to change that in this country. It needs to be part of in this country. It needs to be part of in this country. It needs to be part of a wellwoman exam. a wellwoman exam. a wellwoman exam. &gt;&gt; They don't do a pelvic ultrasound. &gt;&gt; They don't do a pelvic ultrasound. &gt;&gt; They don't do a pelvic ultrasound. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; Is there I I'm baffled. what is &gt;&gt; Is there I I'm baffled. what is &gt;&gt; Is there I I'm baffled. what is the reason for not doing it? the reason for not doing it? the reason for not doing it? &gt;&gt; They're not trained to do it or they &gt;&gt; They're not trained to do it or they &gt;&gt; They're not trained to do it or they have to hire a ultrasound tech to their have to hire a ultrasound tech to their have to hire a ultrasound tech to their office to do it. Uh or they but for me office to do it. Uh or they but for me office to do it. Uh or they but for me in my office, if you come to my office in my office, if you come to my office in my office, if you come to my office and you say you can't do an ultrasound, and you say you can't do an ultrasound, and you say you can't do an ultrasound, it's just like me grabbing your glasses it's just like me grabbing your glasses it's just like me grabbing your glasses right now and say read how can I how can right now and say read how can I how can right now and say read how can I how can I diagnose you? Pelvic ultrasound should I diagnose you? Pelvic ultrasound should I diagnose you? Pelvic ultrasound should be mandatory. That's another topic I be mandatory. That's another topic I be mandatory. That's another topic I want to cover with the what wellwoman want to cover with the what wellwoman want to cover with the what wellwoman exam should look like versus what women exam should look like versus what women exam should look like versus what women get when they go to their doctor's get when they go to their doctor's get when they go to their doctor's office. So one of the issues is because office. So one of the issues is because office. So one of the issues is because women don't get a pelvic ultrasound. No women don't get a pelvic ultrasound. No women don't get a pelvic ultrasound. No one knows. One, two, a lot of doctors one knows. One, two, a lot of doctors one knows. One, two, a lot of doctors don't even know what a PCOS looking don't even know what a PCOS looking don't even know what a PCOS looking ovary looks like. They think polycystic ovary looks like. They think polycystic ovary looks like. They think polycystic ovary syndrome means cysts on the ovary. ovary syndrome means cysts on the ovary. ovary syndrome means cysts on the ovary. &gt;&gt; The naming is really a problem. And this &gt;&gt; The naming is really a problem. And this &gt;&gt; The naming is really a problem. And this is true in science and very clearly true is true in science and very clearly true is true in science and very clearly true in medicine as well. the what things are in medicine as well. the what things are in medicine as well. the what things are named can be it can be very useful but named can be it can be very useful but named can be it can be very useful but it can also really limit understanding. it can also really limit understanding. it can also really limit understanding. Yeah. Uh if anything um today's Yeah. Uh if anything um today's Yeah. Uh if anything um today's discussion hopefully will maybe even discussion hopefully will maybe even discussion hopefully will maybe even remove or put an asterisk next to the C remove or put an asterisk next to the C remove or put an asterisk next to the C and in and PCOS. you know, they want to and in and PCOS. you know, they want to and in and PCOS. you know, they want to change the name, but I personally am change the name, but I personally am change the name, but I personally am against it because I've spent against it because I've spent against it because I've spent 25 years saying PCOS, PCOS. 25 years saying PCOS, PCOS. 25 years saying PCOS, PCOS. And I feel like just in the past few And I feel like just in the past few And I feel like just in the past few years, more and more people, you know, years, more and more people, you know, years, more and more people, you know, like people didn't talk about menopause. like people didn't talk about menopause. like people didn't talk about menopause. Now, everyone's talking about uh Now, everyone's talking about uh Now, everyone's talking about uh menopause. I feel like PCOS is the next menopause. I feel like PCOS is the next menopause. I feel like PCOS is the next topic hopefully. And if you go and topic hopefully. And if you go and topic hopefully. And if you go and change the name, change the name, change the name, then I feel like I have to start all then I feel like I have to start all then I feel like I have to start all over again. over again. over again. &gt;&gt; No, but you make a very good point. We &gt;&gt; No, but you make a very good point. We &gt;&gt; No, but you make a very good point. We don't want that to have to happen. And I don't want that to have to happen. And I don't want that to have to happen. And I agree. &gt;&gt; But they're trying to do it. &gt;&gt; But they're trying to do it. &gt;&gt; But they're trying to do it. &gt;&gt; There's this there's a strange thing &gt;&gt; There's this there's a strange thing &gt;&gt; There's this there's a strange thing in public health where there needs to be in public health where there needs to be in public health where there needs to be a ton of hydraulic pressure over time. a ton of hydraulic pressure over time. a ton of hydraulic pressure over time. Like, you know, I guess today's my day Like, you know, I guess today's my day Like, you know, I guess today's my day to be only slightly politically to be only slightly politically to be only slightly politically incorrect. You know, 5 years ago, if you incorrect. You know, 5 years ago, if you incorrect. You know, 5 years ago, if you said the word obese or you said, you said the word obese or you said, you said the word obese or you said, you know, this person has health issues know, this person has health issues know, this person has health issues because they're obese. It was considered because they're obese. It was considered because they're obese. It was considered I mean, people were losing jobs for I mean, people were losing jobs for I mean, people were losing jobs for making statements like that. Now, we making statements like that. Now, we making statements like that. Now, we understand obesity to be a serious risk understand obesity to be a serious risk understand obesity to be a serious risk to brain and body health. It's a medical to brain and body health. It's a medical to brain and body health. It's a medical condition. I think the GLPs have kind of condition. I think the GLPs have kind of condition. I think the GLPs have kind of helped shift the view now because helped shift the view now because helped shift the view now because there's a medical treatment, but it was there's a medical treatment, but it was there's a medical treatment, but it was always true that obesity was dangerous always true that obesity was dangerous always true that obesity was dangerous for people, for people, for people, &gt;&gt; but now you can say it. So, I do think &gt;&gt; but now you can say it. So, I do think &gt;&gt; but now you can say it. So, I do think that there need to be a lot of hydraulic that there need to be a lot of hydraulic that there need to be a lot of hydraulic pressure behind that. And now, um, pressure behind that. And now, um, pressure behind that. And now, um, you're doing the same for PCOS. So, uh, you're doing the same for PCOS. So, uh, you're doing the same for PCOS. So, uh, I have a couple questions about the I have a couple questions about the I have a couple questions about the thinning of hair, acne, and so forth. thinning of hair, acne, and so forth. thinning of hair, acne, and so forth. I could imagine that a number of women I could imagine that a number of women I could imagine that a number of women listening to this are thinking, well, listening to this are thinking, well, listening to this are thinking, well, you know, I've got a little bit of acne. you know, I've got a little bit of acne. you know, I've got a little bit of acne. My hair is thinner than it was 5 years My hair is thinner than it was 5 years My hair is thinner than it was 5 years ago, but, you know, is this mild PCOS? ago, but, you know, is this mild PCOS? ago, but, you know, is this mild PCOS? Is this indicative of PCOS? I mean, Is this indicative of PCOS? I mean, Is this indicative of PCOS? I mean, everyone knows that hopefully knows everyone knows that hopefully knows everyone knows that hopefully knows their body best, but how bad does the their body best, but how bad does the their body best, but how bad does the acne or the hair thinning have to be? acne or the hair thinning have to be? acne or the hair thinning have to be? How rapid before you might say, you How rapid before you might say, you How rapid before you might say, you know, it it's maybe just, you know, the know, it it's maybe just, you know, the know, it it's maybe just, you know, the hairs seemingly thinner. Um there's the hairs seemingly thinner. Um there's the hairs seemingly thinner. Um there's a little bit more acne. It's back acne, a little bit more acne. It's back acne, a little bit more acne. It's back acne, but and is it throughout the cycle? but and is it throughout the cycle? but and is it throughout the cycle? &gt;&gt; Yes, it's throughout the cycle. And &gt;&gt; Yes, it's throughout the cycle. And &gt;&gt; Yes, it's throughout the cycle. And these are patients who usually come to these are patients who usually come to these are patients who usually come to the office asking for help. They say, "I the office asking for help. They say, "I the office asking for help. They say, "I can't get rid of my acne." I always say, can't get rid of my acne." I always say, can't get rid of my acne." I always say, if you're twer than 25 and you're if you're twer than 25 and you're if you're twer than 25 and you're struggling with acne and you come to my struggling with acne and you come to my struggling with acne and you come to my office and you're asking for office and you're asking for office and you're asking for sperolactone and Accutane, sperolactone and Accutane, sperolactone and Accutane, something's not right. Right. If you something's not right. Right. If you something's not right. Right. If you have hair thinning, like you brush your have hair thinning, like you brush your have hair thinning, like you brush your hair and you lose tons of hair. I mean, hair and you lose tons of hair. I mean, hair and you lose tons of hair. I mean, these are patients you look at, you these are patients you look at, you these are patients you look at, you could look at their scalp and you know could look at their scalp and you know could look at their scalp and you know they're losing hair. I'm not talking they're losing hair. I'm not talking they're losing hair. I'm not talking about the hair loss that you get about the hair loss that you get about the hair loss that you get postpartum. Do you know what that's postpartum. Do you know what that's postpartum. Do you know what that's transitional and it recovers in like 9 transitional and it recovers in like 9 transitional and it recovers in like 9 to 12 months. These are symptoms that to 12 months. These are symptoms that to 12 months. These are symptoms that persist and as they get these patients persist and as they get these patients persist and as they get these patients get older, it becomes more and more and get older, it becomes more and more and get older, it becomes more and more and more significant. But the reason I give more significant. But the reason I give more significant. But the reason I give that big picture is I always look at that big picture is I always look at that big picture is I always look at other factors. Are they having a hard other factors. Are they having a hard other factors. Are they having a hard time losing weight? Do they have mood time losing weight? Do they have mood time losing weight? Do they have mood disorder? Do they have any history of disorder? Do they have any history of disorder? Do they have any history of eating disorder? Have they been on eating disorder? Have they been on eating disorder? Have they been on Accutane? Do they go and laser their Accutane? Do they go and laser their Accutane? Do they go and laser their hair like twice a year because they hair like twice a year because they hair like twice a year because they can't get rid of it. It's a pattern that can't get rid of it. It's a pattern that can't get rid of it. It's a pattern that you will know. It's not a little bit of you will know. It's not a little bit of you will know. It's not a little bit of this and a these are patients. Patients this and a these are patients. Patients this and a these are patients. Patients who are listening right now to me, who are listening right now to me, who are listening right now to me, they're going to say, "Yes, I have this. they're going to say, "Yes, I have this. they're going to say, "Yes, I have this. &gt;&gt; I have every symptom." And I put a check &gt;&gt; I have every symptom." And I put a check &gt;&gt; I have every symptom." And I put a check in front of it. The problem with PCOS is in front of it. The problem with PCOS is in front of it. The problem with PCOS is there are four different phenotypes of there are four different phenotypes of there are four different phenotypes of PCOS. That's why it's so confusing for PCOS. That's why it's so confusing for PCOS. That's why it's so confusing for doctors to diagnose PCOS. The most doctors to diagnose PCOS. The most doctors to diagnose PCOS. The most common classic phenotype is a patient common classic phenotype is a patient common classic phenotype is a patient that has all three PCOS looking ovaries that has all three PCOS looking ovaries that has all three PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound. Elevated testosterone on ultrasound. Elevated testosterone on ultrasound. Elevated testosterone symptoms or high testosterone or symptoms or high testosterone or symptoms or high testosterone or androgens in the blood or and irregular androgens in the blood or and irregular androgens in the blood or and irregular period and irregular period. period and irregular period. period and irregular period. The second type B patients have the high The second type B patients have the high The second type B patients have the high androgen symptoms. They do have um androgen symptoms. They do have um androgen symptoms. They do have um dysfunctional ovulation with irregular dysfunctional ovulation with irregular dysfunctional ovulation with irregular periods. But these patients have normal periods. But these patients have normal periods. But these patients have normal ovaries on ultrasound. So you can't in ovaries on ultrasound. So you can't in ovaries on ultrasound. So you can't in this group of patients you can't do an this group of patients you can't do an this group of patients you can't do an ultrasound and say your ovaries are not ultrasound and say your ovaries are not ultrasound and say your ovaries are not PCOS looking so you don't have it. Then PCOS looking so you don't have it. Then PCOS looking so you don't have it. Then the third phenotype is the ovulatory the third phenotype is the ovulatory the third phenotype is the ovulatory PCOS. It gets very confusing. this group PCOS. It gets very confusing. this group PCOS. It gets very confusing. this group of uh PCOS patients actually ovulate at of uh PCOS patients actually ovulate at of uh PCOS patients actually ovulate at least sometimes because you know 70 to least sometimes because you know 70 to least sometimes because you know 70 to 80% of PCOS patients don't ovulate 80% of PCOS patients don't ovulate 80% of PCOS patients don't ovulate &gt;&gt; 70 &gt;&gt; 70 &gt;&gt; 70 &gt;&gt; to 80% do not ovulate even when they &gt;&gt; to 80% do not ovulate even when they &gt;&gt; to 80% do not ovulate even when they have regular cycles. So of the 20 30% have regular cycles. So of the 20 30% have regular cycles. So of the 20 30% who ovulate you need to ovulate to get who ovulate you need to ovulate to get who ovulate you need to ovulate to get pregnant this se phenotype these patients are this se phenotype these patients are this se phenotype these patients are ovulating sometimes with regular cycles. So these are PCOS with regular cycles. So these are PCOS with regular cycles. So these are PCOS patients who go to the doctor, they have patients who go to the doctor, they have patients who go to the doctor, they have PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound, they PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound, they PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound, they have acne, hair loss, facial hair, body have acne, hair loss, facial hair, body have acne, hair loss, facial hair, body hair, mood, all of that, but their hair, mood, all of that, but their hair, mood, all of that, but their periods are regular. Even these patients periods are regular. Even these patients periods are regular. Even these patients a lot of times are not ovulating. That a lot of times are not ovulating. That a lot of times are not ovulating. That regular cycle that you're seeing is regular cycle that you're seeing is regular cycle that you're seeing is estrogen withdrawal. It's not from the estrogen withdrawal. It's not from the estrogen withdrawal. It's not from the progesterone of ovulation. And we're progesterone of ovulation. And we're progesterone of ovulation. And we're going to get into all that if you want going to get into all that if you want going to get into all that if you want to. And the fourth category, these are to. And the fourth category, these are to. And the fourth category, these are patients who um basically don't have any patients who um basically don't have any patients who um basically don't have any uh elevated testosterone or androgen uh elevated testosterone or androgen uh elevated testosterone or androgen symptoms. They don't have acne, hair symptoms. They don't have acne, hair symptoms. They don't have acne, hair loss, facial hair, body hair. They just loss, facial hair, body hair. They just loss, facial hair, body hair. They just don't ovulate regularly and they have don't ovulate regularly and they have don't ovulate regularly and they have PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound. So PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound. So PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound. So imagine these four phenotypes, right? imagine these four phenotypes, right? imagine these four phenotypes, right? And imagine all the insulin resistance And imagine all the insulin resistance And imagine all the insulin resistance and all these other underlying and all these other underlying and all these other underlying conditions. It makes the big picture, conditions. It makes the big picture, conditions. It makes the big picture, the image of these patients so the image of these patients so the image of these patients so different. They all present differently different. They all present differently different. They all present differently to the office. That's why doctors to the office. That's why doctors to the office. That's why doctors scratch their heads. That's why doctors scratch their heads. That's why doctors scratch their heads. That's why doctors don't want to diagnose PCOS because they don't want to diagnose PCOS because they don't want to diagnose PCOS because they really don't understand all these really don't understand all these really don't understand all these phenotypes. They don't understand that phenotypes. They don't understand that phenotypes. They don't understand that you can be completely thin and have you can be completely thin and have you can be completely thin and have PCOS. That not all PCOS patients need to PCOS. That not all PCOS patients need to PCOS. That not all PCOS patients need to have weight issues. That you don't have weight issues. That you don't have weight issues. That you don't have to have acne, hair loss, facial hair, to have acne, hair loss, facial hair, to have acne, hair loss, facial hair, body hair. That in some phenotypes you body hair. That in some phenotypes you body hair. That in some phenotypes you don't need to have a PCOS looking don't need to have a PCOS looking don't need to have a PCOS looking ovaries. there's some that have regular ovaries. there's some that have regular ovaries. there's some that have regular cycles. So that's why it gets so cycles. So that's why it gets so cycles. So that's why it gets so confusing. &gt;&gt; It is uh confusing and yet I think when &gt;&gt; It is uh confusing and yet I think when &gt;&gt; It is uh confusing and yet I think when one hears that there are different one hears that there are different one hears that there are different um indicators obviously and it sounds um indicators obviously and it sounds um indicators obviously and it sounds like a skilled practitioner like a skilled practitioner like a skilled practitioner like yourself can see the contour of yourself can see the contour of yourself can see the contour of which ones fit together. I it's pattern which ones fit together. I it's pattern which ones fit together. I it's pattern recognition clinical pattern recognition clinical pattern recognition clinical pattern recognition which is very difficult to recognition which is very difficult to recognition which is very difficult to do from an AI search or from it's do from an AI search or from it's do from an AI search or from it's impossible really. I mean I think um I impossible really. I mean I think um I impossible really. I mean I think um I have a couple of questions. Uh one is have a couple of questions. Uh one is have a couple of questions. Uh one is just leap to mind as it relates to the just leap to mind as it relates to the just leap to mind as it relates to the mood disorders. Um I could imagine that mood disorders. Um I could imagine that mood disorders. Um I could imagine that some of these disorders are treated or some of these disorders are treated or some of these disorders are treated or they attempt to treat them through uh they attempt to treat them through uh they attempt to treat them through uh anti-depressants, SSRIs and things of anti-depressants, SSRIs and things of anti-depressants, SSRIs and things of that sort. Is there any indication that sort. Is there any indication that sort. Is there any indication that the drug treatments for these mood the drug treatments for these mood the drug treatments for these mood disorders interact with the hormones disorders interact with the hormones disorders interact with the hormones that we're talking about in a way that we're talking about in a way that we're talking about in a way that exacerbates the PCOS? I mean we know exacerbates the PCOS? I mean we know exacerbates the PCOS? I mean we know that serotonin and dopamine all these that serotonin and dopamine all these that serotonin and dopamine all these things have feedback and interaction things have feedback and interaction things have feedback and interaction with these hormones or do you think that with these hormones or do you think that with these hormones or do you think that um that's se a separate thing entirely? um that's se a separate thing entirely? um that's se a separate thing entirely? &gt;&gt; In order to answer that I think it's &gt;&gt; In order to answer that I think it's &gt;&gt; In order to answer that I think it's better for me to tell you the underlying better for me to tell you the underlying better for me to tell you the underlying drivers of the symptoms of PCOS and how drivers of the symptoms of PCOS and how drivers of the symptoms of PCOS and how those can affect the mood. And by those can affect the mood. And by those can affect the mood. And by treating the underlying conditions, treating the underlying conditions, treating the underlying conditions, sometimes you can address mood changes sometimes you can address mood changes sometimes you can address mood changes without having to give them a zoloft or without having to give them a zoloft or without having to give them a zoloft or alexapore. You might have to, right? alexapore. You might have to, right? alexapore. You might have to, right? &gt;&gt; But there's no evidence from what I &gt;&gt; But there's no evidence from what I &gt;&gt; But there's no evidence from what I understand that those drugs are actually understand that those drugs are actually understand that those drugs are actually causing PCOS. Okay. I just want to causing PCOS. Okay. I just want to causing PCOS. Okay. I just want to essentially rule that out. Right. Okay. essentially rule that out. Right. Okay. essentially rule that out. Right. Okay. Good. I'm relieved to hear that because Good. I'm relieved to hear that because Good. I'm relieved to hear that because those drugs are those drugs are those drugs are &gt;&gt; not to my knowledge. I've never &gt;&gt; not to my knowledge. I've never &gt;&gt; not to my knowledge. I've never experienced that. experienced that. experienced that. &gt;&gt; My my, you know, not so cursory uh web &gt;&gt; My my, you know, not so cursory uh web &gt;&gt; My my, you know, not so cursory uh web search on this uh said no, but I want search on this uh said no, but I want search on this uh said no, but I want to verify with you. So, um so what is to verify with you. So, um so what is to verify with you. So, um so what is the cause of the mood disorders? You're the cause of the mood disorders? You're the cause of the mood disorders? You're talking slightly elevated testosterone. talking slightly elevated testosterone. talking slightly elevated testosterone. So, all the all the males listening are So, all the all the males listening are So, all the all the males listening are like, "Oo, sounds great." And of course, like, "Oo, sounds great." And of course, like, "Oo, sounds great." And of course, um supplementing with testosterone um in um supplementing with testosterone um in um supplementing with testosterone um in women in menopause has now become kind women in menopause has now become kind women in menopause has now become kind of a trendy thing. of a trendy thing. of a trendy thing. &gt;&gt; And you can absolutely do that with PCOS &gt;&gt; And you can absolutely do that with PCOS &gt;&gt; And you can absolutely do that with PCOS patients. We can get to that. But I is patients. We can get to that. But I is patients. We can get to that. But I is it okay if I discuss the underlying it okay if I discuss the underlying it okay if I discuss the underlying pillars because it's very important and pillars because it's very important and pillars because it's very important and I think that's what people don't I think that's what people don't I think that's what people don't understand and I think that's what I've understand and I think that's what I've understand and I think that's what I've observed in my practice at least over observed in my practice at least over observed in my practice at least over the past 25 years and it's so important the past 25 years and it's so important the past 25 years and it's so important to understand it because if you don't to understand it because if you don't to understand it because if you don't understand it then you don't know how to understand it then you don't know how to understand it then you don't know how to treat PCOS then you don't just throw treat PCOS then you don't just throw treat PCOS then you don't just throw birth control pill at it and that's why birth control pill at it and that's why birth control pill at it and that's why these patients don't feel better so these patients don't feel better so these patients don't feel better so they're underlying pillars that drive they're underlying pillars that drive they're underlying pillars that drive the symptoms of PCOS us the number one the symptoms of PCOS us the number one the symptoms of PCOS us the number one issue is the brain pituitary ovary issue is the brain pituitary ovary issue is the brain pituitary ovary access which I'm sure you know it by access which I'm sure you know it by access which I'm sure you know it by heart but as you know our hypothalamus heart but as you know our hypothalamus heart but as you know our hypothalamus releases a hormone called G&amp;R that releases a hormone called G&amp;R that releases a hormone called G&amp;R that stimulates in a uh it fires in a stimulates in a uh it fires in a stimulates in a uh it fires in a pulsatile fashion and basically it pulsatile fashion and basically it pulsatile fashion and basically it stimulates the pituitary gland to stimulates the pituitary gland to stimulates the pituitary gland to release this hormone called FSH which release this hormone called FSH which release this hormone called FSH which stimulates the follicles in the ovaries stimulates the follicles in the ovaries stimulates the follicles in the ovaries as the follicles one follicle per month. as the follicles one follicle per month. as the follicles one follicle per month. As the follicle gets stimulated and As the follicle gets stimulated and As the follicle gets stimulated and starts growing, it starts releasing starts growing, it starts releasing starts growing, it starts releasing estrogen. When the estrogen peaks really estrogen. When the estrogen peaks really estrogen. When the estrogen peaks really high for 48 hours, it stimulates that high for 48 hours, it stimulates that high for 48 hours, it stimulates that same pituitary gland to release a same pituitary gland to release a same pituitary gland to release a hormone called LH. And LH is responsible hormone called LH. And LH is responsible hormone called LH. And LH is responsible for ovulation. It comes, it basically for ovulation. It comes, it basically for ovulation. It comes, it basically weakens the wall of the follicle. It weakens the wall of the follicle. It weakens the wall of the follicle. It causes inflammation. It causes vascular causes inflammation. It causes vascular causes inflammation. It causes vascular changes, all of that. So the egg gets changes, all of that. So the egg gets changes, all of that. So the egg gets released. Once the egg gets released, released. Once the egg gets released, released. Once the egg gets released, whatever's left of that follicle is the whatever's left of that follicle is the whatever's left of that follicle is the corpus ludial cyst which starts corpus ludial cyst which starts corpus ludial cyst which starts releasing progesterone to basically uh releasing progesterone to basically uh releasing progesterone to basically uh support implantation. This is what's support implantation. This is what's support implantation. This is what's supposed to happen and that's how people supposed to happen and that's how people supposed to happen and that's how people get pregnant. get pregnant. get pregnant. &gt;&gt; It's such a beautiful mechanism, right? &gt;&gt; It's such a beautiful mechanism, right? &gt;&gt; It's such a beautiful mechanism, right? Very cells that are stimulated by FSH Very cells that are stimulated by FSH Very cells that are stimulated by FSH produce a hormone which feeds back to produce a hormone which feeds back to produce a hormone which feeds back to shut down the production of FSH and shut down the production of FSH and shut down the production of FSH and bring in the LH. I mean it's a I bring in the LH. I mean it's a I bring in the LH. I mean it's a I mean it's a beautiful molecular set of mean it's a beautiful molecular set of mean it's a beautiful molecular set of gears basically. It's beautiful. I mean gears basically. It's beautiful. I mean gears basically. It's beautiful. I mean not to make it too reductionist but it's not to make it too reductionist but it's not to make it too reductionist but it's truly incredible when one thinks it's truly incredible when one thinks it's truly incredible when one thinks about it. And as you mentioned that it about it. And as you mentioned that it about it. And as you mentioned that it spans from the brain all the way to the spans from the brain all the way to the spans from the brain all the way to the ovary. It's to the uterus. It's it's a ovary. It's to the uterus. It's it's a ovary. It's to the uterus. It's it's a it's a spectacular set of it's a spectacular set of it's a spectacular set of interactions really. interactions really. interactions really. &gt;&gt; And you know that estrogen that the &gt;&gt; And you know that estrogen that the &gt;&gt; And you know that estrogen that the follicle is uh stimulating gets the follicle is uh stimulating gets the follicle is uh stimulating gets the lining of the uterus nice and juicy lining of the uterus nice and juicy lining of the uterus nice and juicy ready for pregnancy. And then when the ready for pregnancy. And then when the ready for pregnancy. And then when the egg ovulates and now the progesterone egg ovulates and now the progesterone egg ovulates and now the progesterone comes, the progesterone stabilizes that comes, the progesterone stabilizes that comes, the progesterone stabilizes that lining so the embryo can go and implant lining so the embryo can go and implant lining so the embryo can go and implant and turn into a beautiful baby. And and turn into a beautiful baby. And and turn into a beautiful baby. And usually that cyst, the corpus ludial usually that cyst, the corpus ludial usually that cyst, the corpus ludial cyst during the first 12 weeks of cyst during the first 12 weeks of cyst during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy is helping release the pregnancy is helping release the pregnancy is helping release the progesterone to help the pregnancy progesterone to help the pregnancy progesterone to help the pregnancy really stick to that wall of the uterus. really stick to that wall of the uterus. really stick to that wall of the uterus. In simple terms, In simple terms, In simple terms, &gt;&gt; nothing wasted. &gt;&gt; nothing wasted. &gt;&gt; nothing wasted. &gt;&gt; Nothing. But women are incredible, &gt;&gt; Nothing. But women are incredible, &gt;&gt; Nothing. But women are incredible, aren't we? Incredible. aren't we? Incredible. aren't we? Incredible. &gt;&gt; It's amazing. I mean, it's it indeed &gt;&gt; It's amazing. I mean, it's it indeed &gt;&gt; It's amazing. I mean, it's it indeed they are. It's it's like indeed they are. It's it's like indeed they are. It's it's like nothing's wasted. The the portion of the nothing's wasted. The the portion of the nothing's wasted. The the portion of the follicle that would otherwise be follicle that would otherwise be follicle that would otherwise be quote unquote discarded is actually a quote unquote discarded is actually a quote unquote discarded is actually a source of critical hormones. It's source of critical hormones. It's source of critical hormones. It's incredible. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. &gt;&gt; But let me tell you what happens in a &gt;&gt; But let me tell you what happens in a &gt;&gt; But let me tell you what happens in a poor PCOS patient. That's the problem. poor PCOS patient. That's the problem. poor PCOS patient. That's the problem. The G&amp;RH, remember that secretes from The G&amp;RH, remember that secretes from The G&amp;RH, remember that secretes from the hypothalamus, the hypothalamus, the hypothalamus, it starts pulsating super fast. By doing it starts pulsating super fast. By doing it starts pulsating super fast. By doing that, it shifts the FSH LH balance. So that, it shifts the FSH LH balance. So that, it shifts the FSH LH balance. So FSH goes down and LH goes up. LH FSH goes down and LH goes up. LH FSH goes down and LH goes up. LH stimulates these cells in the ovary. I stimulates these cells in the ovary. I stimulates these cells in the ovary. I don't know if you remember the thea don't know if you remember the thea don't know if you remember the thea cells in the ovary and they start cells in the ovary and they start cells in the ovary and they start pumping androgens out, right? And it pumping androgens out, right? And it pumping androgens out, right? And it when you have a lot of androgens in the when you have a lot of androgens in the when you have a lot of androgens in the ovaries, the androgens block the growth ovaries, the androgens block the growth ovaries, the androgens block the growth of that beautiful follicle that's of that beautiful follicle that's of that beautiful follicle that's growing to ovulate. So it freezes the growing to ovulate. So it freezes the growing to ovulate. So it freezes the follicle and it prevents it from follicle and it prevents it from follicle and it prevents it from ovulating. The follicle is still secretreting the The follicle is still secretreting the The follicle is still secretreting the estrogen, but it never gets to that peak estrogen, but it never gets to that peak estrogen, but it never gets to that peak high, right? And it's still stimulating high, right? And it's still stimulating high, right? And it's still stimulating the lining of the uterus, but the lining of the uterus, but the lining of the uterus, but the ovulation doesn't happen. So when the ovulation doesn't happen. So when the ovulation doesn't happen. So when the ovulation doesn't happen, polycystic ovulation doesn't happen, polycystic ovulation doesn't happen, polycystic ovary syndrome, you start seeing these ovary syndrome, you start seeing these ovary syndrome, you start seeing these follicles in the ovary. follicles in the ovary. follicles in the ovary. &gt;&gt; So is it um lack of sufficient LH? &gt;&gt; So is it um lack of sufficient LH? &gt;&gt; So is it um lack of sufficient LH? &gt;&gt; It's too much LH in PCOS. the LH FSH &gt;&gt; It's too much LH in PCOS. the LH FSH &gt;&gt; It's too much LH in PCOS. the LH FSH ratio flips. So the LH is twice as much ratio flips. So the LH is twice as much ratio flips. So the LH is twice as much as the FSH. So you have this constant as the FSH. So you have this constant as the FSH. So you have this constant secretion of LH that stimulates these secretion of LH that stimulates these secretion of LH that stimulates these cells to just pump androgens out, right? cells to just pump androgens out, right? cells to just pump androgens out, right? So the follicle freezes, doesn't So the follicle freezes, doesn't So the follicle freezes, doesn't ovulate, the follicle stays in the ovulate, the follicle stays in the ovulate, the follicle stays in the ovary. And one thing that they've ovary. And one thing that they've ovary. And one thing that they've noticed with PCOS patients, for whatever noticed with PCOS patients, for whatever noticed with PCOS patients, for whatever reason, their ovary is super sensitive reason, their ovary is super sensitive reason, their ovary is super sensitive to the LH. It's like adding fuel to the to the LH. It's like adding fuel to the to the LH. It's like adding fuel to the fire. &gt;&gt; It's like a positive feedback. The &gt;&gt; It's like a positive feedback. The &gt;&gt; It's like a positive feedback. The reason I asked if it's if it's um how LH reason I asked if it's if it's um how LH reason I asked if it's if it's um how LH is adjusted is the LH surge is what is adjusted is the LH surge is what is adjusted is the LH surge is what triggers ovulation normally. Correct. triggers ovulation normally. Correct. triggers ovulation normally. Correct. &gt;&gt; But there is no LH surge. &gt;&gt; But there is no LH surge. &gt;&gt; But there is no LH surge. &gt;&gt; What I'm getting a kind of mental visual &gt;&gt; What I'm getting a kind of mental visual &gt;&gt; What I'm getting a kind of mental visual of is that um the strong pull of the of is that um the strong pull of the of is that um the strong pull of the levers is it's just a bunch of levers is it's just a bunch of levers is it's just a bunch of smaller levers being pulled repeatedly. smaller levers being pulled repeatedly. smaller levers being pulled repeatedly. But but there's still shedding of the But but there's still shedding of the But but there's still shedding of the uterine lining, right? There's still uterine lining, right? There's still uterine lining, right? There's still menses. So it can be. So that's why it's menses. So it can be. So that's why it's menses. So it can be. So that's why it's probably very misleading for people who probably very misleading for people who probably very misleading for people who don't have extreme symptoms of PCOS don't have extreme symptoms of PCOS don't have extreme symptoms of PCOS because they think, well, if they're because they think, well, if they're because they think, well, if they're menrating, then they assume that they're menrating, then they assume that they're menrating, then they assume that they're ovulating. &gt;&gt; And 20 to 30% of them actually ovulate, &gt;&gt; And 20 to 30% of them actually ovulate, &gt;&gt; And 20 to 30% of them actually ovulate, right? But they don't always ovulate. right? But they don't always ovulate. right? But they don't always ovulate. That's the problem. That's the problem. That's the problem. &gt;&gt; And of the ones who ovulate, it gets &gt;&gt; And of the ones who ovulate, it gets &gt;&gt; And of the ones who ovulate, it gets worse. of the ones who let's say you worse. of the ones who let's say you worse. of the ones who let's say you know this uh brain pituitary ovary know this uh brain pituitary ovary know this uh brain pituitary ovary access is just partially disrupted access is just partially disrupted access is just partially disrupted of the ones who ovulate of the ones who ovulate of the ones who ovulate 40% of them the embryo does either 40% of them the embryo does either 40% of them the embryo does either doesn't form because the quality of the doesn't form because the quality of the doesn't form because the quality of the egg is bad but also the environment is egg is bad but also the environment is egg is bad but also the environment is not ready for it so the progesterone the not ready for it so the progesterone the not ready for it so the progesterone the uterine lining is not ready for it uterine lining is not ready for it uterine lining is not ready for it that's why these patients don't get that that's why these patients don't get that that's why these patients don't get that &gt;&gt; what is thought to disrupt the &gt;&gt; what is thought to disrupt the &gt;&gt; what is thought to disrupt the hypothalamic uh G&amp;RH neurons hypothalamic uh G&amp;RH neurons hypothalamic uh G&amp;RH neurons &gt;&gt; it could be everything it could it comes &gt;&gt; it could be everything it could it comes &gt;&gt; it could be everything it could it comes to all the other pillars to all the other pillars to all the other pillars yes &gt;&gt; but is there any evidence um I mean &gt;&gt; but is there any evidence um I mean &gt;&gt; but is there any evidence um I mean we don't want to attribute everything to we don't want to attribute everything to we don't want to attribute everything to psychological stress but the more I psychological stress but the more I psychological stress but the more I learn about the brain and body and their learn about the brain and body and their learn about the brain and body and their interactions over the years the more I'm interactions over the years the more I'm interactions over the years the more I'm convinced that psychological state does convinced that psychological state does convinced that psychological state does impact hormones and brain function impact hormones and brain function impact hormones and brain function anyone listening will say of course it anyone listening will say of course it anyone listening will say of course it does but 10 years ago there was this does but 10 years ago there was this does but 10 years ago there was this notion of psychossematic illness people notion of psychossematic illness people notion of psychossematic illness people would say oh they would say it's all in would say oh they would say it's all in would say oh they would say it's all in your head we now know that um that your head we now know that um that your head we now know that um that stress is a is a powerful modulator of stress is a is a powerful modulator of stress is a is a powerful modulator of hypothalamic function it actually comes hypothalamic function it actually comes hypothalamic function it actually comes from the hypothalamus in part from the hypothalamus in part from the hypothalamus in part &gt;&gt; so I is there evidence that this is you &gt;&gt; so I is there evidence that this is you &gt;&gt; so I is there evidence that this is you know preceded by stress or trauma things know preceded by stress or trauma things know preceded by stress or trauma things of that sort it just comes of that sort it just comes of that sort it just comes &gt;&gt; absolutely it yes it's genetic and &gt;&gt; absolutely it yes it's genetic and &gt;&gt; absolutely it yes it's genetic and that's why I want to talk about it this that's why I want to talk about it this that's why I want to talk about it this is just the first pillar you saw like is just the first pillar you saw like is just the first pillar you saw like just the first driving force is this just the first driving force is this just the first driving force is this brain main pituitary ovary pathway brain main pituitary ovary pathway brain main pituitary ovary pathway that's completely disrupted that some that's completely disrupted that some that's completely disrupted that some most patients 70 to 80% don't even most patients 70 to 80% don't even most patients 70 to 80% don't even ovulate and of the ones who ovulate the and of the ones who ovulate the and of the ones who ovulate the environment is not really good for the environment is not really good for the environment is not really good for the embryo so that's just the first pillar embryo so that's just the first pillar embryo so that's just the first pillar but at its core PCOS has insulin but at its core PCOS has insulin but at its core PCOS has insulin resistance and I'm sure you know all resistance and I'm sure you know all resistance and I'm sure you know all about insulin resistance but I want to about insulin resistance but I want to about insulin resistance but I want to explain it explain it explain it &gt;&gt; please remind our audience because you &gt;&gt; please remind our audience because you &gt;&gt; please remind our audience because you know we have newcomers to the know we have newcomers to the know we have newcomers to the conversation and I don't think we could conversation and I don't think we could conversation and I don't think we could hear enough about insulin resistance hear enough about insulin resistance hear enough about insulin resistance &gt;&gt; resistance as a gynecologist, I'll &gt;&gt; resistance as a gynecologist, I'll &gt;&gt; resistance as a gynecologist, I'll explain insulin resistance. So, I'm sure explain insulin resistance. So, I'm sure explain insulin resistance. So, I'm sure you've had, you know, physicians uh who you've had, you know, physicians uh who you've had, you know, physicians uh who probably explain it better, but I'm probably explain it better, but I'm probably explain it better, but I'm going to simplify it because it's one of going to simplify it because it's one of going to simplify it because it's one of the biggest drivers of PCOS symptom and the biggest drivers of PCOS symptom and the biggest drivers of PCOS symptom and it's extremely common. Even lean PCOS it's extremely common. Even lean PCOS it's extremely common. Even lean PCOS patients can have insulin resistance. patients can have insulin resistance. patients can have insulin resistance. So, what is insulin resistance? The So, what is insulin resistance? The So, what is insulin resistance? The simple way of explaining it is when we simple way of explaining it is when we simple way of explaining it is when we eat carbohydrates and our body breaks it eat carbohydrates and our body breaks it eat carbohydrates and our body breaks it down into glucose, glucose stimulates down into glucose, glucose stimulates down into glucose, glucose stimulates our pancreas to release a hormone called our pancreas to release a hormone called our pancreas to release a hormone called insulin. The job of insulin is it goes insulin. The job of insulin is it goes insulin. The job of insulin is it goes to the cells in our muscle in our liver to the cells in our muscle in our liver to the cells in our muscle in our liver and it opens up the channels on these and it opens up the channels on these and it opens up the channels on these cells and pushes sugar into the cell cells and pushes sugar into the cell cells and pushes sugar into the cell where it can turn into energy. So where it can turn into energy. So where it can turn into energy. So basically insulin takes the sugar from basically insulin takes the sugar from basically insulin takes the sugar from the blood, pushes into the cell and the blood, pushes into the cell and the blood, pushes into the cell and turns it into energy. PCOS patients, 80% turns it into energy. PCOS patients, 80% turns it into energy. PCOS patients, 80% of them have insulin resistance. It's of them have insulin resistance. It's of them have insulin resistance. It's not their fault. They're born that way. not their fault. They're born that way. not their fault. They're born that way. What does insulin resistant do? When What does insulin resistant do? When What does insulin resistant do? When they eat carbohydrate and their body they eat carbohydrate and their body they eat carbohydrate and their body breaks it down into glucose, glucose breaks it down into glucose, glucose breaks it down into glucose, glucose stimulates their pancreas to release stimulates their pancreas to release stimulates their pancreas to release insulin, but their cells are resistant. insulin, but their cells are resistant. insulin, but their cells are resistant. And I'll tell you why. Remember that And I'll tell you why. Remember that And I'll tell you why. Remember that androgen that I was talking to you about androgen that I was talking to you about androgen that I was talking to you about that gets secreted from their ovaries that gets secreted from their ovaries that gets secreted from their ovaries because of the first pillar makes women because of the first pillar makes women because of the first pillar makes women more insulin resistant. So, their cells more insulin resistant. So, their cells more insulin resistant. So, their cells don't respond well. I know it's like, don't respond well. I know it's like, don't respond well. I know it's like, let me get there. It's let me get there. It's let me get there. It's &gt;&gt; do the question I was going to ask &gt;&gt; do the question I was going to ask &gt;&gt; do the question I was going to ask was going to be a facicious one. I was going to be a facicious one. I was going to be a facicious one. I was going to say, do androgens do anything going to say, do androgens do anything going to say, do androgens do anything good? No, of course they do. But do good? No, of course they do. But do good? No, of course they do. But do &gt;&gt; women. No, they do. Well, women need &gt;&gt; women. No, they do. Well, women need &gt;&gt; women. No, they do. Well, women need androgens, but they don't need this many androgens, but they don't need this many androgens, but they don't need this many androgens coming from the theal cells. androgens coming from the theal cells. androgens coming from the theal cells. Right. &gt;&gt; So, when their cells can't uptake this &gt;&gt; So, when their cells can't uptake this &gt;&gt; So, when their cells can't uptake this glucose, glucose bounces in the blood. glucose, glucose bounces in the blood. glucose, glucose bounces in the blood. Well, you can't have blood stay I mean, Well, you can't have blood stay I mean, Well, you can't have blood stay I mean, glucose stay in your blood. You have to glucose stay in your blood. You have to glucose stay in your blood. You have to clear it. So as glucose goes up, it clear it. So as glucose goes up, it clear it. So as glucose goes up, it pushes our insulin to go up. What does pushes our insulin to go up. What does pushes our insulin to go up. What does insulin do to PCOS patients? Number one, insulin do to PCOS patients? Number one, insulin do to PCOS patients? Number one, when insulin goes up, insulin stimulates when insulin goes up, insulin stimulates when insulin goes up, insulin stimulates our ovaries to push more androgens out. our ovaries to push more androgens out. our ovaries to push more androgens out. How about that? And it blocks the How about that? And it blocks the How about that? And it blocks the ovulation. It freezes that follicle, ovulation. It freezes that follicle, ovulation. It freezes that follicle, right? And it causes acne, hair loss, right? And it causes acne, hair loss, right? And it causes acne, hair loss, facial hair, body hair, irregular facial hair, body hair, irregular facial hair, body hair, irregular periods, all of that. periods, all of that. periods, all of that. The other thing insulin does, it blocks The other thing insulin does, it blocks The other thing insulin does, it blocks the liver from secretreting sex hormone the liver from secretreting sex hormone the liver from secretreting sex hormone binding globbulin. If you do a blood binding globbulin. If you do a blood binding globbulin. If you do a blood test on a PCOS patient, a lot of them test on a PCOS patient, a lot of them test on a PCOS patient, a lot of them the sex hormone binding globbulin is the sex hormone binding globbulin is the sex hormone binding globbulin is low. Sex hormone binding globulin is a low. Sex hormone binding globulin is a low. Sex hormone binding globulin is a protein in the blood that grabs free protein in the blood that grabs free protein in the blood that grabs free testosterone from our blood. Right? When testosterone from our blood. Right? When testosterone from our blood. Right? When the levels go down because of high the levels go down because of high the levels go down because of high insulin, our free androgens and insulin, our free androgens and insulin, our free androgens and testosterone go up. So more acne, hair testosterone go up. So more acne, hair testosterone go up. So more acne, hair loss, facial hair, body hair, all those loss, facial hair, body hair, all those loss, facial hair, body hair, all those symptoms. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; High insulin does one more thing. It &gt;&gt; High insulin does one more thing. It &gt;&gt; High insulin does one more thing. It basically tells your body, take this basically tells your body, take this basically tells your body, take this sugar, get rid of it from the blood and sugar, get rid of it from the blood and sugar, get rid of it from the blood and store it as fat. How does it do that? It store it as fat. How does it do that? It store it as fat. How does it do that? It pushes our liver to turn it into pushes our liver to turn it into pushes our liver to turn it into triglyceride. The triglycerides can a go triglyceride. The triglycerides can a go triglyceride. The triglycerides can a go into our blood as a form of VLDL and go into our blood as a form of VLDL and go into our blood as a form of VLDL and go and attach themselves to the heart. And and attach themselves to the heart. And and attach themselves to the heart. And that's why PCOS patients, you have to that's why PCOS patients, you have to that's why PCOS patients, you have to screen them their lipid panel because of screen them their lipid panel because of screen them their lipid panel because of their cholesterol, risk of their cholesterol, risk of their cholesterol, risk of cardiovascular disease, risk of cardiovascular disease, risk of cardiovascular disease, risk of diabetes, all of that. But what it does, diabetes, all of that. But what it does, diabetes, all of that. But what it does, it sends these triglycerides to our it sends these triglycerides to our it sends these triglycerides to our visceral organs. So these patients start visceral organs. So these patients start visceral organs. So these patients start having visceral fat. Visceral fat is having visceral fat. Visceral fat is having visceral fat. Visceral fat is very different than the fat that you very different than the fat that you very different than the fat that you have under your skin. Visceral fat have under your skin. Visceral fat have under your skin. Visceral fat actually c releases cytoines actually c releases cytoines actually c releases cytoines inflammatory factors that increases the inflammatory factors that increases the inflammatory factors that increases the inflammation. Inflammation makes our insulin Inflammation makes our insulin Inflammation makes our insulin resistance worse and inflammation which resistance worse and inflammation which resistance worse and inflammation which is the next pillar is the next pillar is the next pillar stimulates our ovaries to secrete more stimulates our ovaries to secrete more stimulates our ovaries to secrete more androgens. &gt;&gt; So it's a vicious feedback cycle. And I &gt;&gt; So it's a vicious feedback cycle. And I &gt;&gt; So it's a vicious feedback cycle. And I think maybe if we just double click on think maybe if we just double click on think maybe if we just double click on uh visceral fat a little bit. We've uh visceral fat a little bit. We've uh visceral fat a little bit. We've never talked about it on this podcast never talked about it on this podcast never talked about it on this podcast really. &gt;&gt; And I'm not a visceral fat expert. &gt;&gt; And I'm not a visceral fat expert. &gt;&gt; And I'm not a visceral fat expert. &gt;&gt; No. Well, nor do I expect you to be, but &gt;&gt; No. Well, nor do I expect you to be, but &gt;&gt; No. Well, nor do I expect you to be, but I think it's it it's worth um people I think it's it it's worth um people I think it's it it's worth um people just hearing twice that visceral fat is just hearing twice that visceral fat is just hearing twice that visceral fat is not subcutaneous fat. This is why some not subcutaneous fat. This is why some not subcutaneous fat. This is why some PCOS patients can be lean. Um indeed, PCOS patients can be lean. Um indeed, PCOS patients can be lean. Um indeed, many people, male or female, can be lean many people, male or female, can be lean many people, male or female, can be lean and have too much visceral fat. It's and have too much visceral fat. It's and have too much visceral fat. It's important to correct. You can now detect important to correct. You can now detect important to correct. You can now detect visceral fat and I believe MRI will do visceral fat and I believe MRI will do visceral fat and I believe MRI will do it. Not everyone of course has access to it. Not everyone of course has access to it. Not everyone of course has access to MRI. fatty liver they call it. You know MRI. fatty liver they call it. You know MRI. fatty liver they call it. You know what I'm saying? But it gets dismissed. what I'm saying? But it gets dismissed. what I'm saying? But it gets dismissed. But it's a very dangerous form of fat But it's a very dangerous form of fat But it's a very dangerous form of fat because of that inflammation. because of that inflammation. because of that inflammation. &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take things like magnesium can take things like magnesium can take things like magnesium thrienate, theine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theine, chamomile extract, and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our longtime sponsor, AG1, just that our longtime sponsor, AG1, just that our longtime sponsor, AG1, just created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drink az.com/huberman to drink az.com/huberman to drink az.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by JWV. JWV makes medical grade red light JWV. JWV makes medical grade red light JWV. JWV makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near infrared sunlight, red light and near infrared sunlight, red light and near infrared light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellar and organ health, aspects of cellar and organ health, aspects of cellar and organ health, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. What sets THW lights apart and why What sets THW lights apart and why What sets THW lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and near wavelengths of red light and near wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to trigger infrared light in combination to trigger infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. the optimal cellar adaptations. the optimal cellar adaptations. Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body panel about three to four times a week, panel about three to four times a week, panel about three to four times a week, and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at home and when I travel. Right now, JW is home and when I travel. Right now, JW is home and when I travel. Right now, JW is having their biggest sale of the year. having their biggest sale of the year. having their biggest sale of the year. From now through December 1st, 2025, you From now through December 1st, 2025, you From now through December 1st, 2025, you can save up to $1,000 on select JWV can save up to $1,000 on select JWV can save up to $1,000 on select JWV devices during their Black Friday sale. devices during their Black Friday sale. devices during their Black Friday sale. Just go to jv.com/huberman. Just go to jv.com/huberman. Just go to jv.com/huberman. That's jovv.com/huberman. Some exclusions apply. Some exclusions apply. Some exclusions apply. &gt;&gt; So the next pillar is chronic &gt;&gt; So the next pillar is chronic &gt;&gt; So the next pillar is chronic inflammation. That's why PCOS patients inflammation. That's why PCOS patients inflammation. That's why PCOS patients have this chronic inflammation that they have this chronic inflammation that they have this chronic inflammation that they complain about. And this chronic complain about. And this chronic complain about. And this chronic inflammation basically stimulates their ovaries to basically stimulates their ovaries to basically stimulates their ovaries to release more androgens. This chronic release more androgens. This chronic release more androgens. This chronic inflammation makes their insulin inflammation makes their insulin inflammation makes their insulin resistance worse. This chronic resistance worse. This chronic resistance worse. This chronic inflammation can affect their gut. inflammation can affect their gut. inflammation can affect their gut. That's why PCOS patients come and say, That's why PCOS patients come and say, That's why PCOS patients come and say, "I don't feel good. I have food "I don't feel good. I have food "I don't feel good. I have food sensitivities. I feel bloated." Because sensitivities. I feel bloated." Because sensitivities. I feel bloated." Because these hormonal shifts and these hormonal shifts and these hormonal shifts and these inflammations do affect our gut. Then we inflammations do affect our gut. Then we inflammations do affect our gut. Then we go to the next pillar which is genetics. go to the next pillar which is genetics. go to the next pillar which is genetics. If you look in PCOS families, there's If you look in PCOS families, there's If you look in PCOS families, there's someone who's either diabetic, someone who's either diabetic, someone who's either diabetic, pre-diabetic, had gestational diabetes, pre-diabetic, had gestational diabetes, pre-diabetic, had gestational diabetes, is overweight, there's some form of is overweight, there's some form of is overweight, there's some form of insulin resistance. A lot of times you insulin resistance. A lot of times you insulin resistance. A lot of times you see these patients and their dad is see these patients and their dad is see these patients and their dad is diabetic. So you don't have to look in diabetic. So you don't have to look in diabetic. So you don't have to look in your mom's side of the family. your mom's side of the family. your mom's side of the family. &gt;&gt; This is a very important point both &gt;&gt; This is a very important point both &gt;&gt; This is a very important point both sides. A lot of people just do the sides. A lot of people just do the sides. A lot of people just do the direct one to one and they assume, well, direct one to one and they assume, well, direct one to one and they assume, well, if my mother had no fertility issues and if my mother had no fertility issues and if my mother had no fertility issues and she wasn't overweight and wasn't she wasn't overweight and wasn't she wasn't overweight and wasn't diabetic, didn't seem to have type 2 diabetic, didn't seem to have type 2 diabetic, didn't seem to have type 2 diabetes, then it's not an issue, but diabetes, then it's not an issue, but diabetes, then it's not an issue, but yeah, dad's genetics are critical as yeah, dad's genetics are critical as yeah, dad's genetics are critical as well. &gt;&gt; And then the last uh pillar is &gt;&gt; And then the last uh pillar is &gt;&gt; And then the last uh pillar is epigenetics, which I know you talk a lot epigenetics, which I know you talk a lot epigenetics, which I know you talk a lot about it, but it's our stress. How much about it, but it's our stress. How much about it, but it's our stress. How much are we sleeping? What kind of food are we sleeping? What kind of food are we sleeping? What kind of food are we eating? Right? Someone said this to we eating? Right? Someone said this to we eating? Right? Someone said this to me, and I love this saying. They said, me, and I love this saying. They said, me, and I love this saying. They said, "Your genes load the gun. Your "Your genes load the gun. Your "Your genes load the gun. Your environment pulls the trigger." environment pulls the trigger." environment pulls the trigger." &gt;&gt; And I love that because even if you're &gt;&gt; And I love that because even if you're &gt;&gt; And I love that because even if you're loaded with insulin resistance, all of loaded with insulin resistance, all of loaded with insulin resistance, all of that, you can suppress these symptoms, that, you can suppress these symptoms, that, you can suppress these symptoms, but if you start eating unhealthy, if but if you start eating unhealthy, if but if you start eating unhealthy, if you're stressed out, if you're not you're stressed out, if you're not you're stressed out, if you're not sleeping, if you're just not exercising sleeping, if you're just not exercising sleeping, if you're just not exercising right, you're pulling that trigger. And right, you're pulling that trigger. And right, you're pulling that trigger. And that's why, Andrew, all these pillars that's why, Andrew, all these pillars that's why, Andrew, all these pillars work together. And that's why these work together. And that's why these work together. And that's why these patients present so many different ways, patients present so many different ways, patients present so many different ways, right? And when you were talking about right? And when you were talking about right? And when you were talking about mood, why does someone feel bad? Why mood, why does someone feel bad? Why mood, why does someone feel bad? Why does a PCOS first of all the androgens does a PCOS first of all the androgens does a PCOS first of all the androgens do affect disrupt the dopamine and do affect disrupt the dopamine and do affect disrupt the dopamine and serotonin in their brain? That's a fact. serotonin in their brain? That's a fact. serotonin in their brain? That's a fact. But put yourself in the shoes of a PCOS But put yourself in the shoes of a PCOS But put yourself in the shoes of a PCOS young girl who lives at home with a young girl who lives at home with a young girl who lives at home with a thin, beautiful mom or a thin, beautiful thin, beautiful mom or a thin, beautiful thin, beautiful mom or a thin, beautiful older sister. She's overweight. older sister. She's overweight. older sister. She's overweight. She doesn't eat anything. She's She doesn't eat anything. She's She doesn't eat anything. She's exercising every day. She's already a exercising every day. She's already a exercising every day. She's already a little anxious. She has acne. Her mom little anxious. She has acne. Her mom little anxious. She has acne. Her mom takes her and they put her on Accutane. takes her and they put her on Accutane. takes her and they put her on Accutane. She's constantly lasering her hair. Her She's constantly lasering her hair. Her She's constantly lasering her hair. Her periods are completely unpredictable. periods are completely unpredictable. periods are completely unpredictable. She's starting to have an eating She's starting to have an eating She's starting to have an eating disorder because nothing she does is disorder because nothing she does is disorder because nothing she does is working for her, right? working for her, right? working for her, right? And then you take this patient with And then you take this patient with And then you take this patient with everything I told you with all these everything I told you with all these everything I told you with all these underlying pillars not working in her. underlying pillars not working in her. underlying pillars not working in her. You take her to the doctor and she gets You take her to the doctor and she gets You take her to the doctor and she gets dismissed. That's why I'm here to speak for them. I That's why I'm here to speak for them. I That's why I'm here to speak for them. I feel like over the past 25 years their feel like over the past 25 years their feel like over the past 25 years their trauma has become my trauma. I literally trauma has become my trauma. I literally trauma has become my trauma. I literally can cry right now. can cry right now. can cry right now. &gt;&gt; It's clear how much you care about your &gt;&gt; It's clear how much you care about your &gt;&gt; It's clear how much you care about your patients and the ones that are not even patients and the ones that are not even patients and the ones that are not even your patients. just the women out there your patients. just the women out there your patients. just the women out there that are suffering in this way. I uh that are suffering in this way. I uh that are suffering in this way. I uh perhaps um could we explore the perhaps um could we explore the perhaps um could we explore the possibility of a different if I say possibility of a different if I say possibility of a different if I say phenotype it may make it sounds so phenotype it may make it sounds so phenotype it may make it sounds so clinical uh but a different person clinical uh but a different person clinical uh but a different person who um perhaps is only experiencing a who um perhaps is only experiencing a who um perhaps is only experiencing a subset of those symptoms that you just subset of those symptoms that you just subset of those symptoms that you just described um and on that note I'm described um and on that note I'm described um and on that note I'm struck by the fact that you know what we struck by the fact that you know what we struck by the fact that you know what we know from male pattern baldness and know from male pattern baldness and know from male pattern baldness and female pattern baldness is that when female pattern baldness is that when female pattern baldness is that when androgens get too high it miniaturizes androgens get too high it miniaturizes androgens get too high it miniaturizes the hair follicle. It's kind of the hair follicle. It's kind of the hair follicle. It's kind of interesting that when androgens get too interesting that when androgens get too interesting that when androgens get too high in the ovary, they miniaturaturize high in the ovary, they miniaturaturize high in the ovary, they miniaturaturize the follicle there, too. It seems like the follicle there, too. It seems like the follicle there, too. It seems like that basically excessive androgens are that basically excessive androgens are that basically excessive androgens are bad for follicle development. bad for follicle development. bad for follicle development. &gt;&gt; It &gt;&gt; It &gt;&gt; It &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, two parallel pathways &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, two parallel pathways &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, two parallel pathways operating in the exact same way. Um, it operating in the exact same way. Um, it operating in the exact same way. Um, it sounds like we're trying to make high sounds like we're trying to make high sounds like we're trying to make high testosterone the issue, but in some testosterone the issue, but in some testosterone the issue, but in some sense, unless we think back to the sense, unless we think back to the sense, unless we think back to the G&amp;R neurons firing too much, the G&amp;R neurons firing too much, the G&amp;R neurons firing too much, the elevated androgens really seem to be the elevated androgens really seem to be the elevated androgens really seem to be the kind of tip of the spear in this the kind of tip of the spear in this the kind of tip of the spear in this whole thing. not what initially sets off whole thing. not what initially sets off whole thing. not what initially sets off the cascade, but in terms of the cascade, but in terms of the cascade, but in terms of tractable things that good medications tractable things that good medications tractable things that good medications and good practices might be able to take and good practices might be able to take and good practices might be able to take hold of. Correct. Is that right? And and hold of. Correct. Is that right? And and hold of. Correct. Is that right? And and certainly insulin sensitivity as well. certainly insulin sensitivity as well. certainly insulin sensitivity as well. But um so I'm imagining, you know, a But um so I'm imagining, you know, a But um so I'm imagining, you know, a bunch of different uh patient profiles bunch of different uh patient profiles bunch of different uh patient profiles here, but I can imagine women in their here, but I can imagine women in their here, but I can imagine women in their 20s, in their 30s who have been told by 20s, in their 30s who have been told by 20s, in their 30s who have been told by society, okay, you're still fertile, society, okay, you're still fertile, society, okay, you're still fertile, you're good. You're going to be fine. you're good. You're going to be fine. you're good. You're going to be fine. These are the women that are showing up These are the women that are showing up These are the women that are showing up in clinics in their late 30s and 40s and in clinics in their late 30s and 40s and in clinics in their late 30s and 40s and saying, you know, why is it that, you saying, you know, why is it that, you saying, you know, why is it that, you know, my egg count is so low or why is know, my egg count is so low or why is know, my egg count is so low or why is it that I can't conceive? it that I can't conceive? it that I can't conceive? &gt;&gt; So PCOS patients, their egg count is &gt;&gt; So PCOS patients, their egg count is &gt;&gt; So PCOS patients, their egg count is falsely high because of that, you know, falsely high because of that, you know, falsely high because of that, you know, these tiny follicles that are frozen in these tiny follicles that are frozen in these tiny follicles that are frozen in the ovaries that never got to ovulate, the ovaries that never got to ovulate, the ovaries that never got to ovulate, they do secrete AMH. they do secrete AMH. they do secrete AMH. So these patients that's why in 2023 So these patients that's why in 2023 So these patients that's why in 2023 they changed that second criteria the they changed that second criteria the they changed that second criteria the PCOS ovaries to elevated or elevated PCOS ovaries to elevated or elevated PCOS ovaries to elevated or elevated AMH. &gt;&gt; How high for AMH? I mean &gt;&gt; How high for AMH? I mean &gt;&gt; How high for AMH? I mean &gt;&gt; sometimes I like a norm let's say &gt;&gt; sometimes I like a norm let's say &gt;&gt; sometimes I like a norm let's say &gt;&gt; what's a typical value for someone in &gt;&gt; what's a typical value for someone in &gt;&gt; what's a typical value for someone in their 20s and 30s? their 20s and 30s? their 20s and 30s? &gt;&gt; So I would say up to six is normal &gt;&gt; So I would say up to six is normal &gt;&gt; So I would say up to six is normal &gt;&gt; and people in their 40s &gt;&gt; and people in their 40s &gt;&gt; and people in their 40s &gt;&gt; less than one &gt;&gt; less than one &gt;&gt; less than one &gt;&gt; it drops precipitously. Yes. Where is &gt;&gt; it drops precipitously. Yes. Where is &gt;&gt; it drops precipitously. Yes. Where is the I don't want to say cliff the I don't want to say cliff the I don't want to say cliff because maybe it's more gradual than because maybe it's more gradual than because maybe it's more gradual than that. after probably late 20s it starts that. after probably late 20s it starts that. after probably late 20s it starts declining. &gt;&gt; That's why I always tell patients, &gt;&gt; That's why I always tell patients, &gt;&gt; That's why I always tell patients, especially PCOS patients, to freeze by especially PCOS patients, to freeze by especially PCOS patients, to freeze by 28 to 30 even though they have tons of 28 to 30 even though they have tons of 28 to 30 even though they have tons of eggs. Listen, I get patients, they come eggs. Listen, I get patients, they come eggs. Listen, I get patients, they come to my office, they're like, "Doctor, new to my office, they're like, "Doctor, new to my office, they're like, "Doctor, new patient." &gt;&gt; I went to my fertility doctor. He &gt;&gt; I went to my fertility doctor. He &gt;&gt; I went to my fertility doctor. He doesn't know what he's doing. Why? 40, doesn't know what he's doing. Why? 40, doesn't know what he's doing. Why? 40, 41 year old. I put out 30 eggs and he 41 year old. I put out 30 eggs and he 41 year old. I put out 30 eggs and he couldn't make a single embryo couldn't make a single embryo couldn't make a single embryo &gt;&gt; through IVF. Yeah. &gt;&gt; through IVF. Yeah. &gt;&gt; through IVF. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Through IVF. You shouldn't put out 30 &gt;&gt; Through IVF. You shouldn't put out 30 &gt;&gt; Through IVF. You shouldn't put out 30 eggs at age 40. That's PCOS. This is so eggs at age 40. That's PCOS. This is so eggs at age 40. That's PCOS. This is so important for people to hear because I important for people to hear because I important for people to hear because I think egg count and elevated or high think egg count and elevated or high think egg count and elevated or high enough AMH is sort of touted as the enough AMH is sort of touted as the enough AMH is sort of touted as the thing that people go and look at. It thing that people go and look at. It thing that people go and look at. It makes sense, right? I mean, they'll do makes sense, right? I mean, they'll do makes sense, right? I mean, they'll do an ultrasound, count follicles. an ultrasound, count follicles. an ultrasound, count follicles. &gt;&gt; It's great as long as you're not missing &gt;&gt; It's great as long as you're not missing &gt;&gt; It's great as long as you're not missing PCOS because if you're if it's PCOS, PCOS because if you're if it's PCOS, PCOS because if you're if it's PCOS, then the quality of the embryo is bad, then the quality of the embryo is bad, then the quality of the embryo is bad, then the ovulation is suboptimal, the then the ovulation is suboptimal, the then the ovulation is suboptimal, the environment is suboptimal, and environment is suboptimal, and environment is suboptimal, and everything else needs to be fixed. And everything else needs to be fixed. And everything else needs to be fixed. And this is perhaps why some people go in this is perhaps why some people go in this is perhaps why some people go in their 30s, they might be doing IVF their 30s, they might be doing IVF their 30s, they might be doing IVF or something like that and they actually or something like that and they actually or something like that and they actually have relatively low egg count. They'll have relatively low egg count. They'll have relatively low egg count. They'll get, you know, maybe I don't want it's get, you know, maybe I don't want it's get, you know, maybe I don't want it's always tricky what low always tricky what low always tricky what low correspondence, but you know, three and correspondence, but you know, three and correspondence, but you know, three and two, you know, three on one side, and two, you know, three on one side, and two, you know, three on one side, two on the other, but then the IVF works two on the other, but then the IVF works two on the other, but then the IVF works because you don't necessarily need because you don't necessarily need because you don't necessarily need the quality of the eggs is higher, the quality of the eggs is higher, the quality of the eggs is higher, &gt;&gt; right? So, AMH, antimmalarian hormone, &gt;&gt; right? So, AMH, antimmalarian hormone, &gt;&gt; right? So, AMH, antimmalarian hormone, the easiest way to look at it is every the easiest way to look at it is every the easiest way to look at it is every uh 0.1 of AMH averages to one follicle. uh 0.1 of AMH averages to one follicle. uh 0.1 of AMH averages to one follicle. That's an easy way to calculate it in That's an easy way to calculate it in That's an easy way to calculate it in your head. Okay? So, if you have an AMH your head. Okay? So, if you have an AMH your head. Okay? So, if you have an AMH of one, you should have about 10 of one, you should have about 10 of one, you should have about 10 follicles. But if you show up at 40 and follicles. But if you show up at 40 and follicles. But if you show up at 40 and there's 30 follicles in your ovaries, there's 30 follicles in your ovaries, there's 30 follicles in your ovaries, something's wrong. That's PCOS. You have something's wrong. That's PCOS. You have something's wrong. That's PCOS. You have to make sure it's not PCOS. have to make to make sure it's not PCOS. have to make to make sure it's not PCOS. have to make sure that you're not missing PCOS sure that you're not missing PCOS sure that you're not missing PCOS because that's why this woman is not, because that's why this woman is not, because that's why this woman is not, you know, getting pregnant. And can I you know, getting pregnant. And can I you know, getting pregnant. And can I tell you, Andrew, how many patients come tell you, Andrew, how many patients come tell you, Andrew, how many patients come through fertility clinic and they're not through fertility clinic and they're not through fertility clinic and they're not diagnosed with PCOS even by their diagnosed with PCOS even by their diagnosed with PCOS even by their fertility doctor? fertility doctor? fertility doctor? &gt;&gt; Well, the way you're describing the &gt;&gt; Well, the way you're describing the &gt;&gt; Well, the way you're describing the sort of standards in the medical sort of standards in the medical sort of standards in the medical profession, it's both not profession, it's both not profession, it's both not surprising and really umad surprising and really umad surprising and really umad disheartening. Yeah, it's really disheartening. Yeah, it's really disheartening. Yeah, it's really sad. again why one of the reasons you're sad. again why one of the reasons you're sad. again why one of the reasons you're here today. I think this reframing of here today. I think this reframing of here today. I think this reframing of AMH and egg number um or follicle AMH and egg number um or follicle AMH and egg number um or follicle number is very important for people to number is very important for people to number is very important for people to hear. uh because um you know I know a hear. uh because um you know I know a hear. uh because um you know I know a number of different people done IVF do number of different people done IVF do number of different people done IVF do IVF and this issue of AMH and IVF and this issue of AMH and IVF and this issue of AMH and follicle number is like kind of held as follicle number is like kind of held as follicle number is like kind of held as the thing right and 50 oh my goodness the thing right and 50 oh my goodness the thing right and 50 oh my goodness someone still has you know 20 someone still has you know 20 someone still has you know 20 follicles at age whatever you know um 41 follicles at age whatever you know um 41 follicles at age whatever you know um 41 or something and then and then they have or something and then and then they have or something and then and then they have they'll go through rounds of IVF and they'll go through rounds of IVF and they'll go through rounds of IVF and it's just it's just it's just it's &gt;&gt; I'm not a fertility specialist but I can &gt;&gt; I'm not a fertility specialist but I can &gt;&gt; I'm not a fertility specialist but I can tell you if at age 25 28 every three um tell you if at age 25 28 every three um tell you if at age 25 28 every three um eggs make one embryo. At 40, you might eggs make one embryo. At 40, you might eggs make one embryo. At 40, you might need 10 to 15 eggs to make one embryo. need 10 to 15 eggs to make one embryo. need 10 to 15 eggs to make one embryo. So if your AMH at 40 is 0.5, that means So if your AMH at 40 is 0.5, that means So if your AMH at 40 is 0.5, that means five follicles. So you might have to do five follicles. So you might have to do five follicles. So you might have to do two or three cycles two or three cycles two or three cycles of egg freezing or embryo freezing of egg freezing or embryo freezing of egg freezing or embryo freezing before you can hit that normal embryo. before you can hit that normal embryo. before you can hit that normal embryo. So that's why unfortunately insurance So that's why unfortunately insurance So that's why unfortunately insurance companies don't cover egg freezing, companies don't cover egg freezing, companies don't cover egg freezing, right? And I always say this when uh right? And I always say this when uh right? And I always say this when uh girls are young and they have beautiful girls are young and they have beautiful girls are young and they have beautiful eggs and their eggs are young and eggs and their eggs are young and eggs and their eggs are young and healthy and you want to freeze them, healthy and you want to freeze them, healthy and you want to freeze them, they can't afford it because it's very they can't afford it because it's very they can't afford it because it's very expensive and then when they can afford expensive and then when they can afford expensive and then when they can afford it, they're usually in their late 30s or it, they're usually in their late 30s or it, they're usually in their late 30s or 40s and the quality is down. So that 40s and the quality is down. So that 40s and the quality is down. So that needs to be fixed. And we had this needs to be fixed. And we had this needs to be fixed. And we had this conversation, I think, in the Bay Area. conversation, I think, in the Bay Area. conversation, I think, in the Bay Area. A lot of these big companies like Google A lot of these big companies like Google A lot of these big companies like Google and Facebook and these companies and Facebook and these companies and Facebook and these companies actually pay for their employees to actually pay for their employees to actually pay for their employees to freeze their eggs. They're smart, right? freeze their eggs. They're smart, right? freeze their eggs. They're smart, right? They don't want their employees to get They don't want their employees to get They don't want their employees to get pregnant. They're like, "I'll pay for pregnant. They're like, "I'll pay for pregnant. They're like, "I'll pay for your egg freezing. Keep working." But your egg freezing. Keep working." But your egg freezing. Keep working." But most women most women don't have access. most women most women don't have access. most women most women don't have access. And let me tell you, 50% of counties in And let me tell you, 50% of counties in And let me tell you, 50% of counties in this country don't have an OBGYn. this country don't have an OBGYn. this country don't have an OBGYn. &gt;&gt; 50% &gt;&gt; 50% &gt;&gt; 50% &gt;&gt; 50% of counties. &gt;&gt; 50% of counties. &gt;&gt; 50% of counties. A lot of these women have to drive two A lot of these women have to drive two A lot of these women have to drive two to four hours to see their OB/GYN. to four hours to see their OB/GYN. to four hours to see their OB/GYN. &gt;&gt; That's crazy. That's why these podcasts &gt;&gt; That's crazy. That's why these podcasts &gt;&gt; That's crazy. That's why these podcasts are a gamecher because if they don't are a gamecher because if they don't are a gamecher because if they don't have access, that's why artificial have access, that's why artificial have access, that's why artificial intelligence AI, these robotic chat bots intelligence AI, these robotic chat bots intelligence AI, these robotic chat bots that hopefully can someday diagnose that hopefully can someday diagnose that hopefully can someday diagnose these patients and treat them, these patients and treat them, these patients and treat them, you know, from home without having them you know, from home without having them you know, from home without having them have to drive, I don't know, four hours have to drive, I don't know, four hours have to drive, I don't know, four hours to see an OB/GYN who will then also to see an OB/GYN who will then also to see an OB/GYN who will then also dismiss their symptoms. dismiss their symptoms. dismiss their symptoms. &gt;&gt; Yeah, like you said, in some cases, &gt;&gt; Yeah, like you said, in some cases, &gt;&gt; Yeah, like you said, in some cases, technology may be better than certain technology may be better than certain technology may be better than certain physicians. I don't disagree with you physicians. I don't disagree with you physicians. I don't disagree with you there. At the end of this podcast, there. At the end of this podcast, there. At the end of this podcast, you'll believe in the robots treating you'll believe in the robots treating you'll believe in the robots treating &gt;&gt; Well, I'll believe in robots and &gt;&gt; Well, I'll believe in robots and &gt;&gt; Well, I'll believe in robots and technologies perhaps doing better than technologies perhaps doing better than technologies perhaps doing better than some clinicians and scientists to be some clinicians and scientists to be some clinicians and scientists to be fair. &gt;&gt; But I do think that spectacularly good &gt;&gt; But I do think that spectacularly good &gt;&gt; But I do think that spectacularly good clinicians like yourself and in other clinicians like yourself and in other clinicians like yourself and in other fields. I mean, I know people in fields. I mean, I know people in fields. I mean, I know people in different fields of medicine. I'm different fields of medicine. I'm different fields of medicine. I'm fortunate enough blessed to know people fortunate enough blessed to know people fortunate enough blessed to know people in different fields of medicine for whom in different fields of medicine for whom in different fields of medicine for whom you can truly say that there's no world you can truly say that there's no world you can truly say that there's no world where a robot or even 15 doctors can where a robot or even 15 doctors can where a robot or even 15 doctors can compare because there's something about compare because there's something about compare because there's something about you know knowing the principles of you know knowing the principles of you know knowing the principles of something knowing the principles below something knowing the principles below something knowing the principles below the principles below that and the principles below that and the principles below that and then being a longtime practitioner in a then being a longtime practitioner in a then being a longtime practitioner in a given field. given field. given field. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know like true what we call true &gt;&gt; You know like true what we call true &gt;&gt; You know like true what we call true expertise deep expertise and lateral expertise deep expertise and lateral expertise deep expertise and lateral expertise. No, I was going to say, you expertise. No, I was going to say, you expertise. No, I was going to say, you know, most fields of medicine, let's know, most fields of medicine, let's know, most fields of medicine, let's take opthalmology, right? Every single take opthalmology, right? Every single take opthalmology, right? Every single opthalmologist knows about cataract. opthalmologist knows about cataract. opthalmologist knows about cataract. &gt;&gt; Yes. Most common form of blindness. &gt;&gt; Yes. Most common form of blindness. &gt;&gt; Yes. Most common form of blindness. &gt;&gt; Thank you. So, it would be rare for you &gt;&gt; Thank you. So, it would be rare for you &gt;&gt; Thank you. So, it would be rare for you to go to an opthalmologist with cataract to go to an opthalmologist with cataract to go to an opthalmologist with cataract and not get diagnosed. Correct. and not get diagnosed. Correct. and not get diagnosed. Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; So, why is it that the leading cause of &gt;&gt; So, why is it that the leading cause of &gt;&gt; So, why is it that the leading cause of infertility on this planet, 90% of women infertility on this planet, 90% of women infertility on this planet, 90% of women are not diagnosed? Women's health is are not diagnosed? Women's health is are not diagnosed? Women's health is very different than other fields of very different than other fields of very different than other fields of medicine. It's very it's a different medicine. It's very it's a different medicine. It's very it's a different monster. It's that cataract patient that monster. It's that cataract patient that monster. It's that cataract patient that goes to 20 goes to 20 goes to 20 opthalmologist and she keeps saying, "I opthalmologist and she keeps saying, "I opthalmologist and she keeps saying, "I can't see." And the opthalmologist says, can't see." And the opthalmologist says, can't see." And the opthalmologist says, "You're crazy. There's nothing wrong "You're crazy. There's nothing wrong "You're crazy. There's nothing wrong with you." with you." with you." &gt;&gt; Now, that's an excellent analogy. Not &gt;&gt; Now, that's an excellent analogy. Not &gt;&gt; Now, that's an excellent analogy. Not not just because it's vision and that's not just because it's vision and that's not just because it's vision and that's my home area of science, but because I my home area of science, but because I my home area of science, but because I think humans are so dependent on vision. think humans are so dependent on vision. think humans are so dependent on vision. And just the idea of losing vision is uh And just the idea of losing vision is uh And just the idea of losing vision is uh for people who are cited is uh so for people who are cited is uh so for people who are cited is uh so challenging. Oh, I mean the number of challenging. Oh, I mean the number of challenging. Oh, I mean the number of incredibly elegant feedback loops and incredibly elegant feedback loops and incredibly elegant feedback loops and the way the whole thing works like a the way the whole thing works like a the way the whole thing works like a beautiful symphony when it works also beautiful symphony when it works also beautiful symphony when it works also indicates that like small disruptions in indicates that like small disruptions in indicates that like small disruptions in these things are can cause um really these things are can cause um really these things are can cause um really downstream consequences. I'm curious why downstream consequences. I'm curious why downstream consequences. I'm curious why so much more PCOS or is it like so many so much more PCOS or is it like so many so much more PCOS or is it like so many areas of medicine where it probably was areas of medicine where it probably was areas of medicine where it probably was around a long time but uh we just around a long time but uh we just around a long time but uh we just weren't aware and you know I can point weren't aware and you know I can point weren't aware and you know I can point to the insulin resistance maybe it's how to the insulin resistance maybe it's how to the insulin resistance maybe it's how people are eating and they the people are eating and they the people are eating and they the downstream chronic inflammation from the downstream chronic inflammation from the downstream chronic inflammation from the traceral fat maybe it's the traceral fat maybe it's the traceral fat maybe it's the neuroscientist in me I keep thinking of neuroscientist in me I keep thinking of neuroscientist in me I keep thinking of these G&amp;R neurons in the brain that are these G&amp;R neurons in the brain that are these G&amp;R neurons in the brain that are suddenly start firing abnormally suddenly start firing abnormally suddenly start firing abnormally &gt;&gt; you know I have all sorts of pet &gt;&gt; you know I have all sorts of pet &gt;&gt; you know I have all sorts of pet theories as to why that could be the theories as to why that could be the theories as to why that could be the case but of course I don't have any case but of course I don't have any case but of course I don't have any data This affects it for sure. data This affects it for sure. data This affects it for sure. &gt;&gt; Disrupted sleepwake cycles. I would sort &gt;&gt; Disrupted sleepwake cycles. I would sort &gt;&gt; Disrupted sleepwake cycles. I would sort of default to that. of default to that. of default to that. &gt;&gt; But then you see these young girls who &gt;&gt; But then you see these young girls who &gt;&gt; But then you see these young girls who grow up in amazing loving families. grow up in amazing loving families. grow up in amazing loving families. They've never had any stress. They're They've never had any stress. They're They've never had any stress. They're you know they didn't have any trauma. you know they didn't have any trauma. you know they didn't have any trauma. &gt;&gt; They're sleeping well. They're eating &gt;&gt; They're sleeping well. They're eating &gt;&gt; They're sleeping well. They're eating well. Yeah. But they start having well. Yeah. But they start having well. Yeah. But they start having these symptoms. The reason I'm saying these symptoms. The reason I'm saying these symptoms. The reason I'm saying this, I don't want um people to get this this, I don't want um people to get this this, I don't want um people to get this message that stress is starting all this message that stress is starting all this message that stress is starting all this because they really it's a it's a because they really it's a it's a because they really it's a it's a multi-system dysfunction. It's an immune multi-system dysfunction. It's an immune multi-system dysfunction. It's an immune system dysfunction. It's a insulin system dysfunction. It's a insulin system dysfunction. It's a insulin resistant dysfunction. It's a brain resistant dysfunction. It's a brain resistant dysfunction. It's a brain pituitary, ovary dysfunction. It's has a pituitary, ovary dysfunction. It's has a pituitary, ovary dysfunction. It's has a genetic factor. It has an epigenetic. genetic factor. It has an epigenetic. genetic factor. It has an epigenetic. And that's why the treatment plan is so And that's why the treatment plan is so And that's why the treatment plan is so important. That's why you can't throw important. That's why you can't throw important. That's why you can't throw birth control at all these pillars and birth control at all these pillars and birth control at all these pillars and say, "All right, see you later." say, "All right, see you later." say, "All right, see you later." &gt;&gt; Also, birth control means many, many &gt;&gt; Also, birth control means many, many &gt;&gt; Also, birth control means many, many things, right? I mean, there's the things, right? I mean, there's the things, right? I mean, there's the &gt;&gt; I love birth control, but you know, &gt;&gt; I love birth control, but you know, &gt;&gt; I love birth control, but you know, &gt;&gt; well, nowadays there's a bit of a push &gt;&gt; well, nowadays there's a bit of a push &gt;&gt; well, nowadays there's a bit of a push back. I noticed at least on Instagram back. I noticed at least on Instagram back. I noticed at least on Instagram for what it's worth. Um, sometimes we for what it's worth. Um, sometimes we for what it's worth. Um, sometimes we think Instagram is the whole world and think Instagram is the whole world and think Instagram is the whole world and I'll tell you everyone, it's not the I'll tell you everyone, it's not the I'll tell you everyone, it's not the whole world. There are a lot of people whole world. There are a lot of people whole world. There are a lot of people who are not on Instagram all the time, who are not on Instagram all the time, who are not on Instagram all the time, but many are. Um, and there seems to be but many are. Um, and there seems to be but many are. Um, and there seems to be a bit of a push back against um, a bit of a push back against um, a bit of a push back against um, certainly hormone based contraception. A certainly hormone based contraception. A certainly hormone based contraception. A lot of women um, I hear from are lot of women um, I hear from are lot of women um, I hear from are convinced that it somehow they believe convinced that it somehow they believe convinced that it somehow they believe it damaged them and I believe them. it damaged them and I believe them. it damaged them and I believe them. &gt;&gt; That's when the topic of endometriosis &gt;&gt; That's when the topic of endometriosis &gt;&gt; That's when the topic of endometriosis will come up and I would love to talk will come up and I would love to talk will come up and I would love to talk about that. But the reason birth control about that. But the reason birth control about that. But the reason birth control pills work for PCOS patients, it's one pills work for PCOS patients, it's one pills work for PCOS patients, it's one of the aspects. I don't like birth of the aspects. I don't like birth of the aspects. I don't like birth control pills for PCOS patients. control pills for PCOS patients. control pills for PCOS patients. Remember I told you they're moody Remember I told you they're moody Remember I told you they're moody patients. they're they have an anxiety, patients. they're they have an anxiety, patients. they're they have an anxiety, they're depressed. Um it's hard for them they're depressed. Um it's hard for them they're depressed. Um it's hard for them to take birth control pills in my to take birth control pills in my to take birth control pills in my opinion. A lot of times they complain of opinion. A lot of times they complain of opinion. A lot of times they complain of I'm eating more or I don't feel well or I'm eating more or I don't feel well or I'm eating more or I don't feel well or I'm more depressed or so I it's not my I'm more depressed or so I it's not my I'm more depressed or so I it's not my first go-to treatment, but I will tell first go-to treatment, but I will tell first go-to treatment, but I will tell you why it works. Remember I told you why it works. Remember I told you why it works. Remember I told you the ovaries are um the sex hormone the ovaries are um the sex hormone the ovaries are um the sex hormone binding globbulin goes down because of binding globbulin goes down because of binding globbulin goes down because of that high insulin. Birth control pills that high insulin. Birth control pills that high insulin. Birth control pills stimulate that sex hormone binding stimulate that sex hormone binding stimulate that sex hormone binding lobbulin that starts grabbing the lobbulin that starts grabbing the lobbulin that starts grabbing the testosterone and helps with their testosterone and helps with their testosterone and helps with their symptoms. That's why if you go to the symptoms. That's why if you go to the symptoms. That's why if you go to the doctor and you say I have acne, they're doctor and you say I have acne, they're doctor and you say I have acne, they're like birth control. I have hair loss, like birth control. I have hair loss, like birth control. I have hair loss, birth control. My periods are irregular. birth control. My periods are irregular. birth control. My periods are irregular. Birth control. We use it for all Birth control. We use it for all Birth control. We use it for all everything, right? But it does work to everything, right? But it does work to everything, right? But it does work to treat the symptoms of PCOS. It makes the treat the symptoms of PCOS. It makes the treat the symptoms of PCOS. It makes the periods regular. It helps with the skin. periods regular. It helps with the skin. periods regular. It helps with the skin. It helps with the hair loss. It helps It helps with the hair loss. It helps It helps with the hair loss. It helps with all of that. This is estrogen based with all of that. This is estrogen based with all of that. This is estrogen based or progesterine based birth control. You or progesterine based birth control. You or progesterine based birth control. You can do both can do both can do both &gt;&gt; estrogen and progesterone or there's a &gt;&gt; estrogen and progesterone or there's a &gt;&gt; estrogen and progesterone or there's a progesterone only birth control pill now progesterone only birth control pill now progesterone only birth control pill now called slend that helps with um it's called slend that helps with um it's called slend that helps with um it's very anti-androgenic that I try for PCOS very anti-androgenic that I try for PCOS very anti-androgenic that I try for PCOS patients who don't want to you know need patients who don't want to you know need patients who don't want to you know need a method of birth control but when it a method of birth control but when it a method of birth control but when it comes to treatment you have to hit the comes to treatment you have to hit the comes to treatment you have to hit the underlying um pillars right so we talked about the um pillars right so we talked about the um pillars right so we talked about the epigenetics I always start with there epigenetics I always start with there epigenetics I always start with there with that exercise walking after each with that exercise walking after each with that exercise walking after each meal meal, you know, walk for 10, 15 meal meal, you know, walk for 10, 15 meal meal, you know, walk for 10, 15 minutes. Make sure you're sleeping well. minutes. Make sure you're sleeping well. minutes. Make sure you're sleeping well. Make sure your diet is healthy. You're Make sure your diet is healthy. You're Make sure your diet is healthy. You're not eating inflammatory foods. You're not eating inflammatory foods. You're not eating inflammatory foods. You're avoiding, you know, u processed foods. avoiding, you know, u processed foods. avoiding, you know, u processed foods. Um, so lower your stress. So, you deal Um, so lower your stress. So, you deal Um, so lower your stress. So, you deal with that, but that doesn't work for with that, but that doesn't work for with that, but that doesn't work for these patients. That's why you need to these patients. That's why you need to these patients. That's why you need to address everything else. Insulin address everything else. Insulin address everything else. Insulin resistance is one of the main pillars resistance is one of the main pillars resistance is one of the main pillars that needs to be addressed. You have to that needs to be addressed. You have to that needs to be addressed. You have to lower that insulin because if you lower that insulin because if you lower that insulin because if you lower that insulin, you're lowering visceral that insulin, you're lowering visceral that insulin, you're lowering visceral fat. You're lowering inflammation. fat. You're lowering inflammation. fat. You're lowering inflammation. You're lowering the ovaries from You're lowering the ovaries from You're lowering the ovaries from secretreting androgens, right? So that secretreting androgens, right? So that secretreting androgens, right? So that insulin needs to be lowered. That's why insulin needs to be lowered. That's why insulin needs to be lowered. That's why a lot of PCOS patients get prescribed a lot of PCOS patients get prescribed a lot of PCOS patients get prescribed metformin, right? What does metformin metformin, right? What does metformin metformin, right? What does metformin do? Metformin basically makes us more do? Metformin basically makes us more do? Metformin basically makes us more insulin sensitive. It's opening these insulin sensitive. It's opening these insulin sensitive. It's opening these channels. So sugar clears the blood and channels. So sugar clears the blood and channels. So sugar clears the blood and goes into the cells where it turns into goes into the cells where it turns into goes into the cells where it turns into energy. &gt;&gt; Is it high dose metformin or low? &gt;&gt; Is it high dose metformin or low? &gt;&gt; Is it high dose metformin or low? &gt;&gt; No, high dose. High dose I mean I start &gt;&gt; No, high dose. High dose I mean I start &gt;&gt; No, high dose. High dose I mean I start patients on 750 twice a day but you have patients on 750 twice a day but you have patients on 750 twice a day but you have to start slow because uh PCOS patients to start slow because uh PCOS patients to start slow because uh PCOS patients especially the ones with insulin especially the ones with insulin especially the ones with insulin resistance which is 80% of them. Um I resistance which is 80% of them. Um I resistance which is 80% of them. Um I start with 750 because it can cause start with 750 because it can cause start with 750 because it can cause sometimes GI symptoms like diarrhea and sometimes GI symptoms like diarrhea and sometimes GI symptoms like diarrhea and it can also cause nausea. So I start it can also cause nausea. So I start it can also cause nausea. So I start with 750 at night. Then if they tolerate with 750 at night. Then if they tolerate with 750 at night. Then if they tolerate it, I um add the 7:50 in the morning. it, I um add the 7:50 in the morning. it, I um add the 7:50 in the morning. And for patients who um are tolerating And for patients who um are tolerating And for patients who um are tolerating it and they still are not ovulating, it and they still are not ovulating, it and they still are not ovulating, their periods are still not regulating their periods are still not regulating their periods are still not regulating and they still have symptoms, I might up and they still have symptoms, I might up and they still have symptoms, I might up it to a thousand twice a day. But you it to a thousand twice a day. But you it to a thousand twice a day. But you see these patients who come in on 500 see these patients who come in on 500 see these patients who come in on 500 milligram of PC uh of metformin once a milligram of PC uh of metformin once a milligram of PC uh of metformin once a day. That's not going to touch these day. That's not going to touch these day. That's not going to touch these patients. So metformin is one. But patients. So metformin is one. But patients. So metformin is one. But before Metformin and I don't know if you before Metformin and I don't know if you before Metformin and I don't know if you know this because of my passion for PCOS know this because of my passion for PCOS know this because of my passion for PCOS I actually developed a calculator it's I actually developed a calculator it's I actually developed a calculator it's called it's a platform called OV women called it's a platform called OV women called it's a platform called OV women can go on it obviously I can't diagnose can go on it obviously I can't diagnose can go on it obviously I can't diagnose on the on any website but I can tell on the on any website but I can tell on the on any website but I can tell them that ask them it's my algorithm them that ask them it's my algorithm them that ask them it's my algorithm that I've developed over the past 25 that I've developed over the past 25 that I've developed over the past 25 years and I can tell them very closely years and I can tell them very closely years and I can tell them very closely whether or not they have the likelihood whether or not they have the likelihood whether or not they have the likelihood of having PCOS. M of having PCOS. M of having PCOS. M &gt;&gt; so that it's there it's ov.com ovi.com &gt;&gt; so that it's there it's ov.com ovi.com &gt;&gt; so that it's there it's ov.com ovi.com it's free it's free it's free &gt;&gt; they answer some questions &gt;&gt; they answer some questions &gt;&gt; they answer some questions &gt;&gt; questions and I tell them whether they &gt;&gt; questions and I tell them whether they &gt;&gt; questions and I tell them whether they have the likelihood or you know if have the likelihood or you know if have the likelihood or you know if they're less likely to have PCOS and if they're less likely to have PCOS and if they're less likely to have PCOS and if they do PCOS is one of the very few they do PCOS is one of the very few they do PCOS is one of the very few conditions in medicine where supplements conditions in medicine where supplements conditions in medicine where supplements make a huge difference and these are for make a huge difference and these are for make a huge difference and these are for patients who don't have access to the patients who don't have access to the patients who don't have access to the doctor and these are patients who doctor and these are patients who doctor and these are patients who basically go to the doctor and they're basically go to the doctor and they're basically go to the doctor and they're not being they're being dismissed these not being they're being dismissed these not being they're being dismissed these These supplements work amazingly well. These supplements work amazingly well. These supplements work amazingly well. Why? Because um the OV supplement I Why? Because um the OV supplement I Why? Because um the OV supplement I created, I literally did it here. created, I literally did it here. created, I literally did it here. Diagnose yourself and if you're being Diagnose yourself and if you're being Diagnose yourself and if you're being dismissed, start with the supplement. dismissed, start with the supplement. dismissed, start with the supplement. They make a huge difference for these They make a huge difference for these They make a huge difference for these patients. Why? Because they address the patients. Why? Because they address the patients. Why? Because they address the insulin sensitivity. I'm sure you've insulin sensitivity. I'm sure you've insulin sensitivity. I'm sure you've heard of anacettol, different forms of heard of anacettol, different forms of heard of anacettol, different forms of anacettol that work um to uh to increase anacettol that work um to uh to increase anacettol that work um to uh to increase sensitivity to insulin. And that's why sensitivity to insulin. And that's why sensitivity to insulin. And that's why these patients when they take it, they these patients when they take it, they these patients when they take it, they say, "Oh, my periods became regular or I say, "Oh, my periods became regular or I say, "Oh, my periods became regular or I took it and I got pregnant." Because it took it and I got pregnant." Because it took it and I got pregnant." Because it does address that when it comes to this does address that when it comes to this does address that when it comes to this insulin resistance. They can either do insulin resistance. They can either do insulin resistance. They can either do the metformin, but what I like to do, I the metformin, but what I like to do, I the metformin, but what I like to do, I like to start them on supplements that like to start them on supplements that like to start them on supplements that has inactol in it and sub vitamin D. Did has inactol in it and sub vitamin D. Did has inactol in it and sub vitamin D. Did you know that low vitamin D makes you know that low vitamin D makes you know that low vitamin D makes you insulin resistant? Well, I'm convinced insulin resistant? Well, I'm convinced insulin resistant? Well, I'm convinced that I was aware, but I think it's it that I was aware, but I think it's it that I was aware, but I think it's it can't be stated enough or emphatically can't be stated enough or emphatically can't be stated enough or emphatically enough because, you know, I know I'm enough because, you know, I know I'm enough because, you know, I know I'm always I'm really bullish about this always I'm really bullish about this always I'm really bullish about this sunlight thing. I'm always talking about sunlight thing. I'm always talking about sunlight thing. I'm always talking about sunlight. I don't want people to get sunlight. I don't want people to get sunlight. I don't want people to get sunburn. That's not what I'm talking sunburn. That's not what I'm talking sunburn. That's not what I'm talking about. But we spend so much more time about. But we spend so much more time about. But we spend so much more time indoors now under artificial lighting indoors now under artificial lighting indoors now under artificial lighting where the short wavelength lighting, where the short wavelength lighting, where the short wavelength lighting, &gt;&gt; everyone's low. It really disrupts how &gt;&gt; everyone's low. It really disrupts how &gt;&gt; everyone's low. It really disrupts how the mitochondria process energy and the mitochondria process energy and the mitochondria process energy and the long wavelength light from sunlight, the long wavelength light from sunlight, the long wavelength light from sunlight, the so-called red and infrared light serves so-called red and infrared light serves so-called red and infrared light serves as a protective feature against the as a protective feature against the as a protective feature against the short wavelength light. So, we're not short wavelength light. So, we're not short wavelength light. So, we're not getting enough vitamin D and we need getting enough vitamin D and we need getting enough vitamin D and we need that. That comes from the short that. That comes from the short that. That comes from the short wavelength light. I do have a question wavelength light. I do have a question wavelength light. I do have a question about inositol. Um there are a couple about inositol. Um there are a couple about inositol. Um there are a couple different forms. Uh there's my right. Um different forms. Uh there's my right. Um different forms. Uh there's my right. Um and we can explore those in more and we can explore those in more and we can explore those in more depth. Um but um it is a well-known uh depth. Um but um it is a well-known uh depth. Um but um it is a well-known uh regulator and can improve um insulin regulator and can improve um insulin regulator and can improve um insulin sensitivity, which is what you want. sensitivity, which is what you want. sensitivity, which is what you want. Sometimes people hear insulin Sometimes people hear insulin Sometimes people hear insulin sensitivity and they think that's the sensitivity and they think that's the sensitivity and they think that's the bad thing. You want your insulin to be bad thing. You want your insulin to be bad thing. You want your insulin to be sensitive. &gt;&gt; You don't want it to be resistant, &gt;&gt; You don't want it to be resistant, &gt;&gt; You don't want it to be resistant, right? &gt;&gt; Anything that will make you more insulin &gt;&gt; Anything that will make you more insulin &gt;&gt; Anything that will make you more insulin sensitive will help with symptoms of sensitive will help with symptoms of sensitive will help with symptoms of PCOS. So you want to bring down these PCOS. So you want to bring down these PCOS. So you want to bring down these pillars, right? without even thinking pillars, right? without even thinking pillars, right? without even thinking about birth control pill. You want to about birth control pill. You want to about birth control pill. You want to lower your insulin resistance. So lower your insulin resistance. So lower your insulin resistance. So whether it's metformin or supplements or whether it's metformin or supplements or whether it's metformin or supplements or exercise or low carbohydrate diet or exercise or low carbohydrate diet or exercise or low carbohydrate diet or lowering your stress and lowering your lowering your stress and lowering your lowering your stress and lowering your cortisol, all of that all of this cortisol, all of that all of this cortisol, all of that all of this system. That's why I wanted to explain system. That's why I wanted to explain system. That's why I wanted to explain all this because they all work together. all this because they all work together. all this because they all work together. Then you want to bring your inflammation Then you want to bring your inflammation Then you want to bring your inflammation down. You want to bring that visceral down. You want to bring that visceral down. You want to bring that visceral fat down. So you have to that's why I fat down. So you have to that's why I fat down. So you have to that's why I don't know if you heard this but you don't know if you heard this but you don't know if you heard this but you know in 2014 back then I had trulicity know in 2014 back then I had trulicity know in 2014 back then I had trulicity as GLP1 as GLP1 as GLP1 and that's what I used to use for my and that's what I used to use for my and that's what I used to use for my PCOS patients and they would lose 50 60 PCOS patients and they would lose 50 60 PCOS patients and they would lose 50 60 80 100 pounds and this is 2014. 80 100 pounds and this is 2014. 80 100 pounds and this is 2014. &gt;&gt; What did your colleagues think at that &gt;&gt; What did your colleagues think at that &gt;&gt; What did your colleagues think at that time that you were injecting patients time that you were injecting patients time that you were injecting patients with GLP? with GLP? with GLP? &gt;&gt; Um I actually learned it from a &gt;&gt; Um I actually learned it from a &gt;&gt; Um I actually learned it from a cardiologist who I used to work with Dr. cardiologist who I used to work with Dr. cardiologist who I used to work with Dr. Corandi and I used to send because I Corandi and I used to send because I Corandi and I used to send because I would screen for lipid panel on these would screen for lipid panel on these would screen for lipid panel on these PCOS patients and they were all you know PCOS patients and they were all you know PCOS patients and they were all you know we they had high triglycerides and they we they had high triglycerides and they we they had high triglycerides and they were overweight so I would keep sending were overweight so I would keep sending were overweight so I would keep sending them send my patients to him and one day them send my patients to him and one day them send my patients to him and one day he called me he's like listen ta there's he called me he's like listen ta there's he called me he's like listen ta there's this medication called trulicity this medication called trulicity this medication called trulicity do not stop sending your patients to me do not stop sending your patients to me do not stop sending your patients to me treat them with this medication they treat them with this medication they treat them with this medication they will lose weight and their cholesterol will lose weight and their cholesterol will lose weight and their cholesterol everything will get better so in 2014 I everything will get better so in 2014 I everything will get better so in 2014 I started putting these patients on truly started putting these patients on truly started putting these patients on truly and one thing I realized is their and one thing I realized is their and one thing I realized is their periods were getting starting to get periods were getting starting to get periods were getting starting to get regular their symptoms of PCOS would get regular their symptoms of PCOS would get regular their symptoms of PCOS would get better and the first thing they would better and the first thing they would better and the first thing they would come and tell me is doctor I feel less come and tell me is doctor I feel less come and tell me is doctor I feel less inflamed why do you think because you inflamed why do you think because you inflamed why do you think because you put them on these medications first of put them on these medications first of put them on these medications first of all PCOS patients chronically they have all PCOS patients chronically they have all PCOS patients chronically they have this insulin firing right and that's why this insulin firing right and that's why this insulin firing right and that's why this cascade starts what GLP1s do people this cascade starts what GLP1s do people this cascade starts what GLP1s do people think it's It's an appetite suppressant think it's It's an appetite suppressant think it's It's an appetite suppressant and that's how it works. Well, that's and that's how it works. Well, that's and that's how it works. Well, that's a side effect of it. But what it that's a side effect of it. But what it that's a side effect of it. But what it does, it actually regulates that does, it actually regulates that does, it actually regulates that insulin. So when you eat, it spikes your insulin. So when you eat, it spikes your insulin. So when you eat, it spikes your insulin up and clears that sugar out of insulin up and clears that sugar out of insulin up and clears that sugar out of your blood, right? your blood, right? your blood, right? &gt;&gt; It's like a scavenger, glucose &gt;&gt; It's like a scavenger, glucose &gt;&gt; It's like a scavenger, glucose scavenger, &gt;&gt; right? And it also makes you insulin &gt;&gt; right? And it also makes you insulin &gt;&gt; right? And it also makes you insulin sensitive. So again, clearing it, which sensitive. So again, clearing it, which sensitive. So again, clearing it, which is oxygen really for these PCOS is oxygen really for these PCOS is oxygen really for these PCOS patients. That's why I get so upset when patients. That's why I get so upset when patients. That's why I get so upset when patients comment about these GLP ones patients comment about these GLP ones patients comment about these GLP ones because in this subgroup of patients because in this subgroup of patients because in this subgroup of patients with insulin resistance who are with insulin resistance who are with insulin resistance who are overweight, who are not ovulating, and overweight, who are not ovulating, and overweight, who are not ovulating, and who have all these symptoms, these who have all these symptoms, these who have all these symptoms, these medications since 2014 have changed medications since 2014 have changed medications since 2014 have changed their lives in my practice. The push their lives in my practice. The push their lives in my practice. The push back on GLP1 says there are variety of back on GLP1 says there are variety of back on GLP1 says there are variety of reasons um probably a discussion for reasons um probably a discussion for reasons um probably a discussion for another time but they've clearly helped another time but they've clearly helped another time but they've clearly helped many people uh as long as people many people uh as long as people many people uh as long as people still engage in the right behaviors still engage in the right behaviors still engage in the right behaviors muscle resistance training and people muscle resistance training and people muscle resistance training and people still need to take great care of still need to take great care of still need to take great care of themselves eat properly exercise sleep themselves eat properly exercise sleep themselves eat properly exercise sleep etc. You mentioned metformin several etc. You mentioned metformin several etc. You mentioned metformin several times. I'm aware of a um of an times. I'm aware of a um of an times. I'm aware of a um of an over-the-counter version called over-the-counter version called over-the-counter version called bourberine which I believe comes from a bourberine which I believe comes from a bourberine which I believe comes from a tree bark um which is supposed to be a tree bark um which is supposed to be a tree bark um which is supposed to be a pretty potent glucose scavenger as well. pretty potent glucose scavenger as well. pretty potent glucose scavenger as well. Is there any reason why bourberine is Is there any reason why bourberine is Is there any reason why bourberine is not advised? not advised? not advised? &gt;&gt; So I think there are some studies that &gt;&gt; So I think there are some studies that &gt;&gt; So I think there are some studies that say long-term bourberine is not uh say long-term bourberine is not uh say long-term bourberine is not uh advised. The problem with PCOS is it's advised. The problem with PCOS is it's advised. The problem with PCOS is it's not something it doesn't have a cure. not something it doesn't have a cure. not something it doesn't have a cure. You can't cure it. It's an ongoing You can't cure it. It's an ongoing You can't cure it. It's an ongoing issue. That's why you need to be on issue. That's why you need to be on issue. That's why you need to be on supplements that long term you can stay supplements that long term you can stay supplements that long term you can stay on and you know like you mentioned on and you know like you mentioned on and you know like you mentioned vitamin D uh curcumin uh chromium uh um vitamin D uh curcumin uh chromium uh um vitamin D uh curcumin uh chromium uh um anacettol there's so many things we can anacettol there's so many things we can anacettol there's so many things we can do to increase that insulin sensitivity do to increase that insulin sensitivity do to increase that insulin sensitivity lower the inflammation in the body I lower the inflammation in the body I lower the inflammation in the body I don't usually give bourberine long term don't usually give bourberine long term don't usually give bourberine long term but it definitely short term you can use but it definitely short term you can use but it definitely short term you can use it as pulse uh treatment for these it as pulse uh treatment for these it as pulse uh treatment for these patients &gt;&gt; and metformin it sounds like is a &gt;&gt; and metformin it sounds like is a &gt;&gt; and metformin it sounds like is a relatively safe drug. Is that right? relatively safe drug. Is that right? relatively safe drug. Is that right? &gt;&gt; It's very safe. I you know um even for &gt;&gt; It's very safe. I you know um even for &gt;&gt; It's very safe. I you know um even for my patients who are not PCOS um I my patients who are not PCOS um I my patients who are not PCOS um I recommend um metformin let's say recommend um metformin let's say recommend um metformin let's say permenopausal women with hemoglobin permenopausal women with hemoglobin permenopausal women with hemoglobin A1C's in the borderline range you know A1C's in the borderline range you know A1C's in the borderline range you know 5.7 you fall into the pre-diabetic 5.7 you fall into the pre-diabetic 5.7 you fall into the pre-diabetic range. Um, you know, I'm very lean. I've range. Um, you know, I'm very lean. I've range. Um, you know, I'm very lean. I've never been overweight, you know, but I never been overweight, you know, but I never been overweight, you know, but I have a long family history of diabetes. have a long family history of diabetes. have a long family history of diabetes. And, uh, my hemoglobin A1C was, um, 5.6 And, uh, my hemoglobin A1C was, um, 5.6 And, uh, my hemoglobin A1C was, um, 5.6 a few years ago. And I started taking a few years ago. And I started taking a few years ago. And I started taking metformin, and now I'm at 4.8. metformin, and now I'm at 4.8. metformin, and now I'm at 4.8. &gt;&gt; What um, dosages for people who are &gt;&gt; What um, dosages for people who are &gt;&gt; What um, dosages for people who are relatively lean or lean? relatively lean or lean? relatively lean or lean? &gt;&gt; I start with like 500 at night just to &gt;&gt; I start with like 500 at night just to &gt;&gt; I start with like 500 at night just to see how they do. Metformin does have see how they do. Metformin does have see how they do. Metformin does have side effects and side effects and side effects and &gt;&gt; drops your blood sugar, right? &gt;&gt; drops your blood sugar, right? &gt;&gt; drops your blood sugar, right? &gt;&gt; And and no, it's mostly like the nausea &gt;&gt; And and no, it's mostly like the nausea &gt;&gt; And and no, it's mostly like the nausea and some people really get really bad and some people really get really bad and some people really get really bad diarrhea with it. diarrhea with it. diarrhea with it. &gt;&gt; That's why, you know, um you can I start &gt;&gt; That's why, you know, um you can I start &gt;&gt; That's why, you know, um you can I start them on the supplements. If it doesn't them on the supplements. If it doesn't them on the supplements. If it doesn't work, I go to Metformin. If that doesn't work, I go to Metformin. If that doesn't work, I go to Metformin. If that doesn't work, then I offer them GLP-1s. I see. work, then I offer them GLP-1s. I see. work, then I offer them GLP-1s. I see. But you can abs and I always ask the But you can abs and I always ask the But you can abs and I always ask the patients ask me, can I be on the patients ask me, can I be on the patients ask me, can I be on the supplement on uh metformin and on the supplement on uh metformin and on the supplement on uh metformin and on the GLP1? Yes. You just don't want to start GLP1? Yes. You just don't want to start GLP1? Yes. You just don't want to start the GLP ones with the metformin because the GLP ones with the metformin because the GLP ones with the metformin because they both cause nausea and you don't they both cause nausea and you don't they both cause nausea and you don't know which one's causing what. So if know which one's causing what. So if know which one's causing what. So if someone's morbidly obese and they really someone's morbidly obese and they really someone's morbidly obese and they really want to lose weight, I start with the want to lose weight, I start with the want to lose weight, I start with the GLP1s and usually in about four months, GLP1s and usually in about four months, GLP1s and usually in about four months, my average since 2014, I can tell you my average since 2014, I can tell you my average since 2014, I can tell you four months of GLP1s done correctly, four months of GLP1s done correctly, four months of GLP1s done correctly, patients lose 24 pounds. That's my patients lose 24 pounds. That's my patients lose 24 pounds. That's my that's my uh that's my curve at my that's my uh that's my curve at my that's my uh that's my curve at my office &gt;&gt; of body fat and muscle or &gt;&gt; of body fat and muscle or &gt;&gt; of body fat and muscle or &gt;&gt; probably of muscle too. These patients &gt;&gt; probably of muscle too. These patients &gt;&gt; probably of muscle too. These patients are a lot of them are like are a lot of them are like are a lot of them are like &gt;&gt; they need to lose weight &gt;&gt; they need to lose weight &gt;&gt; they need to lose weight &gt;&gt; 300 lb. So it's hard to even assess &gt;&gt; 300 lb. So it's hard to even assess &gt;&gt; 300 lb. So it's hard to even assess that. But you know what? As they start that. But you know what? As they start that. But you know what? As they start losing weight, they become more losing weight, they become more losing weight, they become more motivated because it's the first time in motivated because it's the first time in motivated because it's the first time in their life that something actually works their life that something actually works their life that something actually works for them because you're actually for them because you're actually for them because you're actually regulating that insulin dysfunction that regulating that insulin dysfunction that regulating that insulin dysfunction that they have. And by supporting that, they have. And by supporting that, they have. And by supporting that, they become more active. They their become more active. They their become more active. They their self-esteem gets better. I had a self-esteem gets better. I had a self-esteem gets better. I had a 26-year-old in my office who I've been treating for in my office who I've been treating for in my office who I've been treating for many years for PCOS and these GLP1s and many years for PCOS and these GLP1s and many years for PCOS and these GLP1s and she came into my office a few months ago she came into my office a few months ago she came into my office a few months ago and when I walked in, she was and when I walked in, she was and when I walked in, she was videotaping me. She looked so good. She videotaping me. She looked so good. She videotaping me. She looked so good. She was so confident. Her hair was done. She was so confident. Her hair was done. She was so confident. Her hair was done. She had a mini skirt with these boots and had a mini skirt with these boots and had a mini skirt with these boots and she was always like, you know, very shy she was always like, you know, very shy she was always like, you know, very shy and she wouldn't talk. She was this and she wouldn't talk. She was this and she wouldn't talk. She was this different person that walked into my different person that walked into my different person that walked into my office. And I started hugging her and office. And I started hugging her and office. And I started hugging her and she started crying and she looked at me. she started crying and she looked at me. she started crying and she looked at me. She said, "Dr. She said, "Dr. She said, "Dr. This is the first time in my life I know This is the first time in my life I know This is the first time in my life I know what it means to be happy. what it means to be happy. what it means to be happy. &gt;&gt; Wow. Yeah. I mean, it's very clear that &gt;&gt; Wow. Yeah. I mean, it's very clear that &gt;&gt; Wow. Yeah. I mean, it's very clear that these GLP1s can help a lot of people. these GLP1s can help a lot of people. these GLP1s can help a lot of people. It's interesting that the push back It's interesting that the push back It's interesting that the push back on GLP1s now is changing a bit because on GLP1s now is changing a bit because on GLP1s now is changing a bit because um a number of compoundingies make them um a number of compoundingies make them um a number of compoundingies make them now. So, you know, people tacked the now. So, you know, people tacked the now. So, you know, people tacked the GLP1s to quote unquote big pharma. You GLP1s to quote unquote big pharma. You GLP1s to quote unquote big pharma. You was kind of Yeah. Um and I understand was kind of Yeah. Um and I understand was kind of Yeah. Um and I understand people's gripes with big pharma people's gripes with big pharma people's gripes with big pharma insurance and things. It's, you know, if insurance and things. It's, you know, if insurance and things. It's, you know, if everyone has been, you know, boxed if everyone has been, you know, boxed if everyone has been, you know, boxed out of access to a drug or something out of access to a drug or something out of access to a drug or something like that and in had insurance issues, like that and in had insurance issues, like that and in had insurance issues, it could be very, very frustrating, even it could be very, very frustrating, even it could be very, very frustrating, even deadly. I mean, there's a whole deadly. I mean, there's a whole deadly. I mean, there's a whole discussion about this recently around discussion about this recently around discussion about this recently around cancer and cancer drugs. But to stay on cancer and cancer drugs. But to stay on cancer and cancer drugs. But to stay on point, I think now that some of these point, I think now that some of these point, I think now that some of these GLP-1 peptides are available through GLP-1 peptides are available through GLP-1 peptides are available through compoundingies, prices have come down. compoundingies, prices have come down. compoundingies, prices have come down. The big pharmaceutical companies don't The big pharmaceutical companies don't The big pharmaceutical companies don't like that. But it's also the case that like that. But it's also the case that like that. But it's also the case that people are quote unquote micro doing people are quote unquote micro doing people are quote unquote micro doing them. They're taking the GLP1s at them. They're taking the GLP1s at them. They're taking the GLP1s at doses that are below the threshold that doses that are below the threshold that doses that are below the threshold that would give them nausea. So, they're not would give them nausea. So, they're not would give them nausea. So, they're not losing weight quite as quickly. They're losing weight quite as quickly. They're losing weight quite as quickly. They're not going gaunt quite as quickly. Um, not going gaunt quite as quickly. Um, not going gaunt quite as quickly. Um, but nonetheless, they're benefiting from but nonetheless, they're benefiting from but nonetheless, they're benefiting from I think the appetite suppression, the I think the appetite suppression, the I think the appetite suppression, the insulin improved insulin sensitivity, insulin improved insulin sensitivity, insulin improved insulin sensitivity, &gt;&gt; inflammation &gt;&gt; inflammation &gt;&gt; inflammation &gt;&gt; and reduced inflammation. Yes. And it &gt;&gt; and reduced inflammation. Yes. And it &gt;&gt; and reduced inflammation. Yes. And it also seems that they adjust something also seems that they adjust something also seems that they adjust something about brain chemistry that make people about brain chemistry that make people about brain chemistry that make people feel better separate. It's impossible to feel better separate. It's impossible to feel better separate. It's impossible to separate it completely, but separate it completely, but separate it completely, but separate from a lot of the bodily changes. from a lot of the bodily changes. from a lot of the bodily changes. There's a bit of an anti-depressant There's a bit of an anti-depressant There's a bit of an anti-depressant function there. function there. function there. &gt;&gt; You know why? Because that noise that &gt;&gt; You know why? Because that noise that &gt;&gt; You know why? Because that noise that says eat, which is an says eat, which is an says eat, which is an issue like you know that binge eating. issue like you know that binge eating. issue like you know that binge eating. I'm just speaking for my PCOS patients I'm just speaking for my PCOS patients I'm just speaking for my PCOS patients cuz I'm not an expert for obesity, but cuz I'm not an expert for obesity, but cuz I'm not an expert for obesity, but uh they have this voice in their head uh they have this voice in their head uh they have this voice in their head and it's a constant battle from the and it's a constant battle from the and it's a constant battle from the minute they wake up to the minute they minute they wake up to the minute they minute they wake up to the minute they go to sleep. And it's not like they're go to sleep. And it's not like they're go to sleep. And it's not like they're crazy. They're not, it's not like crazy. They're not, it's not like crazy. They're not, it's not like they're, you know, being sloppy with they're, you know, being sloppy with they're, you know, being sloppy with food. It's just this brain food. It's just this brain food. It's just this brain disregulation of dopamine and serotonin disregulation of dopamine and serotonin disregulation of dopamine and serotonin that stimul that causes this that stimul that causes this that stimul that causes this &gt;&gt; brutal &gt;&gt; brutal &gt;&gt; brutal &gt;&gt; anxiety, constant anxiety. And every &gt;&gt; anxiety, constant anxiety. And every &gt;&gt; anxiety, constant anxiety. And every single one of them will tell me my brain single one of them will tell me my brain single one of them will tell me my brain is quiet. is quiet. is quiet. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; They're not drinking as much. &gt;&gt; They're not drinking as much. &gt;&gt; They're not drinking as much. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's a clear quotequote side &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's a clear quotequote side &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's a clear quotequote side effect is people don't crave alcoholics. effect is people don't crave alcoholics. effect is people don't crave alcoholics. And I've said it for years. Just use it And I've said it for years. Just use it And I've said it for years. Just use it on alcoholics. Use it on alcoholics. I on alcoholics. Use it on alcoholics. I on alcoholics. Use it on alcoholics. I had a friend of mine who called me and had a friend of mine who called me and had a friend of mine who called me and said her son drinks a lot. The first said her son drinks a lot. The first said her son drinks a lot. The first thing I asked is can he tolerate micro thing I asked is can he tolerate micro thing I asked is can he tolerate micro doing of ompic because it shuts down doing of ompic because it shuts down doing of ompic because it shuts down their cravings their cravings their cravings &gt;&gt; because it's in some sense a sugar &gt;&gt; because it's in some sense a sugar &gt;&gt; because it's in some sense a sugar craving. It's a state craving of being craving. It's a state craving of being craving. It's a state craving of being under the influence of alcohol but it under the influence of alcohol but it under the influence of alcohol but it starts with a craving of sugar. Those starts with a craving of sugar. Those starts with a craving of sugar. Those two things are very closely paired. two things are very closely paired. two things are very closely paired. &gt;&gt; But that's why they feel better, right? &gt;&gt; But that's why they feel better, right? &gt;&gt; But that's why they feel better, right? But even without GLP1s, when you But even without GLP1s, when you But even without GLP1s, when you diagnose and treat these PCOS patients, diagnose and treat these PCOS patients, diagnose and treat these PCOS patients, their confidence comes back. They feel their confidence comes back. They feel their confidence comes back. They feel better. They know they're not crazy, better. They know they're not crazy, better. They know they're not crazy, which is why I'm here today. You are not which is why I'm here today. You are not which is why I'm here today. You are not crazy. If you're gaining weight, acne, crazy. If you're gaining weight, acne, crazy. If you're gaining weight, acne, hair loss, facial hair, body hair, if hair loss, facial hair, body hair, if hair loss, facial hair, body hair, if you're not getting pregnant, if you you're not getting pregnant, if you you're not getting pregnant, if you can't lose your weight, um none of this, can't lose your weight, um none of this, can't lose your weight, um none of this, you're not crazy. This this had these you're not crazy. This this had these you're not crazy. This this had these are the underlying conditions and these are the underlying conditions and these are the underlying conditions and these vicious cycles need to be addressed. And vicious cycles need to be addressed. And vicious cycles need to be addressed. And for people that want to get pregnant and for people that want to get pregnant and for people that want to get pregnant and treat their PCOS, treat their PCOS, treat their PCOS, uh, what are the success rates that uh, what are the success rates that uh, what are the success rates that you've observed in your clinic? you've observed in your clinic? you've observed in your clinic? &gt;&gt; Very good question. So, as I'm not a &gt;&gt; Very good question. So, as I'm not a &gt;&gt; Very good question. So, as I'm not a fertility doctor, but I'm trying to take fertility doctor, but I'm trying to take fertility doctor, but I'm trying to take these patients out of the hands of the these patients out of the hands of the these patients out of the hands of the fertility doctors. So, one thing I do, I fertility doctors. So, one thing I do, I fertility doctors. So, one thing I do, I put them on the supplement uh on my OV put them on the supplement uh on my OV put them on the supplement uh on my OV supplement. I give them metformin and I supplement. I give them metformin and I supplement. I give them metformin and I have them try and try to see if I can have them try and try to see if I can have them try and try to see if I can regulate their period. two things you regulate their period. two things you regulate their period. two things you can do easily and doctors can do it in can do easily and doctors can do it in can do easily and doctors can do it in their office. One is a medication called their office. One is a medication called their office. One is a medication called let and the other one is Clomid. Both of let and the other one is Clomid. Both of let and the other one is Clomid. Both of those basically um regulate that those basically um regulate that those basically um regulate that hypothalamus pituitary ovarian axis and hypothalamus pituitary ovarian axis and hypothalamus pituitary ovarian axis and pushes these patients to ovulate. With pushes these patients to ovulate. With pushes these patients to ovulate. With letol 60 70% of them I think ovulate and letol 60 70% of them I think ovulate and letol 60 70% of them I think ovulate and with Clomid it's a little bit less. So with Clomid it's a little bit less. So with Clomid it's a little bit less. So you can try those in the office for you can try those in the office for you can try those in the office for someone who wants to get pregnant. What someone who wants to get pregnant. What someone who wants to get pregnant. What I usually do, I have them try on their I usually do, I have them try on their I usually do, I have them try on their own for 6 months to a year depending on own for 6 months to a year depending on own for 6 months to a year depending on their age. If they're above 35, I say 6 their age. If they're above 35, I say 6 their age. If they're above 35, I say 6 months. If they're less than that and months. If they're less than that and months. If they're less than that and they're not in a hurry and their egg they're not in a hurry and their egg they're not in a hurry and their egg count is good and I've regular and I count is good and I've regular and I count is good and I've regular and I know I've dealt with their PCOS and know I've dealt with their PCOS and know I've dealt with their PCOS and their inflammation and their insulin their inflammation and their insulin their inflammation and their insulin resistance, then I have them try for a resistance, then I have them try for a resistance, then I have them try for a year, right? Because if you take um 100 year, right? Because if you take um 100 year, right? Because if you take um 100 couples regardless of age um and you have them regardless of age um and you have them regardless of age um and you have them have sex I don't know three times three have sex I don't know three times three have sex I don't know three times three to four times a week 50% of them get to four times a week 50% of them get to four times a week 50% of them get pregnant in the first 6 months and 90% pregnant in the first 6 months and 90% pregnant in the first 6 months and 90% of them get pregnant in the first year. of them get pregnant in the first year. of them get pregnant in the first year. But for patients with endometriosis or But for patients with endometriosis or But for patients with endometriosis or PCOS I usually have them try for like PCOS I usually have them try for like PCOS I usually have them try for like about 6 months and then check back in about 6 months and then check back in about 6 months and then check back in with me. you know if letol clomit uh with me. you know if letol clomit uh with me. you know if letol clomit uh trying on their own everything fails trying on their own everything fails trying on their own everything fails then you can send them to fertility then you can send them to fertility then you can send them to fertility doctors. Uh one thing that I want to doctors. Uh one thing that I want to doctors. Uh one thing that I want to bring up here which is my observation bring up here which is my observation bring up here which is my observation and it's nowhere in the literature but and it's nowhere in the literature but and it's nowhere in the literature but I'm saying it today and I know it's I'm saying it today and I know it's I'm saying it today and I know it's going to be published someday. going to be published someday. going to be published someday. I strongly believe that over 50% of PCOS I strongly believe that over 50% of PCOS I strongly believe that over 50% of PCOS patients also have endometriosis. patients also have endometriosis. patients also have endometriosis. Over 50%. And I've always said this, if Over 50%. And I've always said this, if Over 50%. And I've always said this, if you have a patient with PCOS, think you have a patient with PCOS, think you have a patient with PCOS, think about it. PCOS is already one of the about it. PCOS is already one of the about it. PCOS is already one of the leading causes of infertility. And in my leading causes of infertility. And in my leading causes of infertility. And in my opinion, 50% of them, because I I've opinion, 50% of them, because I I've opinion, 50% of them, because I I've seen it in my office, have seen it in my office, have seen it in my office, have endometriosis. And I have a path report endometriosis. And I have a path report endometriosis. And I have a path report and I've done laparoscopic surgery to and I've done laparoscopic surgery to and I've done laparoscopic surgery to prove it. If you only address PCOS and prove it. If you only address PCOS and prove it. If you only address PCOS and you're dismissing their painful period, you're dismissing their painful period, you're dismissing their painful period, then they're not getting pregnant. then they're not getting pregnant. then they're not getting pregnant. That's why you have to That's why you have to That's why you have to make sure you put a check in front of make sure you put a check in front of make sure you put a check in front of all these underlying conditions. all these underlying conditions. all these underlying conditions. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Well, I to claim a free sample pack. Well, I to claim a free sample pack. Well, I definitely want to talk about definitely want to talk about definitely want to talk about endometriosis. Um, before we move to endometriosis. Um, before we move to endometriosis. Um, before we move to that, it sounds like going after the that, it sounds like going after the that, it sounds like going after the insulin resistance first with metformin insulin resistance first with metformin insulin resistance first with metformin and oitol, the other things in uh OV. and oitol, the other things in uh OV. and oitol, the other things in uh OV. Well, first people should go to the uh Well, first people should go to the uh Well, first people should go to the uh OVI site. We can put it in the show not OVI site. We can put it in the show not OVI site. We can put it in the show not take the quiz as it's a zerocost take the quiz as it's a zerocost take the quiz as it's a zerocost platform. You get some feedback there platform. You get some feedback there platform. You get some feedback there about what might be happening, what's about what might be happening, what's about what might be happening, what's likely happening. Um and then take care likely happening. Um and then take care likely happening. Um and then take care of the insulin resistance which of the insulin resistance which of the insulin resistance which presumably also includes things you presumably also includes things you presumably also includes things you mentioned trying to get best possible mentioned trying to get best possible mentioned trying to get best possible sleep, limit stress, exercise. sleep, limit stress, exercise. sleep, limit stress, exercise. &gt;&gt; Yes. And start with supplements first if &gt;&gt; Yes. And start with supplements first if &gt;&gt; Yes. And start with supplements first if your symptoms are not bad. You know, your symptoms are not bad. You know, your symptoms are not bad. You know, I've had like 50some patients get off OV I've had like 50some patients get off OV I've had like 50some patients get off OV because they got pregnant. All you're because they got pregnant. All you're because they got pregnant. All you're doing is addressing their hormone and doing is addressing their hormone and doing is addressing their hormone and metabolic health. That's all we're doing metabolic health. That's all we're doing metabolic health. That's all we're doing with it. But if it doesn't work, ask for with it. But if it doesn't work, ask for with it. But if it doesn't work, ask for metformin. If it doesn't work and you're metformin. If it doesn't work and you're metformin. If it doesn't work and you're having a hard time losing weight, you're having a hard time losing weight, you're having a hard time losing weight, ask for GLP1s. Ask your doctor for ask for GLP1s. Ask your doctor for ask for GLP1s. Ask your doctor for Clomid if you're trying to get pregnant. Clomid if you're trying to get pregnant. Clomid if you're trying to get pregnant. Ask your doctor for let first, Clomid Ask your doctor for let first, Clomid Ask your doctor for let first, Clomid second. And if all that fails, go see a second. And if all that fails, go see a second. And if all that fails, go see a fertility doctor. But before that, even fertility doctor. But before that, even fertility doctor. But before that, even if you're single and you don't have a if you're single and you don't have a if you're single and you don't have a partner and you're in your late 20s and partner and you're in your late 20s and partner and you're in your late 20s and you have no one uh and you know having a you have no one uh and you know having a you have no one uh and you know having a baby is something that will probably baby is something that will probably baby is something that will probably happen few years down the line, consider happen few years down the line, consider happen few years down the line, consider freezing eggs. Not because of the count, freezing eggs. Not because of the count, freezing eggs. Not because of the count, because of the quality of the eggs because of the quality of the eggs because of the quality of the eggs because PCOS patients again have tons of because PCOS patients again have tons of because PCOS patients again have tons of eggs but the quality is not that good. eggs but the quality is not that good. eggs but the quality is not that good. Endometriosis is opposite. endometriosis Endometriosis is opposite. endometriosis Endometriosis is opposite. endometriosis destroys your egg count and quality. destroys your egg count and quality. destroys your egg count and quality. &gt;&gt; I've seen a few papers um that suggest &gt;&gt; I've seen a few papers um that suggest &gt;&gt; I've seen a few papers um that suggest that co-enzyme Q10 and Lcarnitine might that co-enzyme Q10 and Lcarnitine might that co-enzyme Q10 and Lcarnitine might be beneficial for egg quality. Yes. And be beneficial for egg quality. Yes. And be beneficial for egg quality. Yes. And in males sperm quality, but we're in males sperm quality, but we're in males sperm quality, but we're talking about eggs here. Um do you talking about eggs here. Um do you talking about eggs here. Um do you include that? include that? include that? &gt;&gt; Yes. And I would say it's probably &gt;&gt; Yes. And I would say it's probably &gt;&gt; Yes. And I would say it's probably because of inflammation, right? because of inflammation, right? because of inflammation, right? &gt;&gt; We don't really have great tests for &gt;&gt; We don't really have great tests for &gt;&gt; We don't really have great tests for inflammation yet. like the number of inflammation yet. like the number of inflammation yet. like the number of tests, you know, that are coming online tests, you know, that are coming online tests, you know, that are coming online for um evaluating biomarkers is quite for um evaluating biomarkers is quite for um evaluating biomarkers is quite impressive, but we don't really quite impressive, but we don't really quite impressive, but we don't really have a good test for inflammation have a good test for inflammation have a good test for inflammation &gt;&gt; as we don't have a test for PCOS. &gt;&gt; as we don't have a test for PCOS. &gt;&gt; as we don't have a test for PCOS. &gt;&gt; Wouldn't that be wonderful? But but it &gt;&gt; Wouldn't that be wonderful? But but it &gt;&gt; Wouldn't that be wonderful? But but it sounds like there's no single blood test sounds like there's no single blood test sounds like there's no single blood test that would do it because it's a that would do it because it's a that would do it because it's a constellation of things. constellation of things. constellation of things. &gt;&gt; That's why patients say, "My doctor said &gt;&gt; That's why patients say, "My doctor said &gt;&gt; That's why patients say, "My doctor said I don't have PCOS because my I don't have PCOS because my I don't have PCOS because my testosterone is normal." False. My testosterone is normal." False. My testosterone is normal." False. My doctor said I don't have PCOS because my doctor said I don't have PCOS because my doctor said I don't have PCOS because my uh I don't have any cysts on my ovaries. uh I don't have any cysts on my ovaries. uh I don't have any cysts on my ovaries. False. My doctor said I don't have PCOS False. My doctor said I don't have PCOS False. My doctor said I don't have PCOS because I'm not overweight. False. My because I'm not overweight. False. My because I'm not overweight. False. My doctor says my periods are regular so doctor says my periods are regular so doctor says my periods are regular so I'm not I don't have PCOS. False. I'm not I don't have PCOS. False. I'm not I don't have PCOS. False. There's so many myths that that's why There's so many myths that that's why There's so many myths that that's why it's important to understand the four it's important to understand the four it's important to understand the four phenotypes and how they differ. phenotypes and how they differ. phenotypes and how they differ. Understand that 70 to 80% of these Understand that 70 to 80% of these Understand that 70 to 80% of these patients don't ovulate. understand that patients don't ovulate. understand that patients don't ovulate. understand that the 20 30% who ovulate that the 20 30% who ovulate that the 20 30% who ovulate sometimes, not all the time and that's sometimes, not all the time and that's sometimes, not all the time and that's why they're not getting pregnant. And why they're not getting pregnant. And why they're not getting pregnant. And understand that inflammation, insulin understand that inflammation, insulin understand that inflammation, insulin resistance, and this brain ovary axis resistance, and this brain ovary axis resistance, and this brain ovary axis are the main drivers. And then you add are the main drivers. And then you add are the main drivers. And then you add genetics and epigenetics, it starts a genetics and epigenetics, it starts a genetics and epigenetics, it starts a big chaos in the body. And that's why as big chaos in the body. And that's why as big chaos in the body. And that's why as a clinician, that's why it takes so much a clinician, that's why it takes so much a clinician, that's why it takes so much time, right? In this health care system, time, right? In this health care system, time, right? In this health care system, when you get 10 minutes with your when you get 10 minutes with your when you get 10 minutes with your doctor, do you think your doctor everything we do you think your doctor everything we do you think your doctor everything we talked about? I'd say I teach all of talked about? I'd say I teach all of talked about? I'd say I teach all of this to my patient, new patients with this to my patient, new patients with this to my patient, new patients with PCOS. How can you do that in 10 minutes? PCOS. How can you do that in 10 minutes? PCOS. How can you do that in 10 minutes? And on top of that, do their papsmear, And on top of that, do their papsmear, And on top of that, do their papsmear, check their hormones, talk about STD, check their hormones, talk about STD, check their hormones, talk about STD, talk about birth control, rule out talk about birth control, rule out talk about birth control, rule out endometriosis. How are you going to do endometriosis. How are you going to do endometriosis. How are you going to do that? A, patients don't have access to that? A, patients don't have access to that? A, patients don't have access to doctors. B when they have access either the B when they have access either the B when they have access either the doctors are not well trained or they doctors are not well trained or they doctors are not well trained or they don't have time to send spend time with don't have time to send spend time with don't have time to send spend time with these patients and they get you know these patients and they get you know these patients and they get you know even when they get diagnosed they get even when they get diagnosed they get even when they get diagnosed they get prescribed a birth control pill prescribed a birth control pill prescribed a birth control pill &gt;&gt; and off you go. &gt;&gt; and off you go. &gt;&gt; and off you go. &gt;&gt; Yeah. the thin end ed end of the wedge &gt;&gt; Yeah. the thin end ed end of the wedge &gt;&gt; Yeah. the thin end ed end of the wedge in this case really seems to be going in this case really seems to be going in this case really seems to be going after the insulin resistance um at least after the insulin resistance um at least after the insulin resistance um at least in terms of what people can do for in terms of what people can do for in terms of what people can do for themselves without you know because themselves without you know because themselves without you know because people can't start injecting androgen people can't start injecting androgen people can't start injecting androgen blockers without you know the assistance blockers without you know the assistance blockers without you know the assistance and guidance of a physician so take and guidance of a physician so take and guidance of a physician so take care of your insulin sensitivity incur care of your insulin sensitivity incur care of your insulin sensitivity incur you know enrich it encourage it so you know enrich it encourage it so you know enrich it encourage it so &gt;&gt; sunlight limit stress sleep etc but &gt;&gt; sunlight limit stress sleep etc but &gt;&gt; sunlight limit stress sleep etc but these tools of inocl co-enzyme Q10 these tools of inocl co-enzyme Q10 these tools of inocl co-enzyme Q10 lcarnitine and these are in OV lcarnitine and these are in OV lcarnitine and these are in OV supplement. &gt;&gt; It is amazing. And not speak not because &gt;&gt; It is amazing. And not speak not because &gt;&gt; It is amazing. And not speak not because I don't even have time, but I really I don't even have time, but I really I don't even have time, but I really created it for women who are at home who created it for women who are at home who created it for women who are at home who don't know if they have a PCOS and they don't know if they have a PCOS and they don't know if they have a PCOS and they don't know what to do. This is the least don't know what to do. This is the least don't know what to do. This is the least you can do. Eat healthy, exercise, sleep you can do. Eat healthy, exercise, sleep you can do. Eat healthy, exercise, sleep well, lower your stress, take the OV well, lower your stress, take the OV well, lower your stress, take the OV supplement, but before you do all that, supplement, but before you do all that, supplement, but before you do all that, take the quiz. take the quiz. take the quiz. &gt;&gt; And if you want future fertility, &gt;&gt; And if you want future fertility, &gt;&gt; And if you want future fertility, freeze, freeze before 30 and freeze, freeze before 30 and freeze, freeze before 30 and know your egg count. What about for know your egg count. What about for know your egg count. What about for women who are older than 30 who want to women who are older than 30 who want to women who are older than 30 who want to freeze eggs? Does it make sense for them freeze eggs? Does it make sense for them freeze eggs? Does it make sense for them to freeze at 35? It seems to me the to freeze at 35? It seems to me the to freeze at 35? It seems to me the answer would be yes. answer would be yes. answer would be yes. &gt;&gt; Oh, always. I always freeze because you &gt;&gt; Oh, always. I always freeze because you &gt;&gt; Oh, always. I always freeze because you need one good egg. need one good egg. need one good egg. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And you don't know if you're going to &gt;&gt; And you don't know if you're going to &gt;&gt; And you don't know if you're going to get it or not, but freeze. And PCOS get it or not, but freeze. And PCOS get it or not, but freeze. And PCOS patients, the beauty of it is they have patients, the beauty of it is they have patients, the beauty of it is they have all these follicles, so we can pull out all these follicles, so we can pull out all these follicles, so we can pull out a lot of eggs. Now, the quality might a lot of eggs. Now, the quality might a lot of eggs. Now, the quality might not be good, but keep pulling it. So for not be good, but keep pulling it. So for not be good, but keep pulling it. So for my PCOS patients, generally speaking, we my PCOS patients, generally speaking, we my PCOS patients, generally speaking, we I always tell my patients, freeze 20 I always tell my patients, freeze 20 I always tell my patients, freeze 20 eggs because 20 is safe. But as you get eggs because 20 is safe. But as you get eggs because 20 is safe. But as you get older, especially if you have PCOS, I older, especially if you have PCOS, I older, especially if you have PCOS, I might want 40 eggs. You know, the more might want 40 eggs. You know, the more might want 40 eggs. You know, the more you have because I know the quality is you have because I know the quality is you have because I know the quality is not that good. not that good. not that good. &gt;&gt; Well, and considering that you're going &gt;&gt; Well, and considering that you're going &gt;&gt; Well, and considering that you're going to get more the younger the patient is to get more the younger the patient is to get more the younger the patient is um and that freezing eggs is not a um and that freezing eggs is not a um and that freezing eggs is not a zerocost endeavor, it starts to get more zerocost endeavor, it starts to get more zerocost endeavor, it starts to get more expensive as you get older essentially, expensive as you get older essentially, expensive as you get older essentially, &gt;&gt; right? So the incentive to do it younger &gt;&gt; right? So the incentive to do it younger &gt;&gt; right? So the incentive to do it younger is that it's going to be less expensive is that it's going to be less expensive is that it's going to be less expensive in the long run. Um I mean there are in the long run. Um I mean there are in the long run. Um I mean there are women in their late 30s, early 40s who women in their late 30s, early 40s who women in their late 30s, early 40s who still try to freeze eggs. I think in still try to freeze eggs. I think in still try to freeze eggs. I think in the state of California after age 42 you the state of California after age 42 you the state of California after age 42 you can only freeze embryos, not eggs. I can only freeze embryos, not eggs. I can only freeze embryos, not eggs. I think it um think it um think it um &gt;&gt; and I mean it doesn't even make &gt;&gt; and I mean it doesn't even make &gt;&gt; and I mean it doesn't even make financial sense at that point to do it financial sense at that point to do it financial sense at that point to do it to pay 10, 15, 20,000. I think in to pay 10, 15, 20,000. I think in to pay 10, 15, 20,000. I think in Northern California it goes up to like Northern California it goes up to like Northern California it goes up to like 35,000. I mean imagine for one cycle to 35,000. I mean imagine for one cycle to 35,000. I mean imagine for one cycle to get two eggs out. get two eggs out. get two eggs out. &gt;&gt; Yeah. the probabilities are exceedingly &gt;&gt; Yeah. the probabilities are exceedingly &gt;&gt; Yeah. the probabilities are exceedingly low but you can understand why people low but you can understand why people low but you can understand why people feel you know this kind of feel you know this kind of feel you know this kind of information even just podcasts in information even just podcasts in information even just podcasts in general weren't so prominent you know general weren't so prominent you know general weren't so prominent you know six seven years ago I mean they were six seven years ago I mean they were six seven years ago I mean they were podcasts were around but these sorts of podcasts were around but these sorts of podcasts were around but these sorts of discussions weren't happening discussions weren't happening discussions weren't happening &gt;&gt; no this is amazing what you're doing I &gt;&gt; no this is amazing what you're doing I &gt;&gt; no this is amazing what you're doing I don't think you'll see this podcast will don't think you'll see this podcast will don't think you'll see this podcast will make such a huge difference and I want make such a huge difference and I want make such a huge difference and I want your male listeners to listen for the your male listeners to listen for the your male listeners to listen for the sake of their daughters their sisters sake of their daughters their sisters sake of their daughters their sisters their girlfriends because are wise their girlfriends because are wise their girlfriends because are wise because this is so common and so because this is so common and so because this is so common and so dismissed and you know I've always said dismissed and you know I've always said dismissed and you know I've always said this you're going to laugh but you know this you're going to laugh but you know this you're going to laugh but you know what my dream is you'll see I'm going to what my dream is you'll see I'm going to what my dream is you'll see I'm going to get to my dream is I've always said it I get to my dream is I've always said it I get to my dream is I've always said it I want the president of United States to want the president of United States to want the president of United States to call for 15 minutes of silence in this call for 15 minutes of silence in this call for 15 minutes of silence in this country and I'm really serious and I country and I'm really serious and I country and I'm really serious and I want him to hand me the mic so I can want him to hand me the mic so I can want him to hand me the mic so I can tell women what they deserve to know to tell women what they deserve to know to tell women what they deserve to know to tell them that their symptoms are real tell them that their symptoms are real tell them that their symptoms are real that their pain is real, that they're that their pain is real, that they're that their pain is real, that they're not crazy, that it's not in their head, not crazy, that it's not in their head, not crazy, that it's not in their head, that there is something really wrong that there is something really wrong that there is something really wrong that needs to be addressed. And if that needs to be addressed. And if that needs to be addressed. And if they're being dismissed, they need to they're being dismissed, they need to they're being dismissed, they need to listen to podcasts like yourself. Come listen to podcasts like yourself. Come listen to podcasts like yourself. Come on, GMD podcast. I literally, just like on, GMD podcast. I literally, just like on, GMD podcast. I literally, just like you, I take every single condition and I you, I take every single condition and I you, I take every single condition and I teach them what to do with it. They teach them what to do with it. They teach them what to do with it. They don't need to go to like literally they don't need to go to like literally they don't need to go to like literally they don't need to come to my office to see don't need to come to my office to see don't need to come to my office to see me. I'm telling them what to do. But you me. I'm telling them what to do. But you me. I'm telling them what to do. But you have to teach them to become their own have to teach them to become their own have to teach them to become their own health advocate. health advocate. health advocate. &gt;&gt; Well, this is the new movement is &gt;&gt; Well, this is the new movement is &gt;&gt; Well, this is the new movement is for people to advocate for their own for people to advocate for their own for people to advocate for their own health is a big shift. I think since the health is a big shift. I think since the health is a big shift. I think since the pandemic really and um I hear you loud pandemic really and um I hear you loud pandemic really and um I hear you loud and clear and also uh folks at AHS and clear and also uh folks at AHS and clear and also uh folks at AHS um health and human services do listen um health and human services do listen um health and human services do listen to this podcast. Um about 50% of our to this podcast. Um about 50% of our to this podcast. Um about 50% of our listenership is male. The other 50% listenership is male. The other 50% listenership is male. The other 50% is female. Uh it you know distributes is female. Uh it you know distributes is female. Uh it you know distributes differently across platforms but that's differently across platforms but that's differently across platforms but that's basically the contour of things. that's basically the contour of things. that's basically the contour of things. And I have a feeling uh you'll get your And I have a feeling uh you'll get your And I have a feeling uh you'll get your 10 15 uh hopefully more minutes. 10 15 uh hopefully more minutes. 10 15 uh hopefully more minutes. &gt;&gt; I know this is my mic today. I feel like &gt;&gt; I know this is my mic today. I feel like &gt;&gt; I know this is my mic today. I feel like I'm getting to my dream. I'm getting to my dream. I'm getting to my dream. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well well hopefully it's a um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well well hopefully it's a um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well well hopefully it's a um a large vertical step toward your a large vertical step toward your a large vertical step toward your ultimate dream of doing that at the ultimate dream of doing that at the ultimate dream of doing that at the um national level although you know we um national level although you know we um national level although you know we are now translated into other languages. are now translated into other languages. are now translated into other languages. So there is uh the potential for So there is uh the potential for So there is uh the potential for this to go extremely uh far. Thanks this to go extremely uh far. Thanks this to go extremely uh far. Thanks thanks to the information you're thanks to the information you're thanks to the information you're sharing. Okay. So, I definitely want to sharing. Okay. So, I definitely want to sharing. Okay. So, I definitely want to talk about endometriosis, but before we talk about endometriosis, but before we talk about endometriosis, but before we do that, I just want to give people a do that, I just want to give people a do that, I just want to give people a summary reminder of the two dues. Women summary reminder of the two dues. Women summary reminder of the two dues. Women basically, regardless of age, should go basically, regardless of age, should go basically, regardless of age, should go take this OVI test, the self test. Yes. take this OVI test, the self test. Yes. take this OVI test, the self test. Yes. Zero cost. Get some answers. Um, get Zero cost. Get some answers. Um, get Zero cost. Get some answers. Um, get some feedback and then really take some feedback and then really take some feedback and then really take control of their insulin sensitivity. control of their insulin sensitivity. control of their insulin sensitivity. This is true for everybody, but This is true for everybody, but This is true for everybody, but especially for the people we're talking especially for the people we're talking especially for the people we're talking about here, women that might have PCOS, about here, women that might have PCOS, about here, women that might have PCOS, might not interested in their fertility might not interested in their fertility might not interested in their fertility or just broadly interested in their or just broadly interested in their or just broadly interested in their hormone health regardless of age, even hormone health regardless of age, even hormone health regardless of age, even if they're pmenopause, menopause. Great. if they're pmenopause, menopause. Great. if they're pmenopause, menopause. Great. &gt;&gt; The actionables of limit stress, &gt;&gt; The actionables of limit stress, &gt;&gt; The actionables of limit stress, excellent sleep in no particular order. excellent sleep in no particular order. excellent sleep in no particular order. limit stress, get the best possible limit stress, get the best possible limit stress, get the best possible sleep, eat a low inflammation diet, sleep, eat a low inflammation diet, sleep, eat a low inflammation diet, limited processed foods, maybe even cut limited processed foods, maybe even cut limited processed foods, maybe even cut back on starchy carbohydrates back on starchy carbohydrates back on starchy carbohydrates &gt;&gt; to improve insulin sensitivity for make &gt;&gt; to improve insulin sensitivity for make &gt;&gt; to improve insulin sensitivity for make sure you're getting enough protein. This sure you're getting enough protein. This sure you're getting enough protein. This kind of thing, exercise, including high kind of thing, exercise, including high kind of thing, exercise, including high intensity and resistance training. And intensity and resistance training. And intensity and resistance training. And then supplementation. then supplementation. then supplementation. You've designed a supplement. I have no You've designed a supplement. I have no You've designed a supplement. I have no relation to it. So that know this isn't relation to it. So that know this isn't relation to it. So that know this isn't a designated like, you know, a designated like, you know, a designated like, you know, collaborative promotional, but the point collaborative promotional, but the point collaborative promotional, but the point being that it has all the things in it being that it has all the things in it being that it has all the things in it that one would want. It's inositol, that one would want. It's inositol, that one would want. It's inositol, co-enzyme Q10. co-enzyme Q10. co-enzyme Q10. &gt;&gt; It has vitamin D. It has actually um &gt;&gt; It has vitamin D. It has actually um &gt;&gt; It has vitamin D. It has actually um wild malberry leaf in it, which believe wild malberry leaf in it, which believe wild malberry leaf in it, which believe it or not, if you take it before your it or not, if you take it before your it or not, if you take it before your heaviest meal, it blocks the absorption heaviest meal, it blocks the absorption heaviest meal, it blocks the absorption of carbohydrates in that meal by 40%. So of carbohydrates in that meal by 40%. So of carbohydrates in that meal by 40%. So all the things that PCOS patients um all the things that PCOS patients um all the things that PCOS patients um really need for that insulin resistance, really need for that insulin resistance, really need for that insulin resistance, for their inflammation, for their inflammation, for their inflammation, um you know, we've had so many patients um you know, we've had so many patients um you know, we've had so many patients get pregnant on it. So many patients I get pregnant on it. So many patients I get pregnant on it. So many patients I had a patient who called me and said, had a patient who called me and said, had a patient who called me and said, "My mood is better." Going back to what "My mood is better." Going back to what "My mood is better." Going back to what I was telling you, uh, instead of just I was telling you, uh, instead of just I was telling you, uh, instead of just starting these patients on Zoloft and starting these patients on Zoloft and starting these patients on Zoloft and Lexapro, sometimes when you fix their Lexapro, sometimes when you fix their Lexapro, sometimes when you fix their underlying condition, you might make underlying condition, you might make underlying condition, you might make them feel better. Not to dismiss their them feel better. Not to dismiss their them feel better. Not to dismiss their symptoms, but you can at least start symptoms, but you can at least start symptoms, but you can at least start with the more natural ways and then with the more natural ways and then with the more natural ways and then prescribe them anti-depressants or prescribe them anti-depressants or prescribe them anti-depressants or anti-anxiety medication. anti-anxiety medication. anti-anxiety medication. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Amen to that. And it's interesting &gt;&gt; Yeah. Amen to that. And it's interesting &gt;&gt; Yeah. Amen to that. And it's interesting uh this mulberry um you know I think uh this mulberry um you know I think uh this mulberry um you know I think some people who are more from the uh some people who are more from the uh some people who are more from the uh traditional medical orientation um think traditional medical orientation um think traditional medical orientation um think oh supplements this and that we've had a oh supplements this and that we've had a oh supplements this and that we've had a couple of scientists on this podcast couple of scientists on this podcast couple of scientists on this podcast serious laboratory scientists who work serious laboratory scientists who work serious laboratory scientists who work on things every everything you can on things every everything you can on things every everything you can imagine from painkillers to things that imagine from painkillers to things that imagine from painkillers to things that are uh you know active in the brain to are uh you know active in the brain to are uh you know active in the brain to improve mood regulate appetite improve mood regulate appetite improve mood regulate appetite pharma and the drugs they make are pharma and the drugs they make are pharma and the drugs they make are derived D almost always from plant derived D almost always from plant derived D almost always from plant compounds initially, right? They compounds initially, right? They compounds initially, right? They actually do what's called actually do what's called actually do what's called bioprospecting. They go out and find bioprospecting. They go out and find bioprospecting. They go out and find plants. We rarely hear about this. They plants. We rarely hear about this. They plants. We rarely hear about this. They find plants, then they isolate the find plants, then they isolate the find plants, then they isolate the alkoids from plants that have potent alkoids from plants that have potent alkoids from plants that have potent effects on blood sugar, potent effects on blood sugar, potent effects on blood sugar, potent effects on mood, potent effects on pain. And on mood, potent effects on pain. And on mood, potent effects on pain. And so what we end up with when we talk so what we end up with when we talk so what we end up with when we talk about pharmaceutical drugs, you know, about pharmaceutical drugs, you know, about pharmaceutical drugs, you know, most of them are derived from plants most of them are derived from plants most of them are derived from plants &gt;&gt; in the first place. &gt;&gt; in the first place. &gt;&gt; in the first place. &gt;&gt; In the first place. So when you hear &gt;&gt; In the first place. So when you hear &gt;&gt; In the first place. So when you hear malberry, you think, oh, is this like a malberry, you think, oh, is this like a malberry, you think, oh, is this like a berry? Is this some magic berry from the berry? Is this some magic berry from the berry? Is this some magic berry from the jungle? No, this is these are the these jungle? No, this is these are the these jungle? No, this is these are the these uh plant compounds contain uh very uh plant compounds contain uh very uh plant compounds contain uh very bioactive elements within them. So that bioactive elements within them. So that bioactive elements within them. So that will also reduce uh these uh the will also reduce uh these uh the will also reduce uh these uh the business of improving insulin business of improving insulin business of improving insulin sensitivity will uh lower inflammation, sensitivity will uh lower inflammation, sensitivity will uh lower inflammation, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Very very important. And then of course &gt;&gt; Very very important. And then of course &gt;&gt; Very very important. And then of course we can't control our genetics but we've we can't control our genetics but we've we can't control our genetics but we've been talking about epigenetics. And then been talking about epigenetics. And then been talking about epigenetics. And then if one is poss if one can they should if one is poss if one can they should if one is poss if one can they should really evaluate their egg count AMH with really evaluate their egg count AMH with really evaluate their egg count AMH with the understanding that high egg count the understanding that high egg count the understanding that high egg count and AMH and regular shedding of the and AMH and regular shedding of the and AMH and regular shedding of the uterine lining aka menses menrating does uterine lining aka menses menrating does uterine lining aka menses menrating does not necessarily mean that everything is not necessarily mean that everything is not necessarily mean that everything is reproductively normal. reproductively normal. reproductively normal. &gt;&gt; Bravo. &gt;&gt; Bravo. &gt;&gt; Bravo. &gt;&gt; Okay. Did I get it right? All right. &gt;&gt; Okay. Did I get it right? All right. &gt;&gt; Okay. Did I get it right? All right. &gt;&gt; You're the best. &gt;&gt; You're the best. &gt;&gt; You're the best. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Well, I just I just want to &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Well, I just I just want to &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Well, I just I just want to make sure that the audience really make sure that the audience really make sure that the audience really understands because these are things understands because these are things understands because these are things that people can really take control of that people can really take control of that people can really take control of and do. Oh, and one other critical thing and do. Oh, and one other critical thing and do. Oh, and one other critical thing is um listen to Dr. Aliabati's podcast is um listen to Dr. Aliabati's podcast is um listen to Dr. Aliabati's podcast because uh because uh because uh &gt;&gt; she &gt;&gt; she &gt;&gt; she MD there's a because there's a lot more MD there's a because there's a lot more MD there's a because there's a lot more information there as well. information there as well. information there as well. &gt;&gt; Okay, let's talk about endometriosis. &gt;&gt; Okay, let's talk about endometriosis. &gt;&gt; Okay, let's talk about endometriosis. What is it? What problems does it What is it? What problems does it What is it? What problems does it create? And what can people do about it? create? And what can people do about it? create? And what can people do about it? devastating condition that devastating condition that devastating condition that affects you know they say 10% I think affects you know they say 10% I think affects you know they say 10% I think it's north of 20% because they're not it's north of 20% because they're not it's north of 20% because they're not diagnosed it's a condition where uh diagnosed it's a condition where uh diagnosed it's a condition where uh tissue similar to the lining of the tissue similar to the lining of the tissue similar to the lining of the uterus is outside of the uterus around the is outside of the uterus around the is outside of the uterus around the tubes and ovaries on the bladder on the tubes and ovaries on the bladder on the tubes and ovaries on the bladder on the bowel or inside the ovary right what bowel or inside the ovary right what bowel or inside the ovary right what happens is in a simple terms when every happens is in a simple terms when every happens is in a simple terms when every month our ovaries are trying to get us month our ovaries are trying to get us month our ovaries are trying to get us pregnant, they secrete estrogen and pregnant, they secrete estrogen and pregnant, they secrete estrogen and estrogen stimulates the lining of the estrogen stimulates the lining of the estrogen stimulates the lining of the uterus. When we don't get pregnant, this uterus. When we don't get pregnant, this uterus. When we don't get pregnant, this lining breaks down and comes out as a lining breaks down and comes out as a lining breaks down and comes out as a form of period. 10 to I think 20% of form of period. 10 to I think 20% of form of period. 10 to I think 20% of women have these cells similar to the women have these cells similar to the women have these cells similar to the lining of the uterus outside of the lining of the uterus outside of the lining of the uterus outside of the uterus. So once a month when the uterus. So once a month when the uterus. So once a month when the follicle is secretreting estrogen, these follicle is secretreting estrogen, these follicle is secretreting estrogen, these cells on the outside get stimulated. And cells on the outside get stimulated. And cells on the outside get stimulated. And when we don't get pregnant and the when we don't get pregnant and the when we don't get pregnant and the lining breaks down, these guys uh break lining breaks down, these guys uh break lining breaks down, these guys uh break down and bleed, but they're bleeding down and bleed, but they're bleeding down and bleed, but they're bleeding outside of the uterus. outside of the uterus. outside of the uterus. &gt;&gt; Oh, so it's a form of internal bleeding. &gt;&gt; Oh, so it's a form of internal bleeding. &gt;&gt; Oh, so it's a form of internal bleeding. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; It's e it's ectopic formation of uterine &gt;&gt; It's e it's ectopic formation of uterine &gt;&gt; It's e it's ectopic formation of uterine lining. It's in the wrong place. lining. It's in the wrong place. lining. It's in the wrong place. &gt;&gt; Correct. We don't know why &gt;&gt; Correct. We don't know why &gt;&gt; Correct. We don't know why people have it, but it's extremely people have it, but it's extremely people have it, but it's extremely common and as I was telling you, I think common and as I was telling you, I think common and as I was telling you, I think 50% more than 50% of my PCOS patients 50% more than 50% of my PCOS patients 50% more than 50% of my PCOS patients also have endometriosis. also have endometriosis. also have endometriosis. The problem with endometriosis is in The problem with endometriosis is in The problem with endometriosis is in this country it takes doctors 9 to 11 this country it takes doctors 9 to 11 this country it takes doctors 9 to 11 years to diagnose endometriosis. years to diagnose endometriosis. years to diagnose endometriosis. On average patients see 5 to 10 doctors On average patients see 5 to 10 doctors On average patients see 5 to 10 doctors and that's not an exaggeration. and that's not an exaggeration. and that's not an exaggeration. I've had patients who've seen 50 doctors I've had patients who've seen 50 doctors I've had patients who've seen 50 doctors in this country to get the diagnosis. in this country to get the diagnosis. in this country to get the diagnosis. Majority of them go undiagnosed. Majority of them go undiagnosed. Majority of them go undiagnosed. A lot of them end up in the fertility A lot of them end up in the fertility A lot of them end up in the fertility clinics. And I my heart if you spend a clinics. And I my heart if you spend a clinics. And I my heart if you spend a day with me in my office, you go home day with me in my office, you go home day with me in my office, you go home with a broken heart because these with a broken heart because these with a broken heart because these patients travel from all over the patients travel from all over the patients travel from all over the country to come. They already know, country to come. They already know, country to come. They already know, right? Because a child had GPT, they right? Because a child had GPT, they right? Because a child had GPT, they already know they have endo. They just already know they have endo. They just already know they have endo. They just want a physician to validate them. So want a physician to validate them. So want a physician to validate them. So they will fly to come because they want they will fly to come because they want they will fly to come because they want someone to say, "Yes, you're not crazy. someone to say, "Yes, you're not crazy. someone to say, "Yes, you're not crazy. you have endometriosis you have endometriosis you have endometriosis and yes, there's a treatment and it's and yes, there's a treatment and it's and yes, there's a treatment and it's not in your head. The problem is these not in your head. The problem is these not in your head. The problem is these patients talk about dismissal. patients talk about dismissal. patients talk about dismissal. I can't even tell you the devastating I can't even tell you the devastating I can't even tell you the devastating side effects of this prolonged dismissal side effects of this prolonged dismissal side effects of this prolonged dismissal because no one wants to sit down and because no one wants to sit down and because no one wants to sit down and just listen to them. You do not need a just listen to them. You do not need a just listen to them. You do not need a fancy blood test. There's no blood test fancy blood test. There's no blood test fancy blood test. There's no blood test for endometriosis. You don't need an for endometriosis. You don't need an for endometriosis. You don't need an ultrasound. You don't need anything to ultrasound. You don't need anything to ultrasound. You don't need anything to diagnose endometriosis. You just have to diagnose endometriosis. You just have to diagnose endometriosis. You just have to listen. I met this gentleman in Paris listen. I met this gentleman in Paris listen. I met this gentleman in Paris who told me he has this blood test who told me he has this blood test who told me he has this blood test that's 95% accurate that he's going to that's 95% accurate that he's going to that's 95% accurate that he's going to release it. This is was few years ago. release it. This is was few years ago. release it. This is was few years ago. And I was like, great, that's great And I was like, great, that's great And I was like, great, that's great because we need a blood test. But then because we need a blood test. But then because we need a blood test. But then when I, you know, was um flying home, I when I, you know, was um flying home, I when I, you know, was um flying home, I was thinking to myself, my accuracy is was thinking to myself, my accuracy is was thinking to myself, my accuracy is 99.9% just by listening to the patient. 99.9% just by listening to the patient. 99.9% just by listening to the patient. You don't need any fancy tools to You don't need any fancy tools to You don't need any fancy tools to diagnose. You can self diagnose yourself diagnose. You can self diagnose yourself diagnose. You can self diagnose yourself at home. How do you diagnose? The first at home. How do you diagnose? The first at home. How do you diagnose? The first thing I want to teach your listeners is thing I want to teach your listeners is thing I want to teach your listeners is painful periods are not normal. painful periods are not normal. painful periods are not normal. You know, one time for my 50th birthday, You know, one time for my 50th birthday, You know, one time for my 50th birthday, I wanted to get um uh what do you call I wanted to get um uh what do you call I wanted to get um uh what do you call it? On the freeways, uh it? On the freeways, uh it? On the freeways, uh I wanted to get like 10 billboards for I wanted to get like 10 billboards for I wanted to get like 10 billboards for my birthday and just put painful periods my birthday and just put painful periods my birthday and just put painful periods are not normal # endometriosis. That was are not normal # endometriosis. That was are not normal # endometriosis. That was my birthday gift for myself. I wanted to my birthday gift for myself. I wanted to my birthday gift for myself. I wanted to do that. But then my daughter, my second do that. But then my daughter, my second do that. But then my daughter, my second daughter came up to me. She's like, daughter came up to me. She's like, daughter came up to me. She's like, "Mom, okay. So you tell them painful "Mom, okay. So you tell them painful "Mom, okay. So you tell them painful periods is not normal." They go to their periods is not normal." They go to their periods is not normal." They go to their doctor and the doctor says, "Yes, it's doctor and the doctor says, "Yes, it's doctor and the doctor says, "Yes, it's normal. Don't worry about it." Then normal. Don't worry about it." Then normal. Don't worry about it." Then what? I'm like, "So maybe going down the what? I'm like, "So maybe going down the what? I'm like, "So maybe going down the freeway, the next one will say, if you freeway, the next one will say, if you freeway, the next one will say, if you have endometriosis, check your egg." And have endometriosis, check your egg." And have endometriosis, check your egg." And if you have endometriosis on the third, if you have endometriosis on the third, if you have endometriosis on the third, and I was, you know, I was going to just and I was, you know, I was going to just and I was, you know, I was going to just treat them as they drive down the treat them as they drive down the treat them as they drive down the freeway. That's how bad it is. So freeway. That's how bad it is. So freeway. That's how bad it is. So painful periods are not normal. Could painful periods are not normal. Could painful periods are not normal. Could you distinguish between painful periods you distinguish between painful periods you distinguish between painful periods and premenstrual cramping? and premenstrual cramping? and premenstrual cramping? &gt;&gt; Correct. So, what do I mean by painful &gt;&gt; Correct. So, what do I mean by painful &gt;&gt; Correct. So, what do I mean by painful period? If the pain disrupts your life, period? If the pain disrupts your life, period? If the pain disrupts your life, if you're skipping school, if you're if you're skipping school, if you're if you're skipping school, if you're calling in sick and you can't go to calling in sick and you can't go to calling in sick and you can't go to work, if you're staying in bed, if you work, if you're staying in bed, if you work, if you're staying in bed, if you change your social plans around your change your social plans around your change your social plans around your periods, if you're ending up in the periods, if you're ending up in the periods, if you're ending up in the emergency room or an urgent care because emergency room or an urgent care because emergency room or an urgent care because your periods are painful, that's not your periods are painful, that's not your periods are painful, that's not normal. If sex with deep penetration normal. If sex with deep penetration normal. If sex with deep penetration hurts, that's not normal. If you're hurts, that's not normal. If you're hurts, that's not normal. If you're constantly bloated, even during the constantly bloated, even during the constantly bloated, even during the month when your periods are painful and month when your periods are painful and month when your periods are painful and after your periods you eat and you're after your periods you eat and you're after your periods you eat and you're constantly bloated, that's not normal. constantly bloated, that's not normal. constantly bloated, that's not normal. If when you have a bowel movement, your If when you have a bowel movement, your If when you have a bowel movement, your bowel movement hurts, that's not normal. bowel movement hurts, that's not normal. bowel movement hurts, that's not normal. If you constantly end up in your gyn or If you constantly end up in your gyn or If you constantly end up in your gyn or primary care's office complaining of UTI primary care's office complaining of UTI primary care's office complaining of UTI or bladder symptoms, recurrent bladder or bladder symptoms, recurrent bladder or bladder symptoms, recurrent bladder symptoms, and you're getting antibiotics symptoms, and you're getting antibiotics symptoms, and you're getting antibiotics three, four, five times, six times, 10 three, four, five times, six times, 10 three, four, five times, six times, 10 times a year with a negative culture, times a year with a negative culture, times a year with a negative culture, that's endometriosis until proven that's endometriosis until proven that's endometriosis until proven otherwise. So because these patients otherwise. So because these patients otherwise. So because these patients present differently, present differently, present differently, majority of these symptoms are chronic majority of these symptoms are chronic majority of these symptoms are chronic pain though. It's the top cause of pain though. It's the top cause of pain though. It's the top cause of chronic pelvic pain in women. It's the chronic pelvic pain in women. It's the chronic pelvic pain in women. It's the leading cause of infertility. leading cause of infertility. leading cause of infertility. Right? Over hundred years ago Right? Over hundred years ago Right? Over hundred years ago they knew about endometriosis. they knew about endometriosis. they knew about endometriosis. 100 years later we're still not 100 years later we're still not 100 years later we're still not diagnosing these patients correctly. 100 diagnosing these patients correctly. 100 diagnosing these patients correctly. 100 years later, these women go through years later, these women go through years later, these women go through life. They can't have children. They life. They can't have children. They life. They can't have children. They have chronic pelvic pain. They stay have chronic pelvic pain. They stay have chronic pelvic pain. They stay home. They get anxious. They get home. They get anxious. They get home. They get anxious. They get depressed. They get addicted to opioids depressed. They get addicted to opioids depressed. They get addicted to opioids because when they go to the doctor, they because when they go to the doctor, they because when they go to the doctor, they end up in these pain clinics and someone end up in these pain clinics and someone end up in these pain clinics and someone starts prescribing them uh Norco or starts prescribing them uh Norco or starts prescribing them uh Norco or Percoet. I have 25 year olds who come to Percoet. I have 25 year olds who come to Percoet. I have 25 year olds who come to my office, they're like, I know Percoet my office, they're like, I know Percoet my office, they're like, I know Percoet is not going to help me. I don't want to is not going to help me. I don't want to is not going to help me. I don't want to take this, but this is what the urgent take this, but this is what the urgent take this, but this is what the urgent care gave me. That sounds like care gave me. That sounds like care gave me. That sounds like malpractice to me. malpractice to me. malpractice to me. &gt;&gt; But it is. But it is. And you know what? &gt;&gt; But it is. But it is. And you know what? &gt;&gt; But it is. But it is. And you know what? I think people think I'm crazy, but I think people think I'm crazy, but I think people think I'm crazy, but you know what I wanted to do, which I'm you know what I wanted to do, which I'm you know what I wanted to do, which I'm never going to do, but intent to sue never going to do, but intent to sue never going to do, but intent to sue letter to send to all the doctors who've letter to send to all the doctors who've letter to send to all the doctors who've dismissed my patients because if you get dismissed my patients because if you get dismissed my patients because if you get one of those letters, maybe you maybe one of those letters, maybe you maybe one of those letters, maybe you maybe it'll wake you up. We have to do it'll wake you up. We have to do it'll wake you up. We have to do something. How, you know, can I tell you something. How, you know, can I tell you something. How, you know, can I tell you something, Andrew? If men, something, Andrew? If men, something, Andrew? If men, think about this, had a condition that think about this, had a condition that think about this, had a condition that would cause them to have severe pain would cause them to have severe pain would cause them to have severe pain during sex. It would scar their during sex. It would scar their during sex. It would scar their scrotums. It would lower their sperm scrotums. It would lower their sperm scrotums. It would lower their sperm count. It would be the top cause of count. It would be the top cause of count. It would be the top cause of their fertil infertility that they would their fertil infertility that they would their fertil infertility that they would stay home 2, three days out of the month stay home 2, three days out of the month stay home 2, three days out of the month in bed. They would end up in emergency in bed. They would end up in emergency in bed. They would end up in emergency rooms few times a year, right? rooms few times a year, right? rooms few times a year, right? They would get bloated, anxious, They would get bloated, anxious, They would get bloated, anxious, depressed from the pain. Do you think depressed from the pain. Do you think depressed from the pain. Do you think majority of them would go undiagnosed? majority of them would go undiagnosed? majority of them would go undiagnosed? &gt;&gt; No. The the problem would be dealt with &gt;&gt; No. The the problem would be dealt with &gt;&gt; No. The the problem would be dealt with very differently. And I say that with um very differently. And I say that with um very differently. And I say that with um with certainty because if you look at with certainty because if you look at with certainty because if you look at the just even the speed with which the just even the speed with which the just even the speed with which certain uh drugs have been approved uh certain uh drugs have been approved uh certain uh drugs have been approved uh in the medical community like Viagra for in the medical community like Viagra for in the medical community like Viagra for instance, one of the fastest approvals instance, one of the fastest approvals instance, one of the fastest approvals for new uses. I mean some of those drugs for new uses. I mean some of those drugs for new uses. I mean some of those drugs like were developed for other purposes like were developed for other purposes like were developed for other purposes but male specific health has uh does um but male specific health has uh does um but male specific health has uh does um receive a sort of acceleration receive a sort of acceleration receive a sort of acceleration um and we know that the in the um and we know that the in the um and we know that the in the research community it started about 10 research community it started about 10 research community it started about 10 years back there was a requirement years back there was a requirement years back there was a requirement actually to get grants funded that um actually to get grants funded that um actually to get grants funded that um that people evaluate both sexes. So that people evaluate both sexes. So that people evaluate both sexes. So believe it or not, it was all done on believe it or not, it was all done on believe it or not, it was all done on male mice for large largely male uh male mice for large largely male uh male mice for large largely male uh done. That changed um now with changes done. That changed um now with changes done. That changed um now with changes in the way that you know um science is in the way that you know um science is in the way that you know um science is being done and funded. This is this being done and funded. This is this being done and funded. This is this issue has become prominent again. But issue has become prominent again. But issue has become prominent again. But everything I'm saying here is just in everything I'm saying here is just in everything I'm saying here is just in uh total agreement. Yeah, it would uh total agreement. Yeah, it would uh total agreement. Yeah, it would have been um it would have been have been um it would have been have been um it would have been considered a national emergency. considered a national emergency. considered a national emergency. &gt;&gt; It would have been right. I saw a &gt;&gt; It would have been right. I saw a &gt;&gt; It would have been right. I saw a patient I mean I have thousands of these patient I mean I have thousands of these patient I mean I have thousands of these stories. I have literally I have trauma stories. I have literally I have trauma stories. I have literally I have trauma from it. I have PTSD from it. I saw a from it. I have PTSD from it. I saw a from it. I have PTSD from it. I saw a patient last week in my office, 50 years patient last week in my office, 50 years patient last week in my office, 50 years old. Um, the first thing she said when I old. Um, the first thing she said when I old. Um, the first thing she said when I walked in, she said, "I asked you a walked in, she said, "I asked you a walked in, she said, "I asked you a favor." I said, "What?" She said, "Don't favor." I said, "What?" She said, "Don't favor." I said, "What?" She said, "Don't call me crazy. I'm not crazy." And I call me crazy. I'm not crazy." And I call me crazy. I'm not crazy." And I didn't mark anxiety because I didn't mark anxiety because I didn't mark anxiety because I didn't want you to blame my symptoms for my want you to blame my symptoms for my want you to blame my symptoms for my anxiety. And I looked at her, I'm like, anxiety. And I looked at her, I'm like, anxiety. And I looked at her, I'm like, "This is the last office I would I would "This is the last office I would I would "This is the last office I would I would be the last person standing on this be the last person standing on this be the last person standing on this planet that would do that to you." as planet that would do that to you." as planet that would do that to you." as I started listening to her classic I started listening to her classic I started listening to her classic endometriosis patient. She's 50 years endometriosis patient. She's 50 years endometriosis patient. She's 50 years old, painful periods. She said, "I've old, painful periods. She said, "I've old, painful periods. She said, "I've been to hundred emergency rooms. I know been to hundred emergency rooms. I know been to hundred emergency rooms. I know every emergency room in every country every emergency room in every country every emergency room in every country I've ever visited. I've um she never got I've ever visited. I've um she never got I've ever visited. I've um she never got married cuz she had painful sex. She married cuz she had painful sex. She married cuz she had painful sex. She couldn't have sex. She had severe pain. couldn't have sex. She had severe pain. couldn't have sex. She had severe pain. She would stay at home. She would lose She would stay at home. She would lose She would stay at home. She would lose her jobs, right? Um never had children. her jobs, right? Um never had children. her jobs, right? Um never had children. Just chronic pain. completely anxious, Just chronic pain. completely anxious, Just chronic pain. completely anxious, guarded, right? Shows up to my office. guarded, right? Shows up to my office. guarded, right? Shows up to my office. I'm probably the hundth doctor she's I'm probably the hundth doctor she's I'm probably the hundth doctor she's seen. And all she wanted to hear me say seen. And all she wanted to hear me say seen. And all she wanted to hear me say is, "You have endometriosis." is, "You have endometriosis." is, "You have endometriosis." This is the story of these patients. I This is the story of these patients. I This is the story of these patients. I you can't even make these stories up. you can't even make these stories up. you can't even make these stories up. &gt;&gt; It's unbelievable and yet believable. &gt;&gt; It's unbelievable and yet believable. &gt;&gt; It's unbelievable and yet believable. And I don't want to sound like somebody And I don't want to sound like somebody And I don't want to sound like somebody who's super suspicious of the medical who's super suspicious of the medical who's super suspicious of the medical community or pharma. I think most community or pharma. I think most community or pharma. I think most physicians have good intentions. I think physicians have good intentions. I think physicians have good intentions. I think that like you said they the culture that like you said they the culture that like you said they the culture and climate within the field, the way and climate within the field, the way and climate within the field, the way insurance is handled, all these things I insurance is handled, all these things I insurance is handled, all these things I think railroad people into a kind of a think railroad people into a kind of a think railroad people into a kind of a conveyor belt type of practice. But I conveyor belt type of practice. But I conveyor belt type of practice. But I can also say that because I know some can also say that because I know some can also say that because I know some excellent physicians like yourself and excellent physicians like yourself and excellent physicians like yourself and some people I've known for um a very some people I've known for um a very some people I've known for um a very long time in other fields that really long time in other fields that really long time in other fields that really good physicians read the literature. good physicians read the literature. good physicians read the literature. They integrate what they know from their They integrate what they know from their They integrate what they know from their clinical practice. They talk to other clinical practice. They talk to other clinical practice. They talk to other physicians. They they're part of a physicians. They they're part of a physicians. They they're part of a community that's trying to evolve community that's trying to evolve community that's trying to evolve itself, but that's usually a subculture itself, but that's usually a subculture itself, but that's usually a subculture within the culture. And most people within the culture. And most people within the culture. And most people don't know how to find the right people. don't know how to find the right people. don't know how to find the right people. Although with podcasts, they're starting Although with podcasts, they're starting Although with podcasts, they're starting to. &gt;&gt; The problem with endometriosis is it's &gt;&gt; The problem with endometriosis is it's &gt;&gt; The problem with endometriosis is it's so common and we don't have enough so common and we don't have enough so common and we don't have enough doctors diagnosing it. And like I said, doctors diagnosing it. And like I said, doctors diagnosing it. And like I said, a lot of these women don't even have an a lot of these women don't even have an a lot of these women don't even have an access to an OB/GYN. And when they go access to an OB/GYN. And when they go access to an OB/GYN. And when they go there, 95% of the time they're not even 95% of the time they're not even 95% of the time they're not even diagnosed. And if they're diagnosed, diagnosed. And if they're diagnosed, diagnosed. And if they're diagnosed, they're not even treated correctly. So they're not even treated correctly. So they're not even treated correctly. So what happens these ectopic implants, what happens these ectopic implants, what happens these ectopic implants, right, that are in the pelvis. It's very right, that are in the pelvis. It's very right, that are in the pelvis. It's very strange because I mean, we don't know strange because I mean, we don't know strange because I mean, we don't know why some women have endometriosis and why some women have endometriosis and why some women have endometriosis and some don't. It could be. There's so many some don't. It could be. There's so many some don't. It could be. There's so many hypothesis, but the most common one is hypothesis, but the most common one is hypothesis, but the most common one is probably retrograde menstruation, which probably retrograde menstruation, which probably retrograde menstruation, which a lot of women uh get, which means when a lot of women uh get, which means when a lot of women uh get, which means when we're having our period, some of that we're having our period, some of that we're having our period, some of that blood goes through the tubes and out blood goes through the tubes and out blood goes through the tubes and out into the pelvis and implants there. In a into the pelvis and implants there. In a into the pelvis and implants there. In a regular healthy immune system will get regular healthy immune system will get regular healthy immune system will get rid of those implants. But for whatever rid of those implants. But for whatever rid of those implants. But for whatever reason in this subgroup of patients reason in this subgroup of patients reason in this subgroup of patients their inflammatory their immune their inflammatory their immune their inflammatory their immune system doesn't work well. It actually system doesn't work well. It actually system doesn't work well. It actually helps start an inflammatory process around start an inflammatory process around start an inflammatory process around these implants that make it stick to the these implants that make it stick to the these implants that make it stick to the wall of the pelvis. wall of the pelvis. wall of the pelvis. &gt;&gt; May I ask? So, um I think I have the &gt;&gt; May I ask? So, um I think I have the &gt;&gt; May I ask? So, um I think I have the picture right where the uterine picture right where the uterine picture right where the uterine lining either heads up the fallopian lining either heads up the fallopian lining either heads up the fallopian tubes as opposed to being shed uh of tubes as opposed to being shed uh of tubes as opposed to being shed uh of outward out of the body basically um and outward out of the body basically um and outward out of the body basically um and then it actually gets out into the then it actually gets out into the then it actually gets out into the extracellular space. So would it be extracellular space. So would it be extracellular space. So would it be cleared by the lymphatic system? cleared by the lymphatic system? cleared by the lymphatic system? &gt;&gt; Yes. And by their immune system &gt;&gt; Yes. And by their immune system &gt;&gt; Yes. And by their immune system &gt;&gt; they come they're eat &gt;&gt; they come they're eat &gt;&gt; they come they're eat Yes. But in these patients, Yes. But in these patients, Yes. But in these patients, not only they don't take them away, they not only they don't take them away, they not only they don't take them away, they stimulate them to stick to the walls of stimulate them to stick to the walls of stimulate them to stick to the walls of the pelvis. That's number one. Then the pelvis. That's number one. Then the pelvis. That's number one. Then these little implants need estrogen to these little implants need estrogen to these little implants need estrogen to grow. Right? Remember I told you the grow. Right? Remember I told you the grow. Right? Remember I told you the ovaries are secretting estrogen. So they ovaries are secretting estrogen. So they ovaries are secretting estrogen. So they start making their own estrogen, start making their own estrogen, start making their own estrogen, &gt;&gt; right? So locally they support &gt;&gt; right? So locally they support &gt;&gt; right? So locally they support themselves without needing systemic themselves without needing systemic themselves without needing systemic estrogen. Right? estrogen. Right? estrogen. Right? And then they start, you know, they And then they start, you know, they And then they start, you know, they increase vascularity to the lesion and increase vascularity to the lesion and increase vascularity to the lesion and then they start um growing nerve uh then they start um growing nerve uh then they start um growing nerve uh fibers around them each lesion. fibers around them each lesion. fibers around them each lesion. &gt;&gt; It's almost as if they're like &gt;&gt; It's almost as if they're like &gt;&gt; It's almost as if they're like everything you're saying resembles tumor everything you're saying resembles tumor everything you're saying resembles tumor formation. &gt;&gt; It's just I always say it acts like &gt;&gt; It's just I always say it acts like &gt;&gt; It's just I always say it acts like cancer, but it's not. cancer, but it's not. cancer, but it's not. &gt;&gt; Let's say you have a patient with colon &gt;&gt; Let's say you have a patient with colon &gt;&gt; Let's say you have a patient with colon cancer. You go and you reect the colon cancer. You go and you reect the colon cancer. You go and you reect the colon cancer. You never tell them, "Okay, sir, cancer. You never tell them, "Okay, sir, cancer. You never tell them, "Okay, sir, I'll see you in 6 months. he'll be back I'll see you in 6 months. he'll be back I'll see you in 6 months. he'll be back with colon cancer everywhere. You have with colon cancer everywhere. You have with colon cancer everywhere. You have to give him chemo. Endometriosis is not to give him chemo. Endometriosis is not to give him chemo. Endometriosis is not cancer, but you have to treat it the cancer, but you have to treat it the cancer, but you have to treat it the same way. What I mean by that is once same way. What I mean by that is once same way. What I mean by that is once you go in laparoscopically and cut these you go in laparoscopically and cut these you go in laparoscopically and cut these lesions out, you have to give it lesions out, you have to give it lesions out, you have to give it hormonal suppression. Otherwise, it hormonal suppression. Otherwise, it hormonal suppression. Otherwise, it comes back. comes back. comes back. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; So, we can get to that. But these &gt;&gt; So, we can get to that. But these &gt;&gt; So, we can get to that. But these implants are self-limited, right? They implants are self-limited, right? They implants are self-limited, right? They basically have vessels that's feeding basically have vessels that's feeding basically have vessels that's feeding them. They make their own estrogen. they them. They make their own estrogen. they them. They make their own estrogen. they start an inflammatory process in that start an inflammatory process in that start an inflammatory process in that area and they start growing right every area and they start growing right every area and they start growing right every month they get more and more uh they month they get more and more uh they month they get more and more uh they progress more as we age that's why these progress more as we age that's why these progress more as we age that's why these patients average age of diagnosis for patients average age of diagnosis for patients average age of diagnosis for endometriosis is 32 and it takes doctors endometriosis is 32 and it takes doctors endometriosis is 32 and it takes doctors 9 to 11 years to diagnose these patients 9 to 11 years to diagnose these patients 9 to 11 years to diagnose these patients because it can start with oh my periods because it can start with oh my periods because it can start with oh my periods are painful then they get more painful are painful then they get more painful are painful then they get more painful then you start staying home then you then you start staying home then you then you start staying home then you have to call your mom to pick you up have to call your mom to pick you up have to call your mom to pick you up from school then sex starts hurting from school then sex starts hurting from school then sex starts hurting Then you realize a week before it starts Then you realize a week before it starts Then you realize a week before it starts hurting. Then you realize now a week hurting. Then you realize now a week hurting. Then you realize now a week after the pain is still there and after the pain is still there and after the pain is still there and eventually it turns into chronic pelvic eventually it turns into chronic pelvic eventually it turns into chronic pelvic pain. But these patients jump from pain. But these patients jump from pain. But these patients jump from doctor to doctor to doctor until a they doctor to doctor to doctor until a they doctor to doctor to doctor until a they have chronic pelvic pain and someone have chronic pelvic pain and someone have chronic pelvic pain and someone says wait a minute you have says wait a minute you have says wait a minute you have endometriosis or b they can't get endometriosis or b they can't get endometriosis or b they can't get pregnant and they end up where in the pregnant and they end up where in the pregnant and they end up where in the fertility clinics for something that fertility clinics for something that fertility clinics for something that could have been suppressed years prior could have been suppressed years prior could have been suppressed years prior to that. to that. to that. &gt;&gt; Let's say they end up in an IVF clinic. &gt;&gt; Let's say they end up in an IVF clinic. &gt;&gt; Let's say they end up in an IVF clinic. they're able to create healthy embryos they're able to create healthy embryos they're able to create healthy embryos they implant. How does endometriosis they implant. How does endometriosis they implant. How does endometriosis impact the uh probability of carrying impact the uh probability of carrying impact the uh probability of carrying that embryo to successful? that embryo to successful? that embryo to successful? &gt;&gt; So it depends on the age on the quality &gt;&gt; So it depends on the age on the quality &gt;&gt; So it depends on the age on the quality of the eggs. One thing endometriosis of the eggs. One thing endometriosis of the eggs. One thing endometriosis does so endometriosis is an inflammatory does so endometriosis is an inflammatory does so endometriosis is an inflammatory process. It causes inflammation in the process. It causes inflammation in the process. It causes inflammation in the pelvis. That's why as it progresses it pelvis. That's why as it progresses it pelvis. That's why as it progresses it causes scarring in the pelvis. It can causes scarring in the pelvis. It can causes scarring in the pelvis. It can cause scarring of the tubes. That cause scarring of the tubes. That cause scarring of the tubes. That inflammation can affect your egg inflammation can affect your egg inflammation can affect your egg quality. can cause bowel adhesions, quality. can cause bowel adhesions, quality. can cause bowel adhesions, bladder adhesions. If it's inside the bladder adhesions. If it's inside the bladder adhesions. If it's inside the ovary, we call it endometrioma or a ovary, we call it endometrioma or a ovary, we call it endometrioma or a chocolate cyst that can destroy a chocolate cyst that can destroy a chocolate cyst that can destroy a woman's egg count and quality. That's woman's egg count and quality. That's woman's egg count and quality. That's why sometimes you get a 30-year-old why sometimes you get a 30-year-old why sometimes you get a 30-year-old endometriosis patient who has zero eggs endometriosis patient who has zero eggs endometriosis patient who has zero eggs or you can have a 14year-old who has the or you can have a 14year-old who has the or you can have a 14year-old who has the egg count of a 40year-old. So, it is egg count of a 40year-old. So, it is egg count of a 40year-old. So, it is absolutely crucial for absolutely crucial for absolutely crucial for endometriosis patients to know their egg endometriosis patients to know their egg endometriosis patients to know their egg count. If they have no pain, get a count. If they have no pain, get a count. If they have no pain, get a baseline at age 18. If you have painful baseline at age 18. If you have painful baseline at age 18. If you have painful periods and you're 14, get an egg count. periods and you're 14, get an egg count. periods and you're 14, get an egg count. Rule out endometriosis. Rule out endometriosis. Rule out endometriosis. You can have an eight-year-old with You can have an eight-year-old with You can have an eight-year-old with endometriosis. Now, it's very rare, endometriosis. Now, it's very rare, endometriosis. Now, it's very rare, right? But as soon as women start right? But as soon as women start right? But as soon as women start menstruating, they can start complaining menstruating, they can start complaining menstruating, they can start complaining of these pains. Now, it's common for of these pains. Now, it's common for of these pains. Now, it's common for patients to have some cramps. You they patients to have some cramps. You they patients to have some cramps. You they might take a couple of Advils and it's might take a couple of Advils and it's might take a couple of Advils and it's fine. But if pain becomes recurrent and fine. But if pain becomes recurrent and fine. But if pain becomes recurrent and it starts progressing and it's it starts progressing and it's it starts progressing and it's disrupting the their life, then it's disrupting the their life, then it's disrupting the their life, then it's absolutely not normal. It's absolutely not normal. It's absolutely not normal. It's endometriosis until proven otherwise. endometriosis until proven otherwise. endometriosis until proven otherwise. Which takes me to my other discussion. Which takes me to my other discussion. Which takes me to my other discussion. We're discussing doctors don't do We're discussing doctors don't do We're discussing doctors don't do ultrasound. Not that you can diagnose ultrasound. Not that you can diagnose ultrasound. Not that you can diagnose endometriosis on ultrasound, but if you endometriosis on ultrasound, but if you endometriosis on ultrasound, but if you have an endometrioma or a chocolate have an endometrioma or a chocolate have an endometrioma or a chocolate cyst, which takes you to approximately a cyst, which takes you to approximately a cyst, which takes you to approximately a stage three out of four endometriosis, stage three out of four endometriosis, stage three out of four endometriosis, you can see it in two seconds on you can see it in two seconds on you can see it in two seconds on ultrasound. So if you do an ultrasound ultrasound. So if you do an ultrasound ultrasound. So if you do an ultrasound and you see an endometrioma, I don't and you see an endometrioma, I don't and you see an endometrioma, I don't care how small it is, don't ignore it. care how small it is, don't ignore it. care how small it is, don't ignore it. It's just like me saying, "I see smoke It's just like me saying, "I see smoke It's just like me saying, "I see smoke here, but I'm going to ignore it because here, but I'm going to ignore it because here, but I'm going to ignore it because I don't see the fire." Well, if you see I don't see the fire." Well, if you see I don't see the fire." Well, if you see smoke, you know there's fire. Go check smoke, you know there's fire. Go check smoke, you know there's fire. Go check it out. And that's exactly what happens it out. And that's exactly what happens it out. And that's exactly what happens with endo patients because they go with endo patients because they go with endo patients because they go dismissed. They show up at age 30. They dismissed. They show up at age 30. They dismissed. They show up at age 30. They have no eggs. Their tubes are scarred. have no eggs. Their tubes are scarred. have no eggs. Their tubes are scarred. And to answer your question, once you a And to answer your question, once you a And to answer your question, once you a lot of these patients because of that lot of these patients because of that lot of these patients because of that inflammation, the environment is inflammation, the environment is inflammation, the environment is hostile. So the reason it's one of the hostile. So the reason it's one of the hostile. So the reason it's one of the top causes of infertility, yes, your top causes of infertility, yes, your top causes of infertility, yes, your tubes can get blocked. Yes, your egg tubes can get blocked. Yes, your egg tubes can get blocked. Yes, your egg count and quality can drop. that the count and quality can drop. that the count and quality can drop. that the environment is so hostile for the sperm, environment is so hostile for the sperm, environment is so hostile for the sperm, for that little egg that's getting for that little egg that's getting for that little egg that's getting released that needs to be picked up by released that needs to be picked up by released that needs to be picked up by the tube that can get attacked by these the tube that can get attacked by these the tube that can get attacked by these inflammatory cells. The embryo sometimes inflammatory cells. The embryo sometimes inflammatory cells. The embryo sometimes doesn't form. If it forms, it might get doesn't form. If it forms, it might get doesn't form. If it forms, it might get stuck in the tube and you might end up stuck in the tube and you might end up stuck in the tube and you might end up with an ectopic pregnancy or if it goes with an ectopic pregnancy or if it goes with an ectopic pregnancy or if it goes into the uterus, all that inflammation into the uterus, all that inflammation into the uterus, all that inflammation increases the risk of miscarriage. And increases the risk of miscarriage. And increases the risk of miscarriage. And on top of that on top of that on top of that a large percentage of endometriosis a large percentage of endometriosis a large percentage of endometriosis patients have adenomiiosis which is the patients have adenomiiosis which is the patients have adenomiiosis which is the sister condition to endometriosis which sister condition to endometriosis which sister condition to endometriosis which is very common. You don't not all is very common. You don't not all is very common. You don't not all adnomiiosis patients have endometriosis adnomiiosis patients have endometriosis adnomiiosis patients have endometriosis but a lot of endometriosis patients have but a lot of endometriosis patients have but a lot of endometriosis patients have adinomiiosis and adnomiiosis is when these ectopic and adnomiiosis is when these ectopic and adnomiiosis is when these ectopic tissue the uh lining inside the uterus tissue the uh lining inside the uterus tissue the uh lining inside the uterus are in the wall of the uterus. So they are in the wall of the uterus. So they are in the wall of the uterus. So they do get stimulated do get stimulated do get stimulated and they can cause heavy periods. They and they can cause heavy periods. They and they can cause heavy periods. They can cause recurrent miscarriages. They can cause recurrent miscarriages. They can cause recurrent miscarriages. They can cause um painful periods and it also can cause um painful periods and it also can cause um painful periods and it also gets dismissed on ultrasound. A lot of gets dismissed on ultrasound. A lot of gets dismissed on ultrasound. A lot of doctors depend on MRIs to diagnose doctors depend on MRIs to diagnose doctors depend on MRIs to diagnose adnomiiosis where if you've done enough adnomiiosis where if you've done enough adnomiiosis where if you've done enough ultrasounds, you can start seeing it on ultrasounds, you can start seeing it on ultrasounds, you can start seeing it on a pelvic ultrasound. But the problem is a pelvic ultrasound. But the problem is a pelvic ultrasound. But the problem is a lot of radiologists don't know how to a lot of radiologists don't know how to a lot of radiologists don't know how to diagnose it. diagnose it. diagnose it. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. to get early access to function. to get early access to function. &gt;&gt; Can I ask a naive question about &gt;&gt; Can I ask a naive question about &gt;&gt; Can I ask a naive question about ultrasound and diagnosis and just ultrasound and diagnosis and just ultrasound and diagnosis and just women's health in general? And forgive women's health in general? And forgive women's health in general? And forgive me for not knowing the answer to this, me for not knowing the answer to this, me for not knowing the answer to this, but I don't. So I'm going to you know um but I don't. So I'm going to you know um but I don't. So I'm going to you know um swallow my pride and just ask what is swallow my pride and just ask what is swallow my pride and just ask what is the current state of the current state of the current state of medical care in this country for women medical care in this country for women medical care in this country for women such that let's say a woman is in her such that let's say a woman is in her such that let's say a woman is in her doesn't matter 20s 30s 40s 50s whatever doesn't matter 20s 30s 40s 50s whatever doesn't matter 20s 30s 40s 50s whatever and wants to go get a pelvic exam with and wants to go get a pelvic exam with and wants to go get a pelvic exam with ultrasound a blood draw to look at AMH ultrasound a blood draw to look at AMH ultrasound a blood draw to look at AMH and let's say have a short discussion and let's say have a short discussion and let's say have a short discussion with a let's say marginally with a let's say marginally with a let's say marginally qualified physician about um hormone qualified physician about um hormone qualified physician about um hormone Is that the sort of thing that is just Is that the sort of thing that is just Is that the sort of thing that is just impossible for people to access who impossible for people to access who impossible for people to access who don't have insurance? Um, if they do don't have insurance? Um, if they do don't have insurance? Um, if they do have insurance, does insurance cover it? have insurance, does insurance cover it? have insurance, does insurance cover it? Do they need to do they need to have a Do they need to do they need to have a Do they need to do they need to have a major problem to get a referral for major problem to get a referral for major problem to get a referral for that? I have no concept of this because that? I have no concept of this because that? I have no concept of this because as a as a man, we don't think about as a as a man, we don't think about as a as a man, we don't think about this, right? this, right? this, right? &gt;&gt; Insurance will cover it. The problem is, &gt;&gt; Insurance will cover it. The problem is, &gt;&gt; Insurance will cover it. The problem is, so there's a lot of issues. One, so there's a lot of issues. One, so there's a lot of issues. One, patients don't know that there's patients don't know that there's patients don't know that there's something wrong. They think irregular something wrong. They think irregular something wrong. They think irregular periods are normal. They think painful periods are normal. They think painful periods are normal. They think painful periods are normal. They think it's just periods are normal. They think it's just periods are normal. They think it's just their nerves because people around them, their nerves because people around them, their nerves because people around them, including their parents, their aunt, including their parents, their aunt, including their parents, their aunt, sister, everyone dismisses them. Oh, it sister, everyone dismisses them. Oh, it sister, everyone dismisses them. Oh, it can't be that bad. Why are you being so can't be that bad. Why are you being so can't be that bad. Why are you being so weak? Take some Advil and get up. No, weak? Take some Advil and get up. No, weak? Take some Advil and get up. No, the this is really debilitating. the this is really debilitating. the this is really debilitating. &gt;&gt; This is not premenstrual cramping. This &gt;&gt; This is not premenstrual cramping. This &gt;&gt; This is not premenstrual cramping. This is pain. This is abnormal levels of is pain. This is abnormal levels of is pain. This is abnormal levels of pain. &gt;&gt; And they don't have anything to check it &gt;&gt; And they don't have anything to check it &gt;&gt; And they don't have anything to check it against because it's in some cases all against because it's in some cases all against because it's in some cases all they ever knew. they ever knew. they ever knew. &gt;&gt; And it sounds as if people are very &gt;&gt; And it sounds as if people are very &gt;&gt; And it sounds as if people are very dismissive of women's pain is what I'm dismissive of women's pain is what I'm dismissive of women's pain is what I'm hearing. &gt;&gt; Period. &gt;&gt; Period. &gt;&gt; Period. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's minimized, dismissed, or &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's minimized, dismissed, or &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's minimized, dismissed, or normalized. And there's no other way normalized. And there's no other way normalized. And there's no other way around that. Those are the three options around that. Those are the three options around that. Those are the three options right now in the health care system right now in the health care system right now in the health care system majority of the time. So then this majority of the time. So then this majority of the time. So then this patient goes to the doctor not knowing patient goes to the doctor not knowing patient goes to the doctor not knowing what's going on. The doctor doesn't have what's going on. The doctor doesn't have what's going on. The doctor doesn't have time. You have 10 minutes with your time. You have 10 minutes with your time. You have 10 minutes with your doctor. He comes in, he's like, "Maybe doctor. He comes in, he's like, "Maybe doctor. He comes in, he's like, "Maybe she has endometriosis. Maybe he or she has endometriosis. Maybe he or she has endometriosis. Maybe he or she is even thinking about this." But she is even thinking about this." But she is even thinking about this." But what do they do? They give birth what do they do? They give birth what do they do? They give birth control, right? And the patient doesn't control, right? And the patient doesn't control, right? And the patient doesn't know why. She goes home and someone know why. She goes home and someone know why. She goes home and someone tells her, "If you take birth control, tells her, "If you take birth control, tells her, "If you take birth control, you're going to be infertile." So she you're going to be infertile." So she you're going to be infertile." So she doesn't take it because her grandmother doesn't take it because her grandmother doesn't take it because her grandmother tells her that and then she continues to tells her that and then she continues to tells her that and then she continues to have pain and starts bouncing from have pain and starts bouncing from have pain and starts bouncing from doctor to doctor. A lot of these do doctor to doctor. A lot of these do doctor to doctor. A lot of these do patients, believe it or not, end up in patients, believe it or not, end up in patients, believe it or not, end up in GI uh offices getting colonoscopies at a GI uh offices getting colonoscopies at a GI uh offices getting colonoscopies at a young age. Like if you have to do a young age. Like if you have to do a young age. Like if you have to do a colonoscopy for pain in a 22year-old, colonoscopy for pain in a 22year-old, colonoscopy for pain in a 22year-old, make sure you're not missing make sure you're not missing make sure you're not missing endometriosis. So it's like you have to endometriosis. So it's like you have to endometriosis. So it's like you have to teach all these doctors. So doctors teach all these doctors. So doctors teach all these doctors. So doctors don't have time. They don't diagnose don't have time. They don't diagnose don't have time. They don't diagnose these patients and they start bouncing these patients and they start bouncing these patients and they start bouncing from doctor to doctor. How can we fix from doctor to doctor. How can we fix from doctor to doctor. How can we fix this? And insurance will pay for these this? And insurance will pay for these this? And insurance will pay for these visits. But you need to be empowered. visits. But you need to be empowered. visits. But you need to be empowered. You need to be educated and you need to You need to be educated and you need to You need to be educated and you need to be your own self health advocate when it be your own self health advocate when it be your own self health advocate when it comes to endometriosis on top of every comes to endometriosis on top of every comes to endometriosis on top of every other diagnosis. Why? If I'm telling you other diagnosis. Why? If I'm telling you other diagnosis. Why? If I'm telling you all the symptoms of endometriosis and all the symptoms of endometriosis and all the symptoms of endometriosis and you have them, you already know you have you have them, you already know you have you have them, you already know you have endometriosis. Go on chat GPT. it will endometriosis. Go on chat GPT. it will endometriosis. Go on chat GPT. it will confirm it for you. confirm it for you. confirm it for you. &gt;&gt; So, painful periods, UTI, &gt;&gt; So, painful periods, UTI, &gt;&gt; So, painful periods, UTI, &gt;&gt; painful sex with deep penetration, &gt;&gt; painful sex with deep penetration, &gt;&gt; painful sex with deep penetration, &gt;&gt; GI pain, &gt;&gt; GI pain, &gt;&gt; GI pain, &gt;&gt; GI pain, bloating, chronic pelvic pain, &gt;&gt; GI pain, bloating, chronic pelvic pain, &gt;&gt; GI pain, bloating, chronic pelvic pain, leg pain, just pain, pain that con it's leg pain, just pain, pain that con it's leg pain, just pain, pain that con it's comes with your period and eventually comes with your period and eventually comes with your period and eventually takes over your life. Now, educate takes over your life. Now, educate takes over your life. Now, educate yourself. Write down the questions. I'm yourself. Write down the questions. I'm yourself. Write down the questions. I'm telling you, a you need if you're young telling you, a you need if you're young telling you, a you need if you're young and you want a family, you need your egg and you want a family, you need your egg and you want a family, you need your egg count checked. So, write AMH on your count checked. So, write AMH on your count checked. So, write AMH on your to-do list before you go to your to-do list before you go to your to-do list before you go to your doctor's office. Two, ask for a pelvic doctor's office. Two, ask for a pelvic doctor's office. Two, ask for a pelvic ultrasound. You know, I have a physical ultrasound. You know, I have a physical ultrasound. You know, I have a physical therapist. He said, "Every time my therapist. He said, "Every time my therapist. He said, "Every time my daughter goes to a doctor, I tell her to daughter goes to a doctor, I tell her to daughter goes to a doctor, I tell her to exaggerate her symptoms by 50%." So, if exaggerate her symptoms by 50%." So, if exaggerate her symptoms by 50%." So, if she has a five out of 10 pain, I say, she has a five out of 10 pain, I say, she has a five out of 10 pain, I say, "Go tell your doctor it's 10 out of 10 "Go tell your doctor it's 10 out of 10 "Go tell your doctor it's 10 out of 10 so they minimize it to five out of 10." so they minimize it to five out of 10." so they minimize it to five out of 10." So, you can get your pelvic ultrasound. So, you can get your pelvic ultrasound. So, you can get your pelvic ultrasound. But don't do that. Just ask your doctor. But don't do that. Just ask your doctor. But don't do that. Just ask your doctor. say, "I have pain and you need to give say, "I have pain and you need to give say, "I have pain and you need to give me a pelvic ultrasound order and if you me a pelvic ultrasound order and if you me a pelvic ultrasound order and if you don't, I'm going to go do it somewhere don't, I'm going to go do it somewhere don't, I'm going to go do it somewhere else or I'm going to go to another else or I'm going to go to another else or I'm going to go to another doctor." Most doctors want to help. doctor." Most doctors want to help. doctor." Most doctors want to help. They're not there to hurt you. They're not there to hurt you. They're not there to hurt you. They're there to help you. Sometimes if they there to help you. Sometimes if they there to help you. Sometimes if they don't think of it, maybe reminding don't think of it, maybe reminding don't think of it, maybe reminding them that this could be an endometriosis them that this could be an endometriosis them that this could be an endometriosis is the first step. They're your is the first step. They're your is the first step. They're your advocate. They want to help you. So, advocate. They want to help you. So, advocate. They want to help you. So, guide them in the right direction. Ask guide them in the right direction. Ask guide them in the right direction. Ask for that pelvic ultrasound. Ask for that for that pelvic ultrasound. Ask for that for that pelvic ultrasound. Ask for that egg count. And when it comes to egg count. And when it comes to egg count. And when it comes to endometriosis, a normal ultrasound does endometriosis, a normal ultrasound does endometriosis, a normal ultrasound does not mean you don't have endometriosis. A not mean you don't have endometriosis. A not mean you don't have endometriosis. A normal pelvic MRI does not mean you normal pelvic MRI does not mean you normal pelvic MRI does not mean you don't have endometriosis. Endometriosis don't have endometriosis. Endometriosis don't have endometriosis. Endometriosis can be minimal, mild, moderate, or can be minimal, mild, moderate, or can be minimal, mild, moderate, or severe. And we stage it 1 2 3 4. The severe. And we stage it 1 2 3 4. The severe. And we stage it 1 2 3 4. The higher the stage, the more uh higher the stage, the more uh higher the stage, the more uh involvement, the more aggressive the involvement, the more aggressive the involvement, the more aggressive the endometriosis is. Endometriosis can be endometriosis is. Endometriosis can be endometriosis is. Endometriosis can be superficial. These implants can be superficial. These implants can be superficial. These implants can be superficial in the pelvis. They could be superficial in the pelvis. They could be superficial in the pelvis. They could be in the ovary called endometrioma or they in the ovary called endometrioma or they in the ovary called endometrioma or they can be deep infiltrating where they go can be deep infiltrating where they go can be deep infiltrating where they go deep and as I told you they make their deep and as I told you they make their deep and as I told you they make their own nerve fibers. And what happens own nerve fibers. And what happens own nerve fibers. And what happens eventually these nerve fibers start eventually these nerve fibers start eventually these nerve fibers start shooting and our central nervous system shooting and our central nervous system shooting and our central nervous system starts going in overdrive and starts going in overdrive and starts going in overdrive and exaggerating those pains. That's why the exaggerating those pains. That's why the exaggerating those pains. That's why the pain is so real and so debilitating pain is so real and so debilitating pain is so real and so debilitating because their body they get because their body they get because their body they get sensitization to this new nerve pains sensitization to this new nerve pains sensitization to this new nerve pains that are forming in their pelvis. The that are forming in their pelvis. The that are forming in their pelvis. The gold standard way of treating this is a gold standard way of treating this is a gold standard way of treating this is a laparoscopic resection of endometriosis. laparoscopic resection of endometriosis. laparoscopic resection of endometriosis. &gt;&gt; Surgery. &gt;&gt; Surgery. &gt;&gt; Surgery. &gt;&gt; Surgery. &gt;&gt; Surgery. &gt;&gt; Surgery. &gt;&gt; There's no like VEGF inhibitor or &gt;&gt; There's no like VEGF inhibitor or &gt;&gt; There's no like VEGF inhibitor or something of that sort. something of that sort. something of that sort. &gt;&gt; So let's talk about that. So you don't &gt;&gt; So let's talk about that. So you don't &gt;&gt; So let's talk about that. So you don't have to jump to surgery, but surgery is have to jump to surgery, but surgery is have to jump to surgery, but surgery is the gold standard way of diagnosing a to the gold standard way of diagnosing a to the gold standard way of diagnosing a to be 100% if you're not confident and b be 100% if you're not confident and b be 100% if you're not confident and b cutting these excising these lesions. We cutting these excising these lesions. We cutting these excising these lesions. We used to burn them, but as of like for used to burn them, but as of like for used to burn them, but as of like for the past 15 years, we've learned that the past 15 years, we've learned that the past 15 years, we've learned that you really need to cut them. You don't you really need to cut them. You don't you really need to cut them. You don't want to burn them, right? Because want to burn them, right? Because want to burn them, right? Because burning them is just a band-aid and the burning them is just a band-aid and the burning them is just a band-aid and the pain comes back. pain comes back. pain comes back. &gt;&gt; Peripheral nerves grow back very readily &gt;&gt; Peripheral nerves grow back very readily &gt;&gt; Peripheral nerves grow back very readily once they're there. I mean, this is once they're there. I mean, this is once they're there. I mean, this is reassuring to anyone that has a reassuring to anyone that has a reassuring to anyone that has a peripheral nerve injury, it'll grow peripheral nerve injury, it'll grow peripheral nerve injury, it'll grow back, unlike a brain injury where it's back, unlike a brain injury where it's back, unlike a brain injury where it's variable outcome. But when peripheral variable outcome. But when peripheral variable outcome. But when peripheral nerves want to grow, they grow. nerves want to grow, they grow. nerves want to grow, they grow. &gt;&gt; They grow. &gt;&gt; They grow. &gt;&gt; They grow. &gt;&gt; Yeah. They're very stubborn. &gt;&gt; Yeah. They're very stubborn. &gt;&gt; Yeah. They're very stubborn. &gt;&gt; They're stubborn and they're painful. &gt;&gt; They're stubborn and they're painful. &gt;&gt; They're stubborn and they're painful. Here's the problem, Andrew. Surgery is Here's the problem, Andrew. Surgery is Here's the problem, Andrew. Surgery is not firstline therapy, but it's gold not firstline therapy, but it's gold not firstline therapy, but it's gold standard. If you have a patient in standard. If you have a patient in standard. If you have a patient in severe pain who's not responding to severe pain who's not responding to severe pain who's not responding to hormonal suppression, which we we're hormonal suppression, which we we're hormonal suppression, which we we're going to talk about. But here's the going to talk about. But here's the going to talk about. But here's the problem with surgery. Do you know that problem with surgery. Do you know that problem with surgery. Do you know that out of 100 gynecologists, out of 100 gynecologists, out of 100 gynecologists, one is trained to do laparoscopic one is trained to do laparoscopic one is trained to do laparoscopic endometriosis surgery and then it gets endometriosis surgery and then it gets endometriosis surgery and then it gets better. If you give 100 laparoscopes better. If you give 100 laparoscopes better. If you give 100 laparoscopes to 100 gynecologists, half of them will wake the patient up half of them will wake the patient up half of them will wake the patient up and say you didn't have it. and say you didn't have it. and say you didn't have it. Endometriosis, the typical endometriosis implants are the typical endometriosis implants are the typical endometriosis implants are glandular endometriosis. So when you glandular endometriosis. So when you glandular endometriosis. So when you look at it, they're blood filled, right? look at it, they're blood filled, right? look at it, they're blood filled, right? There are these black spots, purple There are these black spots, purple There are these black spots, purple spots all over the pelvis. But sometimes spots all over the pelvis. But sometimes spots all over the pelvis. But sometimes you really need to look for them. You you really need to look for them. You you really need to look for them. You have to lift the o lift the ovary, look have to lift the o lift the ovary, look have to lift the o lift the ovary, look underneath, look at the bladder. Like underneath, look at the bladder. Like underneath, look at the bladder. Like with the laparoscope, you have to go with the laparoscope, you have to go with the laparoscope, you have to go really close to find them. The problem really close to find them. The problem really close to find them. The problem is a small subgroup of patients have is a small subgroup of patients have is a small subgroup of patients have stromal endometriosis who's actually, stromal endometriosis who's actually, stromal endometriosis who's actually, you know, this stromal endometriosis is you know, this stromal endometriosis is you know, this stromal endometriosis is not as rare as what you read. It's not as rare as what you read. It's not as rare as what you read. It's actually very common in almost every end actually very common in almost every end actually very common in almost every end endometriosis surgery that I do. My path endometriosis surgery that I do. My path endometriosis surgery that I do. My path report shows at some stroal report shows at some stroal report shows at some stroal endometriosis implants. So stromal endometriosis implants. So stromal endometriosis implants. So stromal endometriosis, imagine those cells in endometriosis, imagine those cells in endometriosis, imagine those cells in the uterus, they have the gland, but the uterus, they have the gland, but the uterus, they have the gland, but they also have the stroma, the they also have the stroma, the they also have the stroma, the connective tissue around it. Stromal connective tissue around it. Stromal connective tissue around it. Stromal endometriosis doesn't have the glandular endometriosis doesn't have the glandular endometriosis doesn't have the glandular uh lesions with it. It's just these uh lesions with it. It's just these uh lesions with it. It's just these fibers that have nerve endings and the fibers that have nerve endings and the fibers that have nerve endings and the nerves get squeezed and actually the nerves get squeezed and actually the nerves get squeezed and actually patients with stromal endometriosis tend patients with stromal endometriosis tend patients with stromal endometriosis tend to have more bloating, more inflammation to have more bloating, more inflammation to have more bloating, more inflammation and more deeper pain. But when you put a and more deeper pain. But when you put a and more deeper pain. But when you put a laposcope, you only see these thin laposcope, you only see these thin laposcope, you only see these thin lines. &gt;&gt; Sometimes it takes me 15 minutes to find &gt;&gt; Sometimes it takes me 15 minutes to find &gt;&gt; Sometimes it takes me 15 minutes to find it. So if I put a camera and I look for it. So if I put a camera and I look for it. So if I put a camera and I look for these purple spots, I'm like, "No, you these purple spots, I'm like, "No, you these purple spots, I'm like, "No, you don't have it." So imagine here you have don't have it." So imagine here you have don't have it." So imagine here you have a patient who's had 15 years of pain, a patient who's had 15 years of pain, a patient who's had 15 years of pain, ends up in the hospital, goes home, she ends up in the hospital, goes home, she ends up in the hospital, goes home, she lost her job, she's on narcotics, she's lost her job, she's on narcotics, she's lost her job, she's on narcotics, she's halfway addicted to these medications. halfway addicted to these medications. halfway addicted to these medications. She's depressed. She's anxious. And She's depressed. She's anxious. And She's depressed. She's anxious. And finally the doctor says, "I think you finally the doctor says, "I think you finally the doctor says, "I think you have endometriosis. Let's take you to have endometriosis. Let's take you to have endometriosis. Let's take you to surgery." And then they wake her up and surgery." And then they wake her up and surgery." And then they wake her up and say, "You didn't have it." say, "You didn't have it." say, "You didn't have it." &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; But that's what I see. &gt;&gt; But that's what I see. &gt;&gt; But that's what I see. &gt;&gt; And they missed it. In many cases, &gt;&gt; And they missed it. In many cases, &gt;&gt; And they missed it. In many cases, &gt;&gt; they missed it. But you want to vomit. &gt;&gt; they missed it. But you want to vomit. &gt;&gt; they missed it. But you want to vomit. You literally I want to pass out You literally I want to pass out You literally I want to pass out sometimes when these patients tell me sometimes when these patients tell me sometimes when these patients tell me these stories. I can write a thousand these stories. I can write a thousand these stories. I can write a thousand stories like this for you. stories like this for you. stories like this for you. &gt;&gt; Sounds like the field of which you're &gt;&gt; Sounds like the field of which you're &gt;&gt; Sounds like the field of which you're trying to fix is badly flawed in some trying to fix is badly flawed in some trying to fix is badly flawed in some sort of like central structural way. sort of like central structural way. sort of like central structural way. &gt;&gt; It is. &gt;&gt; It is. &gt;&gt; It is. &gt;&gt; It just sort of feels like and we &gt;&gt; It just sort of feels like and we &gt;&gt; It just sort of feels like and we could explore the reasons for that. Um could explore the reasons for that. Um could explore the reasons for that. Um but that comes clear in what you're but that comes clear in what you're but that comes clear in what you're saying. Do we know what causes saying. Do we know what causes saying. Do we know what causes endometriosis? The first one is this endometriosis? The first one is this endometriosis? The first one is this retrograde uh flow of the menstrual uh retrograde uh flow of the menstrual uh retrograde uh flow of the menstrual uh flow. Second is an immune system issue, flow. Second is an immune system issue, flow. Second is an immune system issue, right? Which I told you for whatever right? Which I told you for whatever right? Which I told you for whatever reason the immune system cannot their reason the immune system cannot their reason the immune system cannot their immune system cannot clear out this um immune system cannot clear out this um immune system cannot clear out this um these implants which goes to the PCOS, these implants which goes to the PCOS, these implants which goes to the PCOS, right? Remember I told you PCOS patients right? Remember I told you PCOS patients right? Remember I told you PCOS patients have so much cytoines released from have so much cytoines released from have so much cytoines released from their viseral. It's my hypothesis their viseral. It's my hypothesis their viseral. It's my hypothesis that that's why I see so much that that's why I see so much that that's why I see so much endometriosis with PCOS that this endometriosis with PCOS that this endometriosis with PCOS that this chronic inflammation that is caused in chronic inflammation that is caused in chronic inflammation that is caused in PCOS patients is fueling these implants PCOS patients is fueling these implants PCOS patients is fueling these implants from not being cleared. Right? That's from not being cleared. Right? That's from not being cleared. Right? That's why I see so much. That's my hypothesis. why I see so much. That's my hypothesis. why I see so much. That's my hypothesis. Someone needs my problem is I don't have Someone needs my problem is I don't have Someone needs my problem is I don't have time to do all of this. There's so much time to do all of this. There's so much time to do all of this. There's so much I want to do. I want to do. I want to do. &gt;&gt; You're too busy saving all these &gt;&gt; You're too busy saving all these &gt;&gt; You're too busy saving all these families and women and kids. families and women and kids. families and women and kids. &gt;&gt; I would have done so much. I love women. &gt;&gt; I would have done so much. I love women. &gt;&gt; I would have done so much. I love women. I would have done so much for them if I would have done so much for them if I would have done so much for them if I could multiply myself to five more or 10 could multiply myself to five more or 10 could multiply myself to five more or 10 more. But anyways, so inflammation is more. But anyways, so inflammation is more. But anyways, so inflammation is another theory. Um then it's the uh another theory. Um then it's the uh another theory. Um then it's the uh metiplasia of this malarian duct you metiplasia of this malarian duct you metiplasia of this malarian duct you know the malarian duct that forms the know the malarian duct that forms the know the malarian duct that forms the uterus and the fallopian tubes. Maybe uterus and the fallopian tubes. Maybe uterus and the fallopian tubes. Maybe embryologically these cells are left embryologically these cells are left embryologically these cells are left somewhere in the body. That's why we see somewhere in the body. That's why we see somewhere in the body. That's why we see implants sometimes by the diaphragm or implants sometimes by the diaphragm or implants sometimes by the diaphragm or so you can find it in people's lungs or so you can find it in people's lungs or so you can find it in people's lungs or very rarely in their brain. So you can't very rarely in their brain. So you can't very rarely in their brain. So you can't say that's retrograde menstruation, say that's retrograde menstruation, say that's retrograde menstruation, right? &gt;&gt; The other hypothesis is through blood &gt;&gt; The other hypothesis is through blood &gt;&gt; The other hypothesis is through blood vessels from the uterus that these cells vessels from the uterus that these cells vessels from the uterus that these cells get picked up in the vessels and implant get picked up in the vessels and implant get picked up in the vessels and implant in distant uh organs like the lung or in distant uh organs like the lung or in distant uh organs like the lung or the brain. the brain. the brain. &gt;&gt; But was it always this common or you &gt;&gt; But was it always this common or you &gt;&gt; But was it always this common or you &gt;&gt; It's always been this common. &gt;&gt; It's always been this common. &gt;&gt; It's always been this common. &gt;&gt; Okay. So it's not as if in the last you &gt;&gt; Okay. So it's not as if in the last you &gt;&gt; Okay. So it's not as if in the last you know 20 years we're seeing a huge know 20 years we're seeing a huge know 20 years we're seeing a huge increase in I mean it's difficult to say increase in I mean it's difficult to say increase in I mean it's difficult to say because as you said the diagnosis it the because as you said the diagnosis it the because as you said the diagnosis it the whole system is faulty you know whole system is faulty you know whole system is faulty you know &gt;&gt; but you can't really study. That's why &gt;&gt; but you can't really study. That's why &gt;&gt; but you can't really study. That's why I'm telling you it's not 10%. I get so I'm telling you it's not 10%. I get so I'm telling you it's not 10%. I get so upset when people say 10%. I'm like it's upset when people say 10%. I'm like it's upset when people say 10%. I'm like it's not 10%. Cuz it's, think about it, 15% not 10%. Cuz it's, think about it, 15% not 10%. Cuz it's, think about it, 15% of women have PCOS, which I think it's of women have PCOS, which I think it's of women have PCOS, which I think it's more. And I think half of those patients more. And I think half of those patients more. And I think half of those patients have endometriosis. So that's just the have endometriosis. So that's just the have endometriosis. So that's just the PCOS group. PCOS group. PCOS group. &gt;&gt; And then I think in the general &gt;&gt; And then I think in the general &gt;&gt; And then I think in the general population, if I had to guess, I would population, if I had to guess, I would population, if I had to guess, I would say north of 20% have endometriosis. And say north of 20% have endometriosis. And say north of 20% have endometriosis. And I feel like I feel like I feel like &gt;&gt; that's a huge number. 20% is an enormous &gt;&gt; that's a huge number. 20% is an enormous &gt;&gt; that's a huge number. 20% is an enormous number. &gt;&gt; Enormous. That's why I'm here to tell &gt;&gt; Enormous. That's why I'm here to tell &gt;&gt; Enormous. That's why I'm here to tell you this is not some zebra diagnosis. you this is not some zebra diagnosis. you this is not some zebra diagnosis. This affects every family in every This affects every family in every This affects every family in every single person can think of someone in single person can think of someone in single person can think of someone in their life who either has PCOS, PCOS and their life who either has PCOS, PCOS and their life who either has PCOS, PCOS and endometriosis or endometriosis. There's endometriosis or endometriosis. There's endometriosis or endometriosis. There's no way if you close your eyes and think no way if you close your eyes and think no way if you close your eyes and think that you cannot think of someone like that you cannot think of someone like that you cannot think of someone like that. There's no such human because that. There's no such human because that. There's no such human because they're everywhere. There are millions they're everywhere. There are millions they're everywhere. There are millions of these women, but they are all of these women, but they are all of these women, but they are all dismissed and they are told for years dismissed and they are told for years dismissed and they are told for years and years that they're crazy. and years that they're crazy. and years that they're crazy. And that needs to stop. If I hear one And that needs to stop. If I hear one And that needs to stop. If I hear one more doctor or health care provider or more doctor or health care provider or more doctor or health care provider or physician assistant or anyone call a physician assistant or anyone call a physician assistant or anyone call a woman crazy, woman crazy, woman crazy, I want like literally I want to turn I want like literally I want to turn I want like literally I want to turn this world upside down. Well, it seems this world upside down. Well, it seems this world upside down. Well, it seems like a, you know, grounds for like a, you know, grounds for like a, you know, grounds for malpractice to call a patient crazy, malpractice to call a patient crazy, malpractice to call a patient crazy, even if they're a psychiatrist calling even if they're a psychiatrist calling even if they're a psychiatrist calling somebody who has a severe mental somebody who has a severe mental somebody who has a severe mental condition crazy. I think that what condition crazy. I think that what condition crazy. I think that what what's becoming increasingly clear as we what's becoming increasingly clear as we what's becoming increasingly clear as we have this conversation, is that have this conversation, is that have this conversation, is that for these issues surrounding women's for these issues surrounding women's for these issues surrounding women's reproductive health and hormone health reproductive health and hormone health reproductive health and hormone health generally, because I realize not generally, because I realize not generally, because I realize not everyone wants to have kids. Many many everyone wants to have kids. Many many everyone wants to have kids. Many many women do, but many women perhaps don't. women do, but many women perhaps don't. women do, but many women perhaps don't. the core component seems to be that the core component seems to be that the core component seems to be that there's kind of like a lot of overlap in there's kind of like a lot of overlap in there's kind of like a lot of overlap in the ven diagram. And so while I'm the ven diagram. And so while I'm the ven diagram. And so while I'm not trying to get any physician a pass, not trying to get any physician a pass, not trying to get any physician a pass, it seems like the only people who really it seems like the only people who really it seems like the only people who really understand this are the clinicians like understand this are the clinicians like understand this are the clinicians like yourself who spent a lot of time with yourself who spent a lot of time with yourself who spent a lot of time with people with these conditions and the people with these conditions and the people with these conditions and the patients themselves. I think that one patients themselves. I think that one patients themselves. I think that one thing that I'm hoping will happen as a thing that I'm hoping will happen as a thing that I'm hoping will happen as a consequence of this conversation as well consequence of this conversation as well consequence of this conversation as well as just the general theme around podcast as just the general theme around podcast as just the general theme around podcast and public health communication is that and public health communication is that and public health communication is that in general patients are dismissed as in general patients are dismissed as in general patients are dismissed as having important knowledge about their having important knowledge about their having important knowledge about their own health. And I think that you know own health. And I think that you know own health. And I think that you know we put doctors on a pedestal because we put doctors on a pedestal because we put doctors on a pedestal because they are incredible healers potentially they are incredible healers potentially they are incredible healers potentially incredible healers. No one knows more incredible healers. No one knows more incredible healers. No one knows more about their own body than oneself. I about their own body than oneself. I about their own body than oneself. I will make will make will make &gt;&gt; especially women. &gt;&gt; especially women. &gt;&gt; especially women. &gt;&gt; Especially women. I was going to say &gt;&gt; Especially women. I was going to say &gt;&gt; Especially women. I was going to say yes, absolutely. And and you know, it's yes, absolutely. And and you know, it's yes, absolutely. And and you know, it's going to sound like I'm trying to grab, going to sound like I'm trying to grab, going to sound like I'm trying to grab, you know, political correctness points you know, political correctness points you know, political correctness points now, even though earlier I was saying now, even though earlier I was saying now, even though earlier I was saying politically incorrect things um by politically incorrect things um by politically incorrect things um by saying this, but I firmly believe saying this, but I firmly believe saying this, but I firmly believe that, you know, and again, I've only that, you know, and again, I've only that, you know, and again, I've only lived as a male, so I only know my own lived as a male, so I only know my own lived as a male, so I only know my own my own situation, but by menrating, by my own situation, but by menrating, by my own situation, but by menrating, by having hormone cycles that across the having hormone cycles that across the having hormone cycles that across the month are more extreme typically than month are more extreme typically than month are more extreme typically than male hormone cycles. I think it's fair male hormone cycles. I think it's fair male hormone cycles. I think it's fair to say that women are much more in to say that women are much more in to say that women are much more in tune with changes in their underlying tune with changes in their underlying tune with changes in their underlying physiology and how they relate to their physiology and how they relate to their physiology and how they relate to their underlying psychology and back and underlying psychology and back and underlying psychology and back and forth. From a scientific perspective, forth. From a scientific perspective, forth. From a scientific perspective, you'd say, "Oh, they they've experienced you'd say, "Oh, they they've experienced you'd say, "Oh, they they've experienced more variables and more outcomes. more variables and more outcomes. more variables and more outcomes. They've run more experiments, right? They've run more experiments, right? They've run more experiments, right? It's being it's happening internally." It's being it's happening internally." It's being it's happening internally." Again, not to make it reductionist or Again, not to make it reductionist or Again, not to make it reductionist or overly uh you know uh intellectual, but overly uh you know uh intellectual, but overly uh you know uh intellectual, but I think that I think that I think that &gt;&gt; the first thing to do is to really &gt;&gt; the first thing to do is to really &gt;&gt; the first thing to do is to really give the statements that patients make give the statements that patients make give the statements that patients make even if they're not technical, you know, even if they're not technical, you know, even if they're not technical, you know, perhaps especially if they're not perhaps especially if they're not perhaps especially if they're not technical, to give them an enormous technical, to give them an enormous technical, to give them an enormous amount of merit. Who knows more about amount of merit. Who knows more about amount of merit. Who knows more about their own body than the person their own body than the person their own body than the person experiencing something? And women are in experiencing something? And women are in experiencing something? And women are in a position to know far more about their a position to know far more about their a position to know far more about their own changes within their body because own changes within their body because own changes within their body because they're always undergoing changes across they're always undergoing changes across they're always undergoing changes across the month. the month. the month. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's coming uh coming &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's coming uh coming &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's coming uh coming through very clearly. through very clearly. through very clearly. &gt;&gt; And I will tell you, 30 years in women's &gt;&gt; And I will tell you, 30 years in women's &gt;&gt; And I will tell you, 30 years in women's health, 25 years in private practice, health, 25 years in private practice, health, 25 years in private practice, when a woman tells you something's when a woman tells you something's when a woman tells you something's wrong, &gt;&gt; 99% of the time something's wrong. Take &gt;&gt; 99% of the time something's wrong. Take &gt;&gt; 99% of the time something's wrong. Take them seriously. The last thing they are them seriously. The last thing they are them seriously. The last thing they are is crazy. The last thing they are is crazy. The last thing they are is crazy. The last thing they are is stress related or hormone related. It's stress related or hormone related. It's stress related or hormone related. It's not in their head. I had a patient once not in their head. I had a patient once not in their head. I had a patient once who told me every time I go to the who told me every time I go to the who told me every time I go to the doctor, uh, my doctor tells me it's my doctor, uh, my doctor tells me it's my doctor, uh, my doctor tells me it's my problem is between my ears. problem is between my ears. problem is between my ears. &gt;&gt; Oh goodness. I mean, unless they're a &gt;&gt; Oh goodness. I mean, unless they're a &gt;&gt; Oh goodness. I mean, unless they're a psychiatrist, and even if they're a psychiatrist, and even if they're a psychiatrist, and even if they're a psychiatrist, we now know that metabolic psychiatrist, we now know that metabolic psychiatrist, we now know that metabolic health impacts brain health. Yeah. That health impacts brain health. Yeah. That health impacts brain health. Yeah. That that's criminal. I mean, that's criminal. I mean, that's criminal. I mean, honestly, what you're describing is honestly, what you're describing is honestly, what you're describing is criminal. It's it's not criminal. It's it's not criminal. It's it's not &gt;&gt; It is criminal. That's why I'm here, &gt;&gt; It is criminal. That's why I'm here, &gt;&gt; It is criminal. That's why I'm here, though. But it is. And it has to change. though. But it is. And it has to change. though. But it is. And it has to change. It really Why do you think I want It really Why do you think I want It really Why do you think I want President of the United States to give President of the United States to give President of the United States to give me that mic? that you did today. I don't me that mic? that you did today. I don't me that mic? that you did today. I don't think you're going to understand the think you're going to understand the think you're going to understand the impact of this podcast today. I don't impact of this podcast today. I don't impact of this podcast today. I don't think I mean I'm sure you do cuz you're think I mean I'm sure you do cuz you're think I mean I'm sure you do cuz you're amazing and you have millions of amazing and you have millions of amazing and you have millions of followers. &gt;&gt; But the information is coming from you. &gt;&gt; But the information is coming from you. &gt;&gt; But the information is coming from you. I mean I mean I mean &gt;&gt; I know but women's health is very &gt;&gt; I know but women's health is very &gt;&gt; I know but women's health is very different than any other field in the different than any other field in the different than any other field in the medicine. Let me tell you what my medicine. Let me tell you what my medicine. Let me tell you what my solution is. You know what my solution is. You know what my solution is. You know what my solution is? You literally need to separate OB is? You literally need to separate OB is? You literally need to separate OB obstetrics from gynecology. You need to obstetrics from gynecology. You need to obstetrics from gynecology. You need to separate it. separate it. separate it. &gt;&gt; Tell me more. &gt;&gt; Tell me more. &gt;&gt; Tell me more. I think for doctors who want to deliver I think for doctors who want to deliver I think for doctors who want to deliver babies, great. Go learn how to deliver babies, great. Go learn how to deliver babies, great. Go learn how to deliver babies. Take care of those women like babies. Take care of those women like babies. Take care of those women like they're your family member. Give them they're your family member. Give them they're your family member. Give them the time. Have the energy. Don't run the time. Have the energy. Don't run the time. Have the energy. Don't run from your office to deliver them last from your office to deliver them last from your office to deliver them last minute. Hold their hand. Don't dismiss minute. Hold their hand. Don't dismiss minute. Hold their hand. Don't dismiss them. And just focus on giving them the them. And just focus on giving them the them. And just focus on giving them the best experience they can possibly have, best experience they can possibly have, best experience they can possibly have, which women are not getting that right which women are not getting that right which women are not getting that right now in this healthcare system. now in this healthcare system. now in this healthcare system. and then separate the residency and for and then separate the residency and for and then separate the residency and for whoever does not want to deliver babies, whoever does not want to deliver babies, whoever does not want to deliver babies, teach them gynecology, teach them how to teach them gynecology, teach them how to teach them gynecology, teach them how to recognize PCOS, teach them what recognize PCOS, teach them what recognize PCOS, teach them what endometriosis is, teach them how to do a endometriosis is, teach them how to do a endometriosis is, teach them how to do a laparoscopic hysterctomy without cutting laparoscopic hysterctomy without cutting laparoscopic hysterctomy without cutting the patient from their belly button all the patient from their belly button all the patient from their belly button all the way down. the way down. the way down. Do you know that in Los Angeles there's Do you know that in Los Angeles there's Do you know that in Los Angeles there's maybe two of us that can do a laparoscopic two of us that can do a laparoscopic two of us that can do a laparoscopic hysterctomy and take a uterus out this hysterctomy and take a uterus out this hysterctomy and take a uterus out this big and I think I'm the only one that big and I think I'm the only one that big and I think I'm the only one that does it outpatient. That's does it outpatient. That's does it outpatient. That's &gt;&gt; you laparoscopic for those of you who &gt;&gt; you laparoscopic for those of you who &gt;&gt; you laparoscopic for those of you who don't know. So small incisions. So don't know. So small incisions. So don't know. So small incisions. So you're not talking about you know major you're not talking about you know major you're not talking about you know major scar incisions, right? So coming in scar incisions, right? So coming in scar incisions, right? So coming in laterally and essentially doing laterally and essentially doing laterally and essentially doing everything from uh the camera from the everything from uh the camera from the everything from uh the camera from the camera. &gt;&gt; So literally a uterus the size of a &gt;&gt; So literally a uterus the size of a &gt;&gt; So literally a uterus the size of a watermelon. I take out laparoscopically watermelon. I take out laparoscopically watermelon. I take out laparoscopically outpatient. Patient goes home the same day. Patient goes home the same day. Patient goes home the same day. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But but that should be standard of &gt;&gt; Yeah. But but that should be standard of &gt;&gt; Yeah. But but that should be standard of care. &gt;&gt; So these patients are still getting cut &gt;&gt; So these patients are still getting cut &gt;&gt; So these patients are still getting cut because it's so big from their belly because it's so big from their belly because it's so big from their belly button all the way down vertical button all the way down vertical button all the way down vertical incision which is traumatic in you know incision which is traumatic in you know incision which is traumatic in you know it would be traumatic to me. And these it would be traumatic to me. And these it would be traumatic to me. And these patients have six to eight weeks of patients have six to eight weeks of patients have six to eight weeks of recovery have to stay in the hospital recovery have to stay in the hospital recovery have to stay in the hospital for 2 three days. I for 2 three days. I for 2 three days. I lost my outpatient privileges at Cedars lost my outpatient privileges at Cedars lost my outpatient privileges at Cedars because I haven't done surgery at because I haven't done surgery at because I haven't done surgery at Cedars. I do it in the outpatient Cedars. I do it in the outpatient Cedars. I do it in the outpatient Cedars. So, it's because you really if you train So, it's because you really if you train So, it's because you really if you train these doctors uh well, they don't need these doctors uh well, they don't need these doctors uh well, they don't need to um take their patients in the to um take their patients in the to um take their patients in the hospital and quality of care will go up. hospital and quality of care will go up. hospital and quality of care will go up. The problem right now is when you're The problem right now is when you're The problem right now is when you're busy running around delivering babies busy running around delivering babies busy running around delivering babies all night. I used to deliver 80 babies a all night. I used to deliver 80 babies a all night. I used to deliver 80 babies a month. &gt;&gt; 80 babies a month. When I was pregnant &gt;&gt; 80 babies a month. When I was pregnant &gt;&gt; 80 babies a month. When I was pregnant with my first daughter, Delara, who you with my first daughter, Delara, who you with my first daughter, Delara, who you met at Stanford, met at Stanford, met at Stanford, I delivered 82 patients I delivered 82 patients I delivered 82 patients when I was 34 weeks pregnant until one when I was 34 weeks pregnant until one when I was 34 weeks pregnant until one night my husband used to drive me to the night my husband used to drive me to the night my husband used to drive me to the hospital. I had my pillow and a blanket hospital. I had my pillow and a blanket hospital. I had my pillow and a blanket in the car. One time when I was running in the car. One time when I was running in the car. One time when I was running at 1:00 in the morning, I fell on the at 1:00 in the morning, I fell on the at 1:00 in the morning, I fell on the lawn and my husband was like, "You can't lawn and my husband was like, "You can't lawn and my husband was like, "You can't do this anymore." And that's when I do this anymore." And that's when I do this anymore." And that's when I started cutting back. But my point is started cutting back. But my point is started cutting back. But my point is take that doctor who's I was up all take that doctor who's I was up all take that doctor who's I was up all night. Then I would come to my office night. Then I would come to my office night. Then I would come to my office the next day like nothing happened at the next day like nothing happened at the next day like nothing happened at night and now I had 30 40 patients on my night and now I had 30 40 patients on my night and now I had 30 40 patients on my schedule. Gyn patients. How can you schedule. Gyn patients. How can you schedule. Gyn patients. How can you catch that endo patient? How can you catch that endo patient? How can you catch that endo patient? How can you diagnose that PCOS patients? And let me diagnose that PCOS patients? And let me diagnose that PCOS patients? And let me tell you, you can't just diagnose in tell you, you can't just diagnose in tell you, you can't just diagnose in your head and throw a medication at your head and throw a medication at your head and throw a medication at them. Patients compliance goes down when them. Patients compliance goes down when them. Patients compliance goes down when they don't know why they're taking a they don't know why they're taking a they don't know why they're taking a medic certain medication. But if you medic certain medication. But if you medic certain medication. But if you take the time and explain it to them, take the time and explain it to them, take the time and explain it to them, they're going to go home and say, "This they're going to go home and say, "This they're going to go home and say, "This medication I'm going to take." So if you medication I'm going to take." So if you medication I'm going to take." So if you separate OB from gyn, separate OB from gyn, separate OB from gyn, then you empower gynecologists a to then you empower gynecologists a to then you empower gynecologists a to spend more time with their patients to spend more time with their patients to spend more time with their patients to not be exhausted, not run from the not be exhausted, not run from the not be exhausted, not run from the hospital into their office just hospital into their office just hospital into their office just completely burnt out. And then you can completely burnt out. And then you can completely burnt out. And then you can focus on women's health. And then we can focus on women's health. And then we can focus on women's health. And then we can also talk about well woman exam. I mean, also talk about well woman exam. I mean, also talk about well woman exam. I mean, I can sit here until tomorrow morning I can sit here until tomorrow morning I can sit here until tomorrow morning and talk to you about what a wellwoman and talk to you about what a wellwoman and talk to you about what a wellwoman exam should all be about. exam should all be about. exam should all be about. &gt;&gt; I love it. Well, we can do multiple &gt;&gt; I love it. Well, we can do multiple &gt;&gt; I love it. Well, we can do multiple podcasts, but uh but you're also giving podcasts, but uh but you're also giving podcasts, but uh but you're also giving us tools to understand us tools to understand us tools to understand uh for women to understand for uh for women to understand for uh for women to understand for themselves if they likely have themselves if they likely have themselves if they likely have endometriosis. Um you know, the painful periods, UTI Um you know, the painful periods, UTI Um you know, the painful periods, UTI issues, GI pain, um issues, GI pain, um issues, GI pain, um &gt;&gt; bloating, &gt;&gt; bloating, &gt;&gt; bloating, &gt;&gt; bloating. You mentioned earlier that &gt;&gt; bloating. You mentioned earlier that &gt;&gt; bloating. You mentioned earlier that with AMH, whatever units it's measured with AMH, whatever units it's measured with AMH, whatever units it's measured in, 0.1 of the typical units it's in, 0.1 of the typical units it's in, 0.1 of the typical units it's measured in corresponds to one egg. measured in corresponds to one egg. measured in corresponds to one egg. Typically, um, ultrasound can be Typically, um, ultrasound can be Typically, um, ultrasound can be informative, but often even with high informative, but often even with high informative, but often even with high resolution ultrasound, it's not resolution ultrasound, it's not resolution ultrasound, it's not exhaustive. You can it can be missed. exhaustive. You can it can be missed. exhaustive. You can it can be missed. Laparoscopic surgery in and out the same Laparoscopic surgery in and out the same Laparoscopic surgery in and out the same day, no major scar is the ideal way to day, no major scar is the ideal way to day, no major scar is the ideal way to go. Very, very few doctors are actually go. Very, very few doctors are actually go. Very, very few doctors are actually doing that. But a number of the things doing that. But a number of the things doing that. But a number of the things we just listed off are actionable. we just listed off are actionable. we just listed off are actionable. People can think about them at any age. People can think about them at any age. People can think about them at any age. I think that's one of the big themes I think that's one of the big themes I think that's one of the big themes coming through today among others is coming through today among others is coming through today among others is that if a woman is 19, 22, 42, 14, that if a woman is 19, 22, 42, 14, that if a woman is 19, 22, 42, 14, &gt;&gt; yeah, 14. Okay. As I that if some of &gt;&gt; yeah, 14. Okay. As I that if some of &gt;&gt; yeah, 14. Okay. As I that if some of these symptoms are occurring, they need these symptoms are occurring, they need these symptoms are occurring, they need to take them seriously. I know we talked to take them seriously. I know we talked to take them seriously. I know we talked about surgery when it comes to about surgery when it comes to about surgery when it comes to endometriosis, but endometriosis endometriosis, but endometriosis endometriosis, but endometriosis implants in general, not the stromal implants in general, not the stromal implants in general, not the stromal type. Uh they grow with estrogen, but type. Uh they grow with estrogen, but type. Uh they grow with estrogen, but their growth slows down with their growth slows down with their growth slows down with progesterone. So if you have a young progesterone. So if you have a young progesterone. So if you have a young patient who you suspect they might have patient who you suspect they might have patient who you suspect they might have endometriosis and you can't really prove endometriosis and you can't really prove endometriosis and you can't really prove it, right? you don't have the it, right? you don't have the it, right? you don't have the experience, but you know they're experience, but you know they're experience, but you know they're complaining of painful periods. And I'm complaining of painful periods. And I'm complaining of painful periods. And I'm talking to clinicians right now or talking to clinicians right now or talking to clinicians right now or patients, then there's nothing uh wrong patients, then there's nothing uh wrong patients, then there's nothing uh wrong with prescribing them some form of birth with prescribing them some form of birth with prescribing them some form of birth control or hormonal suppression that control or hormonal suppression that control or hormonal suppression that will suppress their symptoms of will suppress their symptoms of will suppress their symptoms of endometriosis. What do I mean by that? endometriosis. What do I mean by that? endometriosis. What do I mean by that? You can use progesterone only birth You can use progesterone only birth You can use progesterone only birth control pills, which that's what I would control pills, which that's what I would control pills, which that's what I would remember. We talked about birth control remember. We talked about birth control remember. We talked about birth control and I said I want to circle back with and I said I want to circle back with and I said I want to circle back with endometriosis. Birth control pills in endometriosis. Birth control pills in endometriosis. Birth control pills in endometriosis patients can be the endometriosis patients can be the endometriosis patients can be the difference of fertility and not having difference of fertility and not having difference of fertility and not having children. That's how amazing birth children. That's how amazing birth children. That's how amazing birth control pills work for suppression of control pills work for suppression of control pills work for suppression of endometriosis. Would you recommend endometriosis. Would you recommend endometriosis. Would you recommend against estrogen against estrogen against estrogen birth control pills because these birth control pills because these birth control pills because these I want these implants right tissues I want these implants right tissues I want these implants right tissues these ectopic tissues meaning sorry these ectopic tissues meaning sorry these ectopic tissues meaning sorry ectopic it's the scientist in me the ectopic it's the scientist in me the ectopic it's the scientist in me the these tissues that are essentially in these tissues that are essentially in these tissues that are essentially in the wrong place they've migrated their the wrong place they've migrated their the wrong place they've migrated their form there they are sensitive to form there they are sensitive to form there they are sensitive to estrogen in the sense that they grow in estrogen in the sense that they grow in estrogen in the sense that they grow in response to estrogen does that mean that response to estrogen does that mean that response to estrogen does that mean that in the in the first half of the in the in the first half of the in the in the first half of the ovulatory cycle the menstrual cycle that ovulatory cycle the menstrual cycle that ovulatory cycle the menstrual cycle that there's more pain at that time there's more pain at that time there's more pain at that time &gt;&gt; no they actually have more pain with the &gt;&gt; no they actually have more pain with the &gt;&gt; no they actually have more pain with the shedding of the lining with the period. shedding of the lining with the period. shedding of the lining with the period. But some patients do complain of chronic But some patients do complain of chronic But some patients do complain of chronic pain because remember these implants pain because remember these implants pain because remember these implants eventually cause scarring cause nerve eventually cause scarring cause nerve eventually cause scarring cause nerve pain and those nerve pains are start you pain and those nerve pains are start you pain and those nerve pains are start you know they start firing all month and know they start firing all month and know they start firing all month and that's why chronic pelvic pain now so that's why chronic pelvic pain now so that's why chronic pelvic pain now so you want to give it progesterone you can you want to give it progesterone you can you want to give it progesterone you can give this progesterone in a form of give this progesterone in a form of give this progesterone in a form of birth control right so if I have a birth control right so if I have a birth control right so if I have a patient who also has PCOS and has acne patient who also has PCOS and has acne patient who also has PCOS and has acne hair loss facial hair body hair loss facial hair body hair loss facial hair body hair irregular periods painful periods and irregular periods painful periods and irregular periods painful periods and their mood disorder is not that bad. I'm their mood disorder is not that bad. I'm their mood disorder is not that bad. I'm like, maybe I give her a slint because I like, maybe I give her a slint because I like, maybe I give her a slint because I can kill two birds with one stone. I can kill two birds with one stone. I can kill two birds with one stone. I can suppress her PCOS symptoms and I can suppress her PCOS symptoms and I can suppress her PCOS symptoms and I can suppress her endometriosis. But most suppress her endometriosis. But most suppress her endometriosis. But most PCOS patients, which is the crowd I see PCOS patients, which is the crowd I see PCOS patients, which is the crowd I see with endometriosis, have mood disorder. with endometriosis, have mood disorder. with endometriosis, have mood disorder. So, one of the um methods that I use to So, one of the um methods that I use to So, one of the um methods that I use to suppress endometriosis is actually a suppress endometriosis is actually a suppress endometriosis is actually a proesterine IUD like Kylina or Merina proesterine IUD like Kylina or Merina proesterine IUD like Kylina or Merina IUD. Morina IUD is the most common IUD. Morina IUD is the most common IUD. Morina IUD is the most common progesterone IUD used in this country. progesterone IUD used in this country. progesterone IUD used in this country. um if you use it for you know it's a um if you use it for you know it's a um if you use it for you know it's a method of birth control and it can last method of birth control and it can last method of birth control and it can last for eight years sometimes we use it for eight years sometimes we use it for eight years sometimes we use it for heavy period and you use it for 5 years heavy period and you use it for 5 years heavy period and you use it for 5 years but I use it very often in my patients but I use it very often in my patients but I use it very often in my patients with endometriosis or adnomiiosis for with endometriosis or adnomiiosis for with endometriosis or adnomiiosis for young girls who haven't had children I young girls who haven't had children I young girls who haven't had children I tend to go with the smaller IUD because tend to go with the smaller IUD because tend to go with the smaller IUD because Marina IUD is slightly larger than the Marina IUD is slightly larger than the Marina IUD is slightly larger than the Kylina IUD so I love the Kylina IUD and Kylina IUD so I love the Kylina IUD and Kylina IUD so I love the Kylina IUD and I'm not advertising for it I'm just I'm not advertising for it I'm just I'm not advertising for it I'm just saying it because it really works. So saying it because it really works. So saying it because it really works. So for patients who have a lot of mood for patients who have a lot of mood for patients who have a lot of mood disorders, then I might go to these IUDs disorders, then I might go to these IUDs disorders, then I might go to these IUDs which are more local in suppressing the which are more local in suppressing the which are more local in suppressing the endometriosis in the pelvis. So I start endometriosis in the pelvis. So I start endometriosis in the pelvis. So I start with either a progesterone birth control with either a progesterone birth control with either a progesterone birth control or a progesterone IUD. And by the way, I or a progesterone IUD. And by the way, I or a progesterone IUD. And by the way, I always check egg count. Always, always, always check egg count. Always, always, always check egg count. Always, always, because I want to make sure we're not because I want to make sure we're not because I want to make sure we're not low because if you have low egg count low because if you have low egg count low because if you have low egg count and you're 17, you're going to go freeze and you're 17, you're going to go freeze and you're 17, you're going to go freeze eggs. I'm not going to wait for you to eggs. I'm not going to wait for you to eggs. I'm not going to wait for you to be older to freeze. Waiting for that be older to freeze. Waiting for that be older to freeze. Waiting for that patient to be 30 or 35, you're done. You patient to be 30 or 35, you're done. You patient to be 30 or 35, you're done. You know, they will have no eggs left. So, know, they will have no eggs left. So, know, they will have no eggs left. So, suppressed with progesterone birth suppressed with progesterone birth suppressed with progesterone birth control, progesterone IUD. control, progesterone IUD. control, progesterone IUD. Then we have u G&amp;R antagonist. I don't Then we have u G&amp;R antagonist. I don't Then we have u G&amp;R antagonist. I don't know if you've heard of these pills or know if you've heard of these pills or know if you've heard of these pills or Alyssa or my famry. These are Alyssa or my famry. These are Alyssa or my famry. These are medications. is remember I told you medications. is remember I told you medications. is remember I told you either um give it progesterone or you either um give it progesterone or you either um give it progesterone or you take the estrogen away to treat take the estrogen away to treat take the estrogen away to treat endometriosis. So giving it progesterone endometriosis. So giving it progesterone endometriosis. So giving it progesterone you can do the progesterone IUD or the you can do the progesterone IUD or the you can do the progesterone IUD or the progesterone birth control. I don't like progesterone birth control. I don't like progesterone birth control. I don't like the implants because of the weight and the implants because of the weight and the implants because of the weight and irregular bleed that comes with it but irregular bleed that comes with it but irregular bleed that comes with it but you can also take the estrogen away. you can also take the estrogen away. you can also take the estrogen away. These medications work amazing These medications work amazing These medications work amazing especially for women who have painful especially for women who have painful especially for women who have painful sex and usually by 2 months they get a sex and usually by 2 months they get a sex and usually by 2 months they get a relief from that painful sex and painful relief from that painful sex and painful relief from that painful sex and painful period. The problem is anytime you take period. The problem is anytime you take period. The problem is anytime you take estrogen away, what happens? You can estrogen away, what happens? You can estrogen away, what happens? You can have hot flashes. You can have all the have hot flashes. You can have all the have hot flashes. You can have all the symptoms like a pseudo menopause. symptoms like a pseudo menopause. symptoms like a pseudo menopause. &gt;&gt; Correct. These pills are great because &gt;&gt; Correct. These pills are great because &gt;&gt; Correct. These pills are great because they're reverse reversible. So if you they're reverse reversible. So if you they're reverse reversible. So if you don't like them, you can take them for a don't like them, you can take them for a don't like them, you can take them for a couple of days and stop it and it's out couple of days and stop it and it's out couple of days and stop it and it's out of your system in a couple of days. So of your system in a couple of days. So of your system in a couple of days. So it's not a big deal, but it does make a it's not a big deal, but it does make a it's not a big deal, but it does make a difference. The problem with these pills difference. The problem with these pills difference. The problem with these pills are because of the effect on the bone are because of the effect on the bone are because of the effect on the bone and the bone loss it causes, you can and the bone loss it causes, you can and the bone loss it causes, you can take him up to two years. So you can't take him up to two years. So you can't take him up to two years. So you can't take him beyond two years. Usually if I take him beyond two years. Usually if I take him beyond two years. Usually if I do a progesterone suppression and the do a progesterone suppression and the do a progesterone suppression and the patient has pain, I recommend surgery patient has pain, I recommend surgery patient has pain, I recommend surgery because during surgery, I resect the because during surgery, I resect the because during surgery, I resect the endometriosis, I cut all the adhesions if they have it, I cut all the adhesions if they have it, I cut all the adhesions if they have it, and then I put a progesterone IUD and I and then I put a progesterone IUD and I and then I put a progesterone IUD and I send them home. For patients during send them home. For patients during send them home. For patients during surgery who have severe disease, stage surgery who have severe disease, stage surgery who have severe disease, stage three or four, then I also add these three or four, then I also add these three or four, then I also add these G&amp;RH antagonists after surgery depending G&amp;RH antagonists after surgery depending G&amp;RH antagonists after surgery depending on their stage or symptoms from 6 months on their stage or symptoms from 6 months on their stage or symptoms from 6 months up to two years up to two years up to two years &gt;&gt; to suppress estrogen &gt;&gt; to suppress estrogen &gt;&gt; to suppress estrogen &gt;&gt; suppress it and to just kill the &gt;&gt; suppress it and to just kill the &gt;&gt; suppress it and to just kill the endometriosis because when it's advanced endometriosis because when it's advanced endometriosis because when it's advanced stage, even with surgery and IUD, let's stage, even with surgery and IUD, let's stage, even with surgery and IUD, let's say stage four, it can come right back. say stage four, it can come right back. say stage four, it can come right back. So, I really want to knock it out. So So, I really want to knock it out. So So, I really want to knock it out. So that's what I would um I would do for that's what I would um I would do for that's what I would um I would do for endometriosis patients and very endometriosis patients and very endometriosis patients and very important point the stage of important point the stage of important point the stage of endometriosis has nothing to do with the degree of has nothing to do with the degree of has nothing to do with the degree of pain and this is very important for pain and this is very important for pain and this is very important for patients to understand. You can have patients to understand. You can have patients to understand. You can have stage one endometriosis and you end up stage one endometriosis and you end up stage one endometriosis and you end up in the emergency room every month in the emergency room every month in the emergency room every month because of pain or you can have stage because of pain or you can have stage because of pain or you can have stage four endometriosis and you just have four endometriosis and you just have four endometriosis and you just have mild pain. So pain you can't say oh mild pain. So pain you can't say oh mild pain. So pain you can't say oh you're there's not much in your pelvis you're there's not much in your pelvis you're there's not much in your pelvis I'm not going to worry about it. So I'm not going to worry about it. So I'm not going to worry about it. So that's one. The other thing is remember that's one. The other thing is remember that's one. The other thing is remember I told you stromal endometriosis that I told you stromal endometriosis that I told you stromal endometriosis that doesn't have the glandular aspect of the doesn't have the glandular aspect of the doesn't have the glandular aspect of the tissue is missing. The glad glandular tissue is missing. The glad glandular tissue is missing. The glad glandular aspect is mostly the fibrous part of it. aspect is mostly the fibrous part of it. aspect is mostly the fibrous part of it. These lesions are almost always missed These lesions are almost always missed These lesions are almost always missed on laparoscopy. they tend to cause more on laparoscopy. they tend to cause more on laparoscopy. they tend to cause more inflammation and they tend to be inflammation and they tend to be inflammation and they tend to be more resistant to progesterone in my more resistant to progesterone in my more resistant to progesterone in my opinion. &gt;&gt; So those are the ones that you really &gt;&gt; So those are the ones that you really &gt;&gt; So those are the ones that you really need to cut out. But then if you've need to cut out. But then if you've need to cut out. But then if you've never seen stomal endometriosis, you never seen stomal endometriosis, you never seen stomal endometriosis, you will not remove it during surgery and will not remove it during surgery and will not remove it during surgery and you will wake your patient up and say you will wake your patient up and say you will wake your patient up and say you didn't have it. you didn't have it. you didn't have it. &gt;&gt; So stage does not equate to pain and &gt;&gt; So stage does not equate to pain and &gt;&gt; So stage does not equate to pain and vice and vice versa. vice and vice versa. vice and vice versa. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. These days it seems at least &gt;&gt; Absolutely. These days it seems at least &gt;&gt; Absolutely. These days it seems at least in the United States that women are in the United States that women are in the United States that women are opting to have children later or not at opting to have children later or not at opting to have children later or not at all. We know that having children before all. We know that having children before all. We know that having children before age 40 is protective against certain age 40 is protective against certain age 40 is protective against certain cancers and he breast cancer in cancers and he breast cancer in cancers and he breast cancer in particular and if and if women have uh particular and if and if women have uh particular and if and if women have uh the BA mutations the BA mutations the BA mutations &gt;&gt; then that number goes way up. So um &gt;&gt; then that number goes way up. So um &gt;&gt; then that number goes way up. So um is there any indication that pregnancy is there any indication that pregnancy is there any indication that pregnancy at before a given age, successful at before a given age, successful at before a given age, successful pregnancy or maybe just pregnancy in pregnancy or maybe just pregnancy in pregnancy or maybe just pregnancy in general before a given age is protective general before a given age is protective general before a given age is protective against PCOS and endometriosis? against PCOS and endometriosis? against PCOS and endometriosis? &gt;&gt; For endometriosis, yes, because during &gt;&gt; For endometriosis, yes, because during &gt;&gt; For endometriosis, yes, because during pregnancy your endometriosis is at bay. pregnancy your endometriosis is at bay. pregnancy your endometriosis is at bay. Patients have no pain, right? It all Patients have no pain, right? It all Patients have no pain, right? It all starts when the menstrual cycle starts when the menstrual cycle starts when the menstrual cycle starts again. But what I do for these patients, again. But what I do for these patients, again. But what I do for these patients, as soon as they deliver, I put a as soon as they deliver, I put a as soon as they deliver, I put a progesterone IUD in them. when they come progesterone IUD in them. when they come progesterone IUD in them. when they come postpartum, six weeks postpartum, and postpartum, six weeks postpartum, and postpartum, six weeks postpartum, and they're discussing birth control, I they're discussing birth control, I they're discussing birth control, I always recommend a progesterone birth always recommend a progesterone birth always recommend a progesterone birth control. &gt;&gt; Do you think that um well, these days we &gt;&gt; Do you think that um well, these days we &gt;&gt; Do you think that um well, these days we hear a lot more about postpartum hear a lot more about postpartum hear a lot more about postpartum depression? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Um and I'm very intrigued by this. &gt;&gt; Um and I'm very intrigued by this. &gt;&gt; Um and I'm very intrigued by this. &gt;&gt; Yes. Like any medical discussion, when &gt;&gt; Yes. Like any medical discussion, when &gt;&gt; Yes. Like any medical discussion, when you hear about something more often, you hear about something more often, you hear about something more often, you get two very polarized arguments. One is get two very polarized arguments. One is get two very polarized arguments. One is it's been limited diagnosis, and this it's been limited diagnosis, and this it's been limited diagnosis, and this has been around a long time, and people has been around a long time, and people has been around a long time, and people have just been suffering in silence. You have just been suffering in silence. You have just been suffering in silence. You hear this about psychiatric conditions, hear this about psychiatric conditions, hear this about psychiatric conditions, childhood neurologic conditions. You childhood neurologic conditions. You childhood neurologic conditions. You hear about this about gut issues. And hear about this about gut issues. And hear about this about gut issues. And then on the other end of the spectrum, then on the other end of the spectrum, then on the other end of the spectrum, you often will hear, well, people are you often will hear, well, people are you often will hear, well, people are just sort of like they're just kind of just sort of like they're just kind of just sort of like they're just kind of fanatic about these terms and then now fanatic about these terms and then now fanatic about these terms and then now people are paying attention for to it. people are paying attention for to it. people are paying attention for to it. Um, do you think that postpartum Um, do you think that postpartum Um, do you think that postpartum depression is on the rise and does it depression is on the rise and does it depression is on the rise and does it have any correlation with things like have any correlation with things like have any correlation with things like endometriosis? Postpartum depression I think in is we Postpartum depression I think in is we Postpartum depression I think in is we see more in patients with anxiety, see more in patients with anxiety, see more in patients with anxiety, trauma or PTSD. So to answer your trauma or PTSD. So to answer your trauma or PTSD. So to answer your question uh endometriosis and PCOS question uh endometriosis and PCOS question uh endometriosis and PCOS patients have anxiety, have depression patients have anxiety, have depression patients have anxiety, have depression and have PTSD. When you live their and have PTSD. When you live their and have PTSD. When you live their experience in their life and everything experience in their life and everything experience in their life and everything they've gone through in their life, they they've gone through in their life, they they've gone through in their life, they all have PTSD. So anyone with any all have PTSD. So anyone with any all have PTSD. So anyone with any history of anxiety, PTSD or depression history of anxiety, PTSD or depression history of anxiety, PTSD or depression or PMDD, a severe form of PMS, or PMDD, a severe form of PMS, or PMDD, a severe form of PMS, all of these patients are at a higher all of these patients are at a higher all of these patients are at a higher risk of postpartum depression. And to risk of postpartum depression. And to risk of postpartum depression. And to answer your question, because anxiety is answer your question, because anxiety is answer your question, because anxiety is on the rise, because depression is on the rise, because depression is on the rise, because depression is on the rise, um postpartum depression is the rise, um postpartum depression is the rise, um postpartum depression is very common. It is very difficult very common. It is very difficult very common. It is very difficult honestly to navigate the different honestly to navigate the different honestly to navigate the different stages of life being a woman. You know, stages of life being a woman. You know, stages of life being a woman. You know, imagine when you're young, some of them imagine when you're young, some of them imagine when you're young, some of them with endometriosis and PCOS, they have with endometriosis and PCOS, they have with endometriosis and PCOS, they have all that struggle. Then they try to get all that struggle. Then they try to get all that struggle. Then they try to get pregnant. They don't get pregnant. They pregnant. They don't get pregnant. They pregnant. They don't get pregnant. They need to sell everything they have to pay need to sell everything they have to pay need to sell everything they have to pay for an IVF to have a baby. Then they for an IVF to have a baby. Then they for an IVF to have a baby. Then they have a baby. They their body changes. have a baby. They their body changes. have a baby. They their body changes. There's this giant drop in estrogen that There's this giant drop in estrogen that There's this giant drop in estrogen that puts them into this, you know, puts them into this, you know, puts them into this, you know, postpartum blues and then postpartum blues and then postpartum blues and then postpartum depression. And that goes dismissed by depression. And that goes dismissed by depression. And that goes dismissed by family members, by everyone. Oh, you're family members, by everyone. Oh, you're family members, by everyone. Oh, you're not sleeping well probably. Oh, it's not sleeping well probably. Oh, it's not sleeping well probably. Oh, it's normal. It's because you haven't had a normal. It's because you haven't had a normal. It's because you haven't had a child. No. These patients, even with child. No. These patients, even with child. No. These patients, even with PMDDD, they completely dissociate PMDDD, they completely dissociate PMDDD, they completely dissociate themselves from their environment, from themselves from their environment, from themselves from their environment, from their child. It's it's really their child. It's it's really their child. It's it's really heartbreaking. And then once they're heartbreaking. And then once they're heartbreaking. And then once they're done with all this in their early 40s, done with all this in their early 40s, done with all this in their early 40s, per menopause comes, late 30s, early per menopause comes, late 30s, early per menopause comes, late 30s, early 40s, right? 40s, right? 40s, right? &gt;&gt; It's like wave after wave, &gt;&gt; It's like wave after wave, &gt;&gt; It's like wave after wave, &gt;&gt; wave after wave, and then pmenopause, &gt;&gt; wave after wave, and then pmenopause, &gt;&gt; wave after wave, and then pmenopause, which is again not diagnosed, right? which is again not diagnosed, right? which is again not diagnosed, right? Average age of menopause is 51 and a Average age of menopause is 51 and a Average age of menopause is 51 and a half, 45 to 55 is the range. Seven to 10 half, 45 to 55 is the range. Seven to 10 half, 45 to 55 is the range. Seven to 10 years before menopause, women go through years before menopause, women go through years before menopause, women go through perry menopause. And during that perry menopause. And during that perry menopause. And during that pmenopausal time, their mood can go. pmenopausal time, their mood can go. pmenopausal time, their mood can go. They're not sleeping well. They have hot They're not sleeping well. They have hot They're not sleeping well. They have hot flashes, night sweats, irregular flashes, night sweats, irregular flashes, night sweats, irregular periods, they're gaining weight, their periods, they're gaining weight, their periods, they're gaining weight, their uh sex hurts, their joint, they have uh sex hurts, their joint, they have uh sex hurts, their joint, they have frozen shoulder, they start having hair frozen shoulder, they start having hair frozen shoulder, they start having hair loss, they have skin thinning. And all loss, they have skin thinning. And all loss, they have skin thinning. And all these things are happening and no one's these things are happening and no one's these things are happening and no one's diagnosing them. No one's treating them diagnosing them. No one's treating them diagnosing them. No one's treating them with hormone replacement until they go with hormone replacement until they go with hormone replacement until they go through menopause. And then that's through menopause. And then that's through menopause. And then that's another chapter of life that just turns another chapter of life that just turns another chapter of life that just turns your body and your life upside down. And your body and your life upside down. And your body and your life upside down. And most men don't even know what menopause most men don't even know what menopause most men don't even know what menopause is. So imagine just the story of this is. So imagine just the story of this is. So imagine just the story of this one woman through her life. And then one woman through her life. And then one woman through her life. And then look how many times there are look how many times there are look how many times there are opportunities for this patient to get opportunities for this patient to get opportunities for this patient to get dismissed in the health care system. dismissed in the health care system. dismissed in the health care system. That's why I have a broken heart. That's why I have a broken heart. That's why I have a broken heart. &gt;&gt; And you're also doing a ton of healing &gt;&gt; And you're also doing a ton of healing &gt;&gt; And you're also doing a ton of healing for people. for people. for people. &gt;&gt; But I hear you loud and clear. what you &gt;&gt; But I hear you loud and clear. what you &gt;&gt; But I hear you loud and clear. what you describe would uh cause most men, describe would uh cause most men, describe would uh cause most men, including me, to dissolve into a puddle including me, to dissolve into a puddle including me, to dissolve into a puddle of her own tears of her own tears of her own tears is my only response. Fibroids, is my only response. Fibroids, is my only response. Fibroids, &gt;&gt; there's hope, though. I don't want to be &gt;&gt; there's hope, though. I don't want to be &gt;&gt; there's hope, though. I don't want to be all negative. No, that's why we're here. all negative. No, that's why we're here. all negative. No, that's why we're here. We're here. We're here. We're here. &gt;&gt; I feel like I'm ne I it might come out &gt;&gt; I feel like I'm ne I it might come out &gt;&gt; I feel like I'm ne I it might come out negative because that's what I see. Do negative because that's what I see. Do negative because that's what I see. Do you know what I'm saying? I see I say my you know what I'm saying? I see I say my you know what I'm saying? I see I say my office, my waiting room is the waiting office, my waiting room is the waiting office, my waiting room is the waiting room of dismissed women in this country. room of dismissed women in this country. room of dismissed women in this country. So maybe so I have a skewed view, but So maybe so I have a skewed view, but So maybe so I have a skewed view, but it's so real and it's so painful to it's so real and it's so painful to it's so real and it's so painful to watch that, you know, that's why I sound watch that, you know, that's why I sound watch that, you know, that's why I sound a little negative, but I'm not a little negative, but I'm not a little negative, but I'm not a negative person. negative person. negative person. &gt;&gt; I don't I don't think you sound negative &gt;&gt; I don't I don't think you sound negative &gt;&gt; I don't I don't think you sound negative if I'm honest. I think you sound very if I'm honest. I think you sound very if I'm honest. I think you sound very passionate about um your empathy for the passionate about um your empathy for the passionate about um your empathy for the pain that you observe. And it must be in pain that you observe. And it must be in pain that you observe. And it must be in I'm realizing right now it must be I'm realizing right now it must be I'm realizing right now it must be incredibly frustrating to know that incredibly frustrating to know that incredibly frustrating to know that there are solutions there are solutions there are solutions and to see so many people suffer. and to see so many people suffer. and to see so many people suffer. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Like I can think of almost nothing worse &gt;&gt; Like I can think of almost nothing worse &gt;&gt; Like I can think of almost nothing worse than having the solution to somebody's than having the solution to somebody's than having the solution to somebody's suffering and not being they don't know suffering and not being they don't know suffering and not being they don't know and because they don't know they and because they don't know they and because they don't know they can't access that solution. can't access that solution. can't access that solution. Um, and as you mentioned, it's a very Um, and as you mentioned, it's a very Um, and as you mentioned, it's a very tangled web of medical infrastructure tangled web of medical infrastructure tangled web of medical infrastructure and things like that, but uh, what comes and things like that, but uh, what comes and things like that, but uh, what comes through is your passion and through is your passion and through is your passion and your care for people, for women, your care for people, for women, your care for people, for women, &gt;&gt; for women. &gt;&gt; for women. &gt;&gt; for women. &gt;&gt; For women. &gt;&gt; For women. &gt;&gt; For women. &gt;&gt; Yes. Specifically women. And also your &gt;&gt; Yes. Specifically women. And also your &gt;&gt; Yes. Specifically women. And also your desire to give them useful information desire to give them useful information desire to give them useful information that they can act on and u better that they can act on and u better that they can act on and u better their lives and their health. their lives and their health. their lives and their health. Fibroids. I hear about fibroids. Where Fibroids. I hear about fibroids. Where Fibroids. I hear about fibroids. Where does that fit into this picture if at does that fit into this picture if at does that fit into this picture if at all or is that completely separate? all or is that completely separate? all or is that completely separate? Fibroids are very common. Fibroids are very common. Fibroids are very common. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; By age 50, 80% of women have some form &gt;&gt; By age 50, 80% of women have some form &gt;&gt; By age 50, 80% of women have some form of fibroids. Like if you stand at the of fibroids. Like if you stand at the of fibroids. Like if you stand at the side of the street and pull out 100 side of the street and pull out 100 side of the street and pull out 100 women, you know, a lot of them will have women, you know, a lot of them will have women, you know, a lot of them will have fibroids. When it comes to fibroids, the fibroids. When it comes to fibroids, the fibroids. When it comes to fibroids, the location of the fibroid is very location of the fibroid is very location of the fibroid is very important. You can have a small fibroid important. You can have a small fibroid important. You can have a small fibroid in the lining of that cavity that we in the lining of that cavity that we in the lining of that cavity that we talked about that can cause you to have talked about that can cause you to have talked about that can cause you to have heavy periods, blood clots, you become heavy periods, blood clots, you become heavy periods, blood clots, you become anemic, um fertility issues, all of anemic, um fertility issues, all of anemic, um fertility issues, all of that. Or you can have a 10 cm fibroid that. Or you can have a 10 cm fibroid that. Or you can have a 10 cm fibroid outside of the uterus that can make you outside of the uterus that can make you outside of the uterus that can make you look like you're pregnant, but it look like you're pregnant, but it look like you're pregnant, but it doesn't do anything to your bleeding. doesn't do anything to your bleeding. doesn't do anything to your bleeding. So, when it comes to fibroids, the So, when it comes to fibroids, the So, when it comes to fibroids, the location of it is very important. For location of it is very important. For location of it is very important. For patients who have small fibroids, it's patients who have small fibroids, it's patients who have small fibroids, it's away from the cavity. they don't have away from the cavity. they don't have away from the cavity. they don't have any symptoms. We just watch them. Uh, as any symptoms. We just watch them. Uh, as any symptoms. We just watch them. Uh, as they grow, you're more likely, you know, they grow, you're more likely, you know, they grow, you're more likely, you know, women in their 40s are very likely to women in their 40s are very likely to women in their 40s are very likely to have fibroids or develop fibroids. But have fibroids or develop fibroids. But have fibroids or develop fibroids. But if it doesn't bother them, we don't do if it doesn't bother them, we don't do if it doesn't bother them, we don't do anything. We operate on fibroids for anything. We operate on fibroids for anything. We operate on fibroids for several reasons. Number one, if it's several reasons. Number one, if it's several reasons. Number one, if it's inside the cavity and it causes inside the cavity and it causes inside the cavity and it causes anemia, infertility or heavy periods. We anemia, infertility or heavy periods. We anemia, infertility or heavy periods. We operate on fibroids if they're extremely operate on fibroids if they're extremely operate on fibroids if they're extremely large and they cause bloating after like large and they cause bloating after like large and they cause bloating after like you know we go by weeks of pregnancy and you know we go by weeks of pregnancy and you know we go by weeks of pregnancy and uh let's say you have a 16 week size uh let's say you have a 16 week size uh let's say you have a 16 week size fibroid uterus which is equal to a 16 fibroid uterus which is equal to a 16 fibroid uterus which is equal to a 16 week size uterus pregnant uterus. It week size uterus pregnant uterus. It week size uterus pregnant uterus. It starts putting pressure on the urers starts putting pressure on the urers starts putting pressure on the urers that drain your kidneys. So then you that drain your kidneys. So then you that drain your kidneys. So then you have to talk about either a myomectomy have to talk about either a myomectomy have to talk about either a myomectomy for women who want to get pregnant when for women who want to get pregnant when for women who want to get pregnant when you go in and you remove the fibroids or you go in and you remove the fibroids or you go in and you remove the fibroids or hysterctomy for women who are done hysterctomy for women who are done hysterctomy for women who are done having children. So fibroids are having children. So fibroids are having children. So fibroids are extremely common but then again if you extremely common but then again if you extremely common but then again if you don't do a pelvic ultrasound just doing don't do a pelvic ultrasound just doing don't do a pelvic ultrasound just doing a bmanual exam will never tell you that a bmanual exam will never tell you that a bmanual exam will never tell you that the if these patients have fibroids. the if these patients have fibroids. the if these patients have fibroids. &gt;&gt; Can a woman insist that she get a an &gt;&gt; Can a woman insist that she get a an &gt;&gt; Can a woman insist that she get a an ultrasound? Can you walk in and just say ultrasound? Can you walk in and just say ultrasound? Can you walk in and just say uh maybe not have to exacerbate the pain uh maybe not have to exacerbate the pain uh maybe not have to exacerbate the pain from a five to a 10, unless she's from a five to a 10, unless she's from a five to a 10, unless she's already at a 10, of course, but can she already at a 10, of course, but can she already at a 10, of course, but can she come in and just say, "Listen, I come in and just say, "Listen, I come in and just say, "Listen, I absolutely want ultrasound. I want you absolutely want ultrasound. I want you absolutely want ultrasound. I want you to look at fibroids. I also want you to look at fibroids. I also want you to look at fibroids. I also want you to do everything you can to determine if I do everything you can to determine if I do everything you can to determine if I have endometriosis. Here's what have endometriosis. Here's what have endometriosis. Here's what endometriosis there is. I heard uh a endometriosis there is. I heard uh a endometriosis there is. I heard uh a podcast where an exp a true expert in podcast where an exp a true expert in podcast where an exp a true expert in this describe these things." How how do this describe these things." How how do this describe these things." How how do you think a physician would respond to you think a physician would respond to you think a physician would respond to that? Um I like to think that they would that? Um I like to think that they would that? Um I like to think that they would say, "Wow, this person knows a lot. I say, "Wow, this person knows a lot. I say, "Wow, this person knows a lot. I better do everything. better do everything. better do everything. &gt;&gt; There you go. Bravo. Empowered, right? &gt;&gt; There you go. Bravo. Empowered, right? &gt;&gt; There you go. Bravo. Empowered, right? That's why I called my um podcast she That's why I called my um podcast she That's why I called my um podcast she MD. Strong, healthy, empowered. If you MD. Strong, healthy, empowered. If you MD. Strong, healthy, empowered. If you empower the woman to be her own health empower the woman to be her own health empower the woman to be her own health advocate and she has that list and she advocate and she has that list and she advocate and she has that list and she takes that to her doctor's office, nine takes that to her doctor's office, nine takes that to her doctor's office, nine out of 10, like I said, doctors are out of 10, like I said, doctors are out of 10, like I said, doctors are amazing humans. They they're there to amazing humans. They they're there to amazing humans. They they're there to help you. But if that doctor doesn't help you. But if that doctor doesn't help you. But if that doctor doesn't have a pelvic ultrasound in his office, have a pelvic ultrasound in his office, have a pelvic ultrasound in his office, which is probably very common, then ask which is probably very common, then ask which is probably very common, then ask them for an order to go to a radiology them for an order to go to a radiology them for an order to go to a radiology center to the hospital near you. But you center to the hospital near you. But you center to the hospital near you. But you should, every woman should have a pelvic should, every woman should have a pelvic should, every woman should have a pelvic ultrasound. I think it should be part of ultrasound. I think it should be part of ultrasound. I think it should be part of wellw women exam every single year. wellw women exam every single year. wellw women exam every single year. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why isn't it just part of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why isn't it just part of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why isn't it just part of the standard exam? standard exam? standard exam? &gt;&gt; It should be &gt;&gt; It should be &gt;&gt; It should be &gt;&gt; every male that goes in for a general &gt;&gt; every male that goes in for a general &gt;&gt; every male that goes in for a general exam has his uh testicles grabbed and exam has his uh testicles grabbed and exam has his uh testicles grabbed and told to cough over the sink looking for told to cough over the sink looking for told to cough over the sink looking for a hernia. So it could be the a hernia. So it could be the a hernia. So it could be the equivalent of that. Well, I mean, equivalent of that. Well, I mean, equivalent of that. Well, I mean, they just do it. They do it no matter they just do it. They do it no matter they just do it. They do it no matter what. &gt;&gt; It takes me less than a minute to do a &gt;&gt; It takes me less than a minute to do a &gt;&gt; It takes me less than a minute to do a pelvic ultrasound, but then I've done it pelvic ultrasound, but then I've done it pelvic ultrasound, but then I've done it for 30 years. for 30 years. for 30 years. &gt;&gt; But this is not an hourong procedure. &gt;&gt; But this is not an hourong procedure. &gt;&gt; But this is not an hourong procedure. &gt;&gt; And you know what? Let me tell you, I &gt;&gt; And you know what? Let me tell you, I &gt;&gt; And you know what? Let me tell you, I had a patient with a uterine septum. Do had a patient with a uterine septum. Do had a patient with a uterine septum. Do you know what that is? when the uterine you know what that is? when the uterine you know what that is? when the uterine cavity is actually divided in two cavity is actually divided in two cavity is actually divided in two because of this septum that was supposed because of this septum that was supposed because of this septum that was supposed to be absorbed, you know, but it never to be absorbed, you know, but it never to be absorbed, you know, but it never did. Unless you do a pelvic ultrasound did. Unless you do a pelvic ultrasound did. Unless you do a pelvic ultrasound and unless you're a good ultrasographer, and unless you're a good ultrasographer, and unless you're a good ultrasographer, you will miss this septum. And these are you will miss this septum. And these are you will miss this septum. And these are patients who have recurrent patients who have recurrent patients who have recurrent miscarriages. They don't get pregnant. They sometimes They don't get pregnant. They sometimes They don't get pregnant. They sometimes come from fertility clinics and they're come from fertility clinics and they're come from fertility clinics and they're like, "My doctor said I fall into the like, "My doctor said I fall into the like, "My doctor said I fall into the unexplained category. There's nothing unexplained category. There's nothing unexplained category. There's nothing unexplained. So if you want to assess your fertility, So if you want to assess your fertility, So if you want to assess your fertility, I have buckets of it. One, female I have buckets of it. One, female I have buckets of it. One, female factor. What is female factor? Check factor. What is female factor? Check factor. What is female factor? Check your hormones. Make sure your egg count your hormones. Make sure your egg count your hormones. Make sure your egg count is normal, right? Make sure your is normal, right? Make sure your is normal, right? Make sure your prolactin, thyroid, everything's normal. prolactin, thyroid, everything's normal. prolactin, thyroid, everything's normal. Do an STD check, gorrhea, chlamydia, all Do an STD check, gorrhea, chlamydia, all Do an STD check, gorrhea, chlamydia, all of that. Next bucket, male factor. of that. Next bucket, male factor. of that. Next bucket, male factor. What's the sperm like? Is your partner What's the sperm like? Is your partner What's the sperm like? Is your partner smoking weed every single day? Um, has smoking weed every single day? Um, has smoking weed every single day? Um, has he had radiation because of testicular he had radiation because of testicular he had radiation because of testicular cancer? Whatever. Has he had fertility cancer? Whatever. Has he had fertility cancer? Whatever. Has he had fertility issues with his previous partner? Make issues with his previous partner? Make issues with his previous partner? Make sure the semen analysis is normal. It sure the semen analysis is normal. It sure the semen analysis is normal. It takes one minute to check that. takes one minute to check that. takes one minute to check that. The third bucket is uh tubal factor or The third bucket is uh tubal factor or The third bucket is uh tubal factor or anatomy. Is the anatomy normal? Do we anatomy. Is the anatomy normal? Do we anatomy. Is the anatomy normal? Do we have fibroids in the uterus? Is there a have fibroids in the uterus? Is there a have fibroids in the uterus? Is there a septum? Are the tubes open? Have you had septum? Are the tubes open? Have you had septum? Are the tubes open? Have you had chlamydia? Do you have, you know, any chlamydia? Do you have, you know, any chlamydia? Do you have, you know, any kind of adhesions? But you know that's kind of adhesions? But you know that's kind of adhesions? But you know that's the next bucket. The fourth bucket is the next bucket. The fourth bucket is the next bucket. The fourth bucket is endometriosis. Are you missing endometriosis? Do you Are you missing endometriosis? Do you Are you missing endometriosis? Do you have painful periods, painful sex, have painful periods, painful sex, have painful periods, painful sex, bloating, everything we talked about? bloating, everything we talked about? bloating, everything we talked about? Rule that out. The next bucket, PCOS. Do Rule that out. The next bucket, PCOS. Do Rule that out. The next bucket, PCOS. Do you have irregular periods? Do you have you have irregular periods? Do you have you have irregular periods? Do you have PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound? Do PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound? Do PCOS looking ovaries on ultrasound? Do you have symptoms of high testosterone? you have symptoms of high testosterone? you have symptoms of high testosterone? If you do, you're 70 80% chance you're If you do, you're 70 80% chance you're If you do, you're 70 80% chance you're not even ovulating. Boom. That's your not even ovulating. Boom. That's your not even ovulating. Boom. That's your problem, right? If you have PCOS then problem, right? If you have PCOS then problem, right? If you have PCOS then you have in my opinion that's aliabody you have in my opinion that's aliabody you have in my opinion that's aliabody diagnosis you have a 50% chance of diagnosis you have a 50% chance of diagnosis you have a 50% chance of having endometriosis then go back to the having endometriosis then go back to the having endometriosis then go back to the other bucket and make sure you're not other bucket and make sure you're not other bucket and make sure you're not missing endometriosis and the last one missing endometriosis and the last one missing endometriosis and the last one is autoimmune for me which is very is autoimmune for me which is very is autoimmune for me which is very important these are patients who can't important these are patients who can't important these are patients who can't get pregnant or when they get pregnant get pregnant or when they get pregnant get pregnant or when they get pregnant they lose the pregnancy they lose the pregnancy they lose the pregnancy especially my endometriosis patients especially my endometriosis patients especially my endometriosis patients endometriosis is a form of autoimmune endometriosis is a form of autoimmune endometriosis is a form of autoimmune and I always say if you have one and I always say if you have one and I always say if you have one autoimmune condition you probably have a autoimmune condition you probably have a autoimmune condition you probably have a 30% chance of having some other 30% chance of having some other 30% chance of having some other autoimmune condition. Run this autoimmune condition. Run this autoimmune condition. Run this autoimmune bucket because if someone has autoimmune bucket because if someone has autoimmune bucket because if someone has let's say antifhospholippid syndrome and let's say antifhospholippid syndrome and let's say antifhospholippid syndrome and they're hypercoagulable and pregnancy they're hypercoagulable and pregnancy they're hypercoagulable and pregnancy make you more hypercoagulable make you more hypercoagulable make you more hypercoagulable you can actually make blood clots in the you can actually make blood clots in the you can actually make blood clots in the placenta and these are patients who keep placenta and these are patients who keep placenta and these are patients who keep having miscarriages and they don't know having miscarriages and they don't know having miscarriages and they don't know why. What about other autoimmune why. What about other autoimmune why. What about other autoimmune conditions like uh psoriasis, not even conditions like uh psoriasis, not even conditions like uh psoriasis, not even mild psoriasis, it's suggestive of mild psoriasis, it's suggestive of mild psoriasis, it's suggestive of overactive interlucans and things of overactive interlucans and things of overactive interlucans and things of that sort. that sort. that sort. &gt;&gt; Any autoimmune I do a full autoimmune &gt;&gt; Any autoimmune I do a full autoimmune &gt;&gt; Any autoimmune I do a full autoimmune panel. And for patients who I go through panel. And for patients who I go through panel. And for patients who I go through all these buckets. So these buckets I all these buckets. So these buckets I all these buckets. So these buckets I told you your listeners can do it told you your listeners can do it told you your listeners can do it at home. You don't need your doctors at home. You don't need your doctors at home. You don't need your doctors because some doctors don't know what because some doctors don't know what because some doctors don't know what these buckets are and they're not really these buckets are and they're not really these buckets are and they're not really putting a check mark in front of it. You putting a check mark in front of it. You putting a check mark in front of it. You can do it yourself. You can ask for the can do it yourself. You can ask for the can do it yourself. You can ask for the first one, first bucket, female factor. first one, first bucket, female factor. first one, first bucket, female factor. Ask for your hormones, ask for a semen Ask for your hormones, ask for a semen Ask for your hormones, ask for a semen analysis, second one. For the third one, analysis, second one. For the third one, analysis, second one. For the third one, ask for a pelvic ultrasound. Make sure ask for a pelvic ultrasound. Make sure ask for a pelvic ultrasound. Make sure there's no septum in that uterus. Make there's no septum in that uterus. Make there's no septum in that uterus. Make sure there are no fibroids. Make sure there are no fibroids. Make sure there are no fibroids. Make sure there are no ovarian cysts or anything there are no ovarian cysts or anything there are no ovarian cysts or anything that would cause any problems. For the that would cause any problems. For the that would cause any problems. For the fourth bucket, ask for testosterone fourth bucket, ask for testosterone fourth bucket, ask for testosterone levels. Rule out to see if you have levels. Rule out to see if you have levels. Rule out to see if you have PCOS. The next one, endometriosis. Make PCOS. The next one, endometriosis. Make PCOS. The next one, endometriosis. Make sure you I taught you today what to do sure you I taught you today what to do sure you I taught you today what to do to make sure you don't have to make sure you don't have to make sure you don't have endometriosis. And if you have any endometriosis. And if you have any endometriosis. And if you have any family history of any autoimmune family history of any autoimmune family history of any autoimmune condition, if you have psoriasis, if you condition, if you have psoriasis, if you condition, if you have psoriasis, if you have shoggrans, if your mom has lupus, have shoggrans, if your mom has lupus, have shoggrans, if your mom has lupus, if you had recurrent uh pregnancy if you had recurrent uh pregnancy if you had recurrent uh pregnancy losses, if you have endometriosis, which losses, if you have endometriosis, which losses, if you have endometriosis, which is autoimmune, ask for a full autoimmune is autoimmune, ask for a full autoimmune is autoimmune, ask for a full autoimmune panel because for patients who have panel because for patients who have panel because for patients who have autoimmune panel, you can give them autoimmune panel, you can give them autoimmune panel, you can give them blood thinners like Lovenox in pregnancy blood thinners like Lovenox in pregnancy blood thinners like Lovenox in pregnancy and it'll help uh bring that flow. And and it'll help uh bring that flow. And and it'll help uh bring that flow. And it's I mean, you know, I have patients it's I mean, you know, I have patients it's I mean, you know, I have patients who come in, I haven't even gone into who come in, I haven't even gone into who come in, I haven't even gone into the room, and my medical assistant says, the room, and my medical assistant says, the room, and my medical assistant says, "Oh, this patient has had five "Oh, this patient has had five "Oh, this patient has had five miscarriages, but there's nothing wrong miscarriages, but there's nothing wrong miscarriages, but there's nothing wrong with her." I'm like, "There's no way with her." I'm like, "There's no way with her." I'm like, "There's no way this woman doesn't have an autoimmune this woman doesn't have an autoimmune this woman doesn't have an autoimmune condition." But that's pregnancy. condition." But that's pregnancy. condition." But that's pregnancy. But can I say something, But can I say something, But can I say something, &gt;&gt; please? &gt;&gt; please? &gt;&gt; please? &gt;&gt; I want to talk about breast cancer. Can &gt;&gt; I want to talk about breast cancer. Can &gt;&gt; I want to talk about breast cancer. Can I? &gt;&gt; Absolutely. You know, my passions in &gt;&gt; Absolutely. You know, my passions in &gt;&gt; Absolutely. You know, my passions in life are PCOS, endometriosis, life are PCOS, endometriosis, life are PCOS, endometriosis, and the breast cancer calculator. Do you and the breast cancer calculator. Do you and the breast cancer calculator. Do you know what that is? Do you know Tyra know what that is? Do you know Tyra know what that is? Do you know Tyra Cusk? Have you ever had an episode on Cusk? Have you ever had an episode on Cusk? Have you ever had an episode on it? &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; You're going to love this. So, I always &gt;&gt; You're going to love this. So, I always &gt;&gt; You're going to love this. So, I always say for women listening to this podcast, say for women listening to this podcast, say for women listening to this podcast, if you know your first name, your last if you know your first name, your last if you know your first name, your last name, and your date of birth, you need name, and your date of birth, you need name, and your date of birth, you need to know your lifetime risk of breast to know your lifetime risk of breast to know your lifetime risk of breast cancer. It's mandatory. cancer. It's mandatory. cancer. It's mandatory. &gt;&gt; Lifetime risk of breast cancer. &gt;&gt; Lifetime risk of breast cancer. &gt;&gt; Lifetime risk of breast cancer. &gt;&gt; Yes. Have you heard of that? &gt;&gt; Yes. Have you heard of that? &gt;&gt; Yes. Have you heard of that? &gt;&gt; I've heard that term. Good. So, why is &gt;&gt; I've heard that term. Good. So, why is &gt;&gt; I've heard that term. Good. So, why is it so important? I'm sure you've you it so important? I'm sure you've you it so important? I'm sure you've you know of someone in their 30s who end up know of someone in their 30s who end up know of someone in their 30s who end up with stage four breast cancer or with stage four breast cancer or with stage four breast cancer or advanced stage breast cancer and they advanced stage breast cancer and they advanced stage breast cancer and they die way before they get to their die way before they get to their die way before they get to their mamogram age, right? So, the first mamogram age, right? So, the first mamogram age, right? So, the first message I want to say on this podcast is message I want to say on this podcast is message I want to say on this podcast is that the message of mamograms should that the message of mamograms should that the message of mamograms should start at 40 is misleading and it needs start at 40 is misleading and it needs start at 40 is misleading and it needs to stop. to stop. to stop. Mamograms start at 40 for very low-risk Mamograms start at 40 for very low-risk Mamograms start at 40 for very low-risk patients. An average American has a 12.5% An average American has a 12.5% An average American has a 12.5% chance of getting breast cancer. chance of getting breast cancer. chance of getting breast cancer. &gt;&gt; 12.5%. &gt;&gt; 12.5%. &gt;&gt; 12.5%. &gt;&gt; Average American &gt;&gt; Average American &gt;&gt; Average American &gt;&gt; for women specifically. &gt;&gt; for women specifically. &gt;&gt; for women specifically. &gt;&gt; Yes. So pick your finger, go to a party &gt;&gt; Yes. So pick your finger, go to a party &gt;&gt; Yes. So pick your finger, go to a party in a room with 100 women, 12.5 of them, in a room with 100 women, 12.5 of them, in a room with 100 women, 12.5 of them, just average will get breast cancer. If just average will get breast cancer. If just average will get breast cancer. If I That's incredible, right? That's a I That's incredible, right? That's a I That's incredible, right? That's a huge number. huge number. huge number. Now the problem is if you have family Now the problem is if you have family Now the problem is if you have family history of breast cancer or if you have history of breast cancer or if you have history of breast cancer or if you have a biopsy that shows atypia at some point a biopsy that shows atypia at some point a biopsy that shows atypia at some point in your life that will significantly in your life that will significantly in your life that will significantly increase your lifetime risk of breast increase your lifetime risk of breast increase your lifetime risk of breast cancer. Why is that important? Again cancer. Why is that important? Again cancer. Why is that important? Again there are three buckets for breast there are three buckets for breast there are three buckets for breast cancer risk. Low risk is less than 15%. cancer risk. Low risk is less than 15%. cancer risk. Low risk is less than 15%. Intermediate risk is 15 to 20%. And high Intermediate risk is 15 to 20%. And high Intermediate risk is 15 to 20%. And high risk is 20% or more. Why am I bringing risk is 20% or more. Why am I bringing risk is 20% or more. Why am I bringing this up? If your lifetime risk of breast this up? If your lifetime risk of breast this up? If your lifetime risk of breast cancer is 20% or more, you can start cancer is 20% or more, you can start cancer is 20% or more, you can start breast imaging at 30, not 40. How about breast imaging at 30, not 40. How about breast imaging at 30, not 40. How about that? &gt;&gt; What does a doctor need to hear um in &gt;&gt; What does a doctor need to hear um in &gt;&gt; What does a doctor need to hear um in order to put someone in that category? order to put someone in that category? order to put someone in that category? &gt;&gt; It's a very simple formula. Patients can &gt;&gt; It's a very simple formula. Patients can &gt;&gt; It's a very simple formula. Patients can do it at home. See, you don't need your do it at home. See, you don't need your do it at home. See, you don't need your doctor to do this for you. Empowered. doctor to do this for you. Empowered. doctor to do this for you. Empowered. That's why women can do this at home. That's why women can do this at home. That's why women can do this at home. It's a formula called tireus It's a formula called tireus It's a formula called tireus risk assessment tool. I have it on GMD. risk assessment tool. I have it on GMD. risk assessment tool. I have it on GMD. It's free. You can literally go on there It's free. You can literally go on there It's free. You can literally go on there and calculate your lifetime risk of and calculate your lifetime risk of and calculate your lifetime risk of breast cancer. It asks you for your age, breast cancer. It asks you for your age, breast cancer. It asks you for your age, height, weight, density of the breast, height, weight, density of the breast, height, weight, density of the breast, which you can only get the density of which you can only get the density of which you can only get the density of the breast from your breast imaging the breast from your breast imaging the breast from your breast imaging mamogram or your MRI. Usually the mamogram or your MRI. Usually the mamogram or your MRI. Usually the radiologists make a comment of whether radiologists make a comment of whether radiologists make a comment of whether or not you have uh you know fibro or not you have uh you know fibro or not you have uh you know fibro glandular fatty breast uh glandular fatty breast uh glandular fatty breast uh heterogeneously dense or extremely dense heterogeneously dense or extremely dense heterogeneously dense or extremely dense breast. The higher the density the breast. The higher the density the breast. The higher the density the higher your lifetime risk of breast higher your lifetime risk of breast higher your lifetime risk of breast cancer. Patients who have children after age 30 Patients who have children after age 30 Patients who have children after age 30 are at a higher risk. Women who haven't are at a higher risk. Women who haven't are at a higher risk. Women who haven't had children. had children. had children. Women with family history. Women with Women with family history. Women with Women with family history. Women with genetic mutations. So you answer these genetic mutations. So you answer these genetic mutations. So you answer these questions and at the end of it will questions and at the end of it will questions and at the end of it will calculate your risk of breast cancer over the next your risk of breast cancer over the next your risk of breast cancer over the next 10 years or over your lifetime. If that 10 years or over your lifetime. If that 10 years or over your lifetime. If that number is 20% or more, you can go to number is 20% or more, you can go to number is 20% or more, you can go to your doctor's office for your wellwoman your doctor's office for your wellwoman your doctor's office for your wellwoman exam after you ask for your egg count exam after you ask for your egg count exam after you ask for your egg count and your pelvic ultrasound. You ask them and your pelvic ultrasound. You ask them and your pelvic ultrasound. You ask them for breast imaging. Especially if you for breast imaging. Especially if you for breast imaging. Especially if you have a firstderee relative, mom, sister, have a firstderee relative, mom, sister, have a firstderee relative, mom, sister, daughter with breast cancer, that daughter with breast cancer, that daughter with breast cancer, that significantly increases your risk. If significantly increases your risk. If significantly increases your risk. If that risk is north of 20%, you need to that risk is north of 20%, you need to that risk is north of 20%, you need to ask your doctor for breast imaging as ask your doctor for breast imaging as ask your doctor for breast imaging as early as 30. That's why I had a girl in early as 30. That's why I had a girl in early as 30. That's why I had a girl in my um on my podcast at 34. She has stage my um on my podcast at 34. She has stage my um on my podcast at 34. She has stage 4 breast cancer. 4 breast cancer. 4 breast cancer. Had she been treated and diagnosed and Had she been treated and diagnosed and Had she been treated and diagnosed and I'll tell you her story. It's it's and I'll tell you her story. It's it's and I'll tell you her story. It's it's really devastating. really devastating. really devastating. So, it's important to know your So, it's important to know your So, it's important to know your left-term risk of breast cancer. left-term risk of breast cancer. left-term risk of breast cancer. Patients who fall into the high-risisk Patients who fall into the high-risisk Patients who fall into the high-risisk category, 20% or more, in addition to category, 20% or more, in addition to category, 20% or more, in addition to mamogram, if they have dense breast mamogram, if they have dense breast mamogram, if they have dense breast tissue, they need to ask for ultrasound tissue, they need to ask for ultrasound tissue, they need to ask for ultrasound of the breast. And for high-risk of the breast. And for high-risk of the breast. And for high-risk patients, 20% or more, in addition to patients, 20% or more, in addition to patients, 20% or more, in addition to mamogram and ultrasound, they need to mamogram and ultrasound, they need to mamogram and ultrasound, they need to ask for a breast MRI. Now, if your ask for a breast MRI. Now, if your ask for a breast MRI. Now, if your doctor writes for a breast MRI, it's doctor writes for a breast MRI, it's doctor writes for a breast MRI, it's probably not going to get covered by probably not going to get covered by probably not going to get covered by insurance. But if your doctor writes insurance. But if your doctor writes insurance. But if your doctor writes patient is high risk, lifetime risk is patient is high risk, lifetime risk is patient is high risk, lifetime risk is 28%. Then your insurance company has to Then your insurance company has to Then your insurance company has to cover, right? So that's how they test cover, right? So that's how they test cover, right? So that's how they test doctors. They want to see that lifetime doctors. They want to see that lifetime doctors. They want to see that lifetime risk on the prescription order in order risk on the prescription order in order risk on the prescription order in order to approve it, but they can still not to approve it, but they can still not to approve it, but they can still not approve it, but that's another approve it, but that's another approve it, but that's another discussion. So it's important to know discussion. So it's important to know discussion. So it's important to know your lifetime risk of breast cancer. For your lifetime risk of breast cancer. For your lifetime risk of breast cancer. For any woman with family history of breast any woman with family history of breast any woman with family history of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, and the list cancer, prostate cancer, and the list cancer, prostate cancer, and the list goes on and on, they can ask their goes on and on, they can ask their goes on and on, they can ask their doctor to see if they qualify for doctor to see if they qualify for doctor to see if they qualify for genetic cancer testing. The company I genetic cancer testing. The company I genetic cancer testing. The company I use in my office, I've used for I don't use in my office, I've used for I don't use in my office, I've used for I don't know over 10 years, is Marriott. And um know over 10 years, is Marriott. And um know over 10 years, is Marriott. And um the reason I use this specific company, the reason I use this specific company, the reason I use this specific company, there are a lot of companies that check there are a lot of companies that check there are a lot of companies that check for genetic cancer testing, right? They for genetic cancer testing, right? They for genetic cancer testing, right? They check 80 90 genes. I think Marriott only check 80 90 genes. I think Marriott only check 80 90 genes. I think Marriott only checks 63 genes which is fine. checks 63 genes which is fine. checks 63 genes which is fine. But so not only Marriott checks you for But so not only Marriott checks you for But so not only Marriott checks you for the cancer-causing genes, they also the cancer-causing genes, they also the cancer-causing genes, they also calculate your tire cus for you so the calculate your tire cus for you so the calculate your tire cus for you so the doctor can see it. But in addition to doctor can see it. But in addition to doctor can see it. But in addition to that, Marriott takes your tire and also that, Marriott takes your tire and also that, Marriott takes your tire and also looks in the DNA for tiny little looks in the DNA for tiny little looks in the DNA for tiny little markers. These are not main genetic markers. These are not main genetic markers. These are not main genetic mutations. They're tiny little markers mutations. They're tiny little markers mutations. They're tiny little markers that individually don't have that much that individually don't have that much that individually don't have that much power, but some women walk around with power, but some women walk around with power, but some women walk around with tons of these uh markers and they add tons of these uh markers and they add tons of these uh markers and they add the tire with these markers and they the tire with these markers and they the tire with these markers and they give you a risk score. Sometimes I have give you a risk score. Sometimes I have give you a risk score. Sometimes I have a patient whose tire is 19% but when you a patient whose tire is 19% but when you a patient whose tire is 19% but when you calculate uh their risk score it jumps calculate uh their risk score it jumps calculate uh their risk score it jumps up to 34%. up to 34%. up to 34%. So for patients who fall into the very So for patients who fall into the very So for patients who fall into the very high risk category north of north of 35% high risk category north of north of 35% high risk category north of north of 35% those patients have the choice of um those patients have the choice of um those patients have the choice of um either doing imaging every 6 months either doing imaging every 6 months either doing imaging every 6 months alternating mamogram ultrasound with MRI alternating mamogram ultrasound with MRI alternating mamogram ultrasound with MRI or asking their doctor for a medication or asking their doctor for a medication or asking their doctor for a medication called temoxifen called temoxifen called temoxifen &gt;&gt; estrogen receptor blocker &gt;&gt; estrogen receptor blocker &gt;&gt; estrogen receptor blocker &gt;&gt; that reduces the risk of breast cancer &gt;&gt; that reduces the risk of breast cancer &gt;&gt; that reduces the risk of breast cancer by 50% in the next 10 years of their by 50% in the next 10 years of their by 50% in the next 10 years of their life or ask for a double mastctomy which life or ask for a double mastctomy which life or ask for a double mastctomy which is exactly What I did, and I'm just is exactly What I did, and I'm just is exactly What I did, and I'm just going to end it by this. I have I was going to end it by this. I have I was going to end it by this. I have I was 48. I had no family history of breast 48. I had no family history of breast 48. I had no family history of breast cancer. 85% of women who get breast cancer. 85% of women who get breast cancer. 85% of women who get breast cancer don't have it in their family. cancer don't have it in their family. cancer don't have it in their family. Less than 5% have a genetic mutation. Less than 5% have a genetic mutation. Less than 5% have a genetic mutation. Most Americans who get it are just like Most Americans who get it are just like Most Americans who get it are just like me. I had no family history. I had no me. I had no family history. I had no me. I had no family history. I had no genetic mutation. I was never on genetic mutation. I was never on genetic mutation. I was never on hormones. I was never overweight. I hormones. I was never overweight. I hormones. I was never overweight. I never smoked. I never I don't drink. never smoked. I never I don't drink. never smoked. I never I don't drink. I've never done drugs in my life. Um, so I've never done drugs in my life. Um, so I've never done drugs in my life. Um, so I was the perfect example of someone did I was the perfect example of someone did I was the perfect example of someone did everything. I did everything right. At everything. I did everything right. At everything. I did everything right. At 48, I had a breast biopsy that showed 48, I had a breast biopsy that showed 48, I had a breast biopsy that showed atypia and I asked my uh, obviously I atypia and I asked my uh, obviously I atypia and I asked my uh, obviously I had to go in and do an excisional had to go in and do an excisional had to go in and do an excisional biopsy. They removed it biopsy. They removed it biopsy. They removed it &gt;&gt; and my doctor said, "Everything's good. &gt;&gt; and my doctor said, "Everything's good. &gt;&gt; and my doctor said, "Everything's good. Go come back in 6 months." I went to my Go come back in 6 months." I went to my Go come back in 6 months." I went to my office and I calculated my lifetime risk office and I calculated my lifetime risk office and I calculated my lifetime risk of breast cancer. And it was the first of breast cancer. And it was the first of breast cancer. And it was the first time I did that because I had no reason time I did that because I had no reason time I did that because I had no reason to do it before cuz I had no risk to do it before cuz I had no risk to do it before cuz I had no risk factors. But when I calculated my factors. But when I calculated my factors. But when I calculated my lifetime risk, it showed 37%. So I lifetime risk, it showed 37%. So I lifetime risk, it showed 37%. So I called my doctor and I said, "You tell called my doctor and I said, "You tell called my doctor and I said, "You tell me I'm okay, but this lifetime risk says me I'm okay, but this lifetime risk says me I'm okay, but this lifetime risk says 37%." And back then I had three 37%." And back then I had three 37%." And back then I had three daughter, my three daughters. I had not daughter, my three daughters. I had not daughter, my three daughters. I had not adopted my little one. If you told me adopted my little one. If you told me adopted my little one. If you told me this plane had a 37% chance of crashing, this plane had a 37% chance of crashing, this plane had a 37% chance of crashing, I would never board that plane. I'm very I would never board that plane. I'm very I would never board that plane. I'm very conservative. Please take my breasts off conservative. Please take my breasts off conservative. Please take my breasts off and put implants in. I already had and put implants in. I already had and put implants in. I already had implants. I had augmentation. implants. I had augmentation. implants. I had augmentation. They called me crazy, paranoid. um uh They called me crazy, paranoid. um uh They called me crazy, paranoid. um uh anxious. Uh they told me uh I was told anxious. Uh they told me uh I was told anxious. Uh they told me uh I was told that because I didn't have family that because I didn't have family that because I didn't have family history or because I looked the way I history or because I looked the way I history or because I looked the way I did and I was so healthy that I was very did and I was so healthy that I was very did and I was so healthy that I was very low risk. Yet my number was 37%. Until I low risk. Yet my number was 37%. Until I low risk. Yet my number was 37%. Until I found the surgeon who was willing to do found the surgeon who was willing to do found the surgeon who was willing to do it. She did it and the day before it. She did it and the day before it. She did it and the day before surgery she was very annoyed with surgery she was very annoyed with surgery she was very annoyed with me and she said, "Why are you doing it?" me and she said, "Why are you doing it?" me and she said, "Why are you doing it?" I'm like, "Well, I don't want it." I I'm like, "Well, I don't want it." I I'm like, "Well, I don't want it." I said the, you know, boarding the plane. said the, you know, boarding the plane. said the, you know, boarding the plane. &gt;&gt; Is that what you want your surgeon to &gt;&gt; Is that what you want your surgeon to &gt;&gt; Is that what you want your surgeon to say to you the day before surgery? say to you the day before surgery? say to you the day before surgery? &gt;&gt; She was because she really didn't want &gt;&gt; She was because she really didn't want &gt;&gt; She was because she really didn't want to do it. She really thought I was to do it. She really thought I was to do it. She really thought I was crazy. And I said, uh, why is it so why do And I said, uh, why is it so why do And I said, uh, why is it so why do I fight? Why do I have to fight so hard I fight? Why do I have to fight so hard I fight? Why do I have to fight so hard to remove my breast? This is my body and to remove my breast? This is my body and to remove my breast? This is my body and I don't care about my breast. It's just I don't care about my breast. It's just I don't care about my breast. It's just it's very personal, but for me it really it's very personal, but for me it really it's very personal, but for me it really didn't matter. You know what she told didn't matter. You know what she told didn't matter. You know what she told me? We have really good chemo for breast We have really good chemo for breast We have really good chemo for breast cancer. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; I'm a women's health advocate. Do you &gt;&gt; I'm a women's health advocate. Do you &gt;&gt; I'm a women's health advocate. Do you understand? This is how I'm being understand? This is how I'm being understand? This is how I'm being treated in the health care system. treated in the health care system. treated in the health care system. Right? So she did it. They gained her Right? So she did it. They gained her Right? So she did it. They gained her advice and a week later I get a call advice and a week later I get a call advice and a week later I get a call that they found breast cancer in my that they found breast cancer in my that they found breast cancer in my tissue. That's how I diagnosed my breast tissue. That's how I diagnosed my breast tissue. That's how I diagnosed my breast cancer. So all this time they were cancer. So all this time they were cancer. So all this time they were digging in the left. My breast cancer digging in the left. My breast cancer digging in the left. My breast cancer was sitting on my right breast at 6:00. was sitting on my right breast at 6:00. was sitting on my right breast at 6:00. Why am I saying this? I'm not saying Why am I saying this? I'm not saying Why am I saying this? I'm not saying this to scare people, but I'm saying this to scare people, but I'm saying this to scare people, but I'm saying this that as a woman's health advocate, this that as a woman's health advocate, this that as a woman's health advocate, as a gynecologist, as someone who's I as a gynecologist, as someone who's I as a gynecologist, as someone who's I feel like I'm extremely competent in my feel like I'm extremely competent in my feel like I'm extremely competent in my field. If I had to fight so hard for field. If I had to fight so hard for field. If I had to fight so hard for someone to take me seriously, someone to take me seriously, someone to take me seriously, do you think other women have a chance? do you think other women have a chance? do you think other women have a chance? That's why they show up so late. That's why they show up so late. That's why they show up so late. That's why their genetic test is not done. why their genetic test is not done. why their genetic test is not done. That's why if you don't know your That's why if you don't know your That's why if you don't know your lifetime risk of if I didn't know my lifetime risk of if I didn't know my lifetime risk of if I didn't know my lifetime risk of breast cancer, I would lifetime risk of breast cancer, I would lifetime risk of breast cancer, I would have never known to ask for these have never known to ask for these have never known to ask for these options. That's why you have to empower women to That's why you have to empower women to That's why you have to empower women to be their own health advocate. Go be their own health advocate. Go be their own health advocate. Go calculate your lifetime risk of breast calculate your lifetime risk of breast calculate your lifetime risk of breast cancer. That's non-negotiable. And if cancer. That's non-negotiable. And if cancer. That's non-negotiable. And if that number is 20% or above, ask your that number is 20% or above, ask your that number is 20% or above, ask your doctor for breast imaging. I don't care doctor for breast imaging. I don't care doctor for breast imaging. I don't care if you're 34 years old. You need it. And if you're 34 years old. You need it. And if you're 34 years old. You need it. And if you have family history, ask your if you have family history, ask your if you have family history, ask your doctor for genetic cancer testing. doctor for genetic cancer testing. doctor for genetic cancer testing. That's not optional. And if you do this, That's not optional. And if you do this, That's not optional. And if you do this, that's why, you know what, Andrew, I that's why, you know what, Andrew, I that's why, you know what, Andrew, I don't want to jinx myself. I've don't want to jinx myself. I've don't want to jinx myself. I've practiced for 25 years. I've never lost practiced for 25 years. I've never lost practiced for 25 years. I've never lost a patient under my care to cancer. a patient under my care to cancer. a patient under my care to cancer. &gt;&gt; That's a wonderful thing to be able to &gt;&gt; That's a wonderful thing to be able to &gt;&gt; That's a wonderful thing to be able to say, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? But it's not because I do some magic in But it's not because I do some magic in But it's not because I do some magic in my office. I'm hyper vigilant with these my office. I'm hyper vigilant with these my office. I'm hyper vigilant with these patients. When you come for your patients. When you come for your patients. When you come for your wellwoman exam to my office, I'm wellwoman exam to my office, I'm wellwoman exam to my office, I'm assessing your fertility. I'm ruling out assessing your fertility. I'm ruling out assessing your fertility. I'm ruling out endo. I'm ruling out PCOS. I'm checking endo. I'm ruling out PCOS. I'm checking endo. I'm ruling out PCOS. I'm checking your egg count. I'm doing a pelvic your egg count. I'm doing a pelvic your egg count. I'm doing a pelvic ultrasound looking for cyst, fibroid, ultrasound looking for cyst, fibroid, ultrasound looking for cyst, fibroid, septum. If you have PCOS, if you're young, I'm If you have PCOS, if you're young, I'm If you have PCOS, if you're young, I'm checking your APO. I'm checking your checking your APO. I'm checking your checking your APO. I'm checking your lipoprotein little A status. If you're lipoprotein little A status. If you're lipoprotein little A status. If you're pmenopausal, I'm checking your ApoE4 to pmenopausal, I'm checking your ApoE4 to pmenopausal, I'm checking your ApoE4 to see if that increases your risk of see if that increases your risk of see if that increases your risk of dementia. I talk about hormone dementia. I talk about hormone dementia. I talk about hormone replacement early uh during pmenopause. replacement early uh during pmenopause. replacement early uh during pmenopause. I talk about bone density. I talk about I talk about bone density. I talk about I talk about bone density. I talk about colonoscopy. I talk about genetic colonoscopy. I talk about genetic colonoscopy. I talk about genetic testing. Depending on your lifetime risk testing. Depending on your lifetime risk testing. Depending on your lifetime risk of breast cancer, I order different of breast cancer, I order different of breast cancer, I order different things, different imaging for different things, different imaging for different things, different imaging for different patients. I check your hormones. I check patients. I check your hormones. I check patients. I check your hormones. I check your thyroid. I check your prolactin. your thyroid. I check your prolactin. your thyroid. I check your prolactin. So, I talk about anxiety, depression. I So, I talk about anxiety, depression. I So, I talk about anxiety, depression. I talk about eating disorder. So, right talk about eating disorder. So, right talk about eating disorder. So, right now, a wellwoman exam for a patient is now, a wellwoman exam for a patient is now, a wellwoman exam for a patient is go to the doctor's office, get your go to the doctor's office, get your go to the doctor's office, get your papsmear, get an STD check if you're asking for get an STD check if you're asking for get an STD check if you're asking for it, right? Ask for birth control, do a it, right? Ask for birth control, do a it, right? Ask for birth control, do a breast exam. If you're 40, you get an breast exam. If you're 40, you get an breast exam. If you're 40, you get an order for mamogram, order for mamogram, order for mamogram, and then you go home. That's not a and then you go home. That's not a and then you go home. That's not a wellwoman exam. That has to stop. And wellwoman exam. That has to stop. And wellwoman exam. That has to stop. And pelvic ultrasound should be on top of pelvic ultrasound should be on top of pelvic ultrasound should be on top of the list. the list. the list. &gt;&gt; I greatly appreciate you telling us &gt;&gt; I greatly appreciate you telling us &gt;&gt; I greatly appreciate you telling us this. I do believe that what you're this. I do believe that what you're this. I do believe that what you're saying will lead to change. It's going saying will lead to change. It's going saying will lead to change. It's going to take some time, but I'm going to take some time, but I'm going to take some time, but I'm going to encourage all the women listening to not encourage all the women listening to not encourage all the women listening to not just do what you suggest, but to also just do what you suggest, but to also just do what you suggest, but to also echo what you're saying to all of their echo what you're saying to all of their echo what you're saying to all of their friends and to all of their family friends and to all of their family friends and to all of their family members, uh, the women they know, members, uh, the women they know, members, uh, the women they know, because I do think that that's the way because I do think that that's the way because I do think that that's the way things change, frankly. Um, you know, I things change, frankly. Um, you know, I things change, frankly. Um, you know, I I've never beat the drum of one I've never beat the drum of one I've never beat the drum of one particular um health ailment or health particular um health ailment or health particular um health ailment or health practice, although morning sunlight. I practice, although morning sunlight. I practice, although morning sunlight. I what I do is I give people information what I do is I give people information what I do is I give people information and I try and distribute it so people and I try and distribute it so people and I try and distribute it so people can distribute it to one another. But um can distribute it to one another. But um can distribute it to one another. But um if ever there was a batch of if ever there was a batch of if ever there was a batch of information to come through on this information to come through on this information to come through on this podcast where it was absolutely critical podcast where it was absolutely critical podcast where it was absolutely critical that people do what the guest is talking that people do what the guest is talking that people do what the guest is talking about and share that information and about and share that information and about and share that information and just keep pushing and pushing forward just keep pushing and pushing forward just keep pushing and pushing forward with this. Um, it's the information with this. Um, it's the information with this. Um, it's the information you've been sharing. So, um, and I can't you've been sharing. So, um, and I can't you've been sharing. So, um, and I can't say that enough times or emphatically say that enough times or emphatically say that enough times or emphatically enough. I do have a couple more questions, even I do have a couple more questions, even I do have a couple more questions, even though you've been incredibly generous though you've been incredibly generous though you've been incredibly generous with your time. No, of course, but there with your time. No, of course, but there with your time. No, of course, but there are questions that come from the are questions that come from the are questions that come from the audience on social media that I've audience on social media that I've audience on social media that I've solicited for prior to the podcast. So, solicited for prior to the podcast. So, solicited for prior to the podcast. So, I'm going to just take a moment, grab my I'm going to just take a moment, grab my I'm going to just take a moment, grab my phone, which I keep out of the room for phone, which I keep out of the room for phone, which I keep out of the room for our discussions, but I'm going to grab our discussions, but I'm going to grab our discussions, but I'm going to grab it now and see if any of the questions it now and see if any of the questions it now and see if any of the questions um touch on things that we haven't um touch on things that we haven't um touch on things that we haven't talked about uh this far. Okay. Okay, talked about uh this far. Okay. Okay, talked about uh this far. Okay. Okay, some excellent questions from the some excellent questions from the some excellent questions from the general public. general public. general public. This first one is, are there any This first one is, are there any This first one is, are there any non-invasive methods for the diagnosis non-invasive methods for the diagnosis non-invasive methods for the diagnosis of endometriosis like tests within the of endometriosis like tests within the of endometriosis like tests within the men from the menstrual blood itself? men from the menstrual blood itself? men from the menstrual blood itself? &gt;&gt; They're doing a lot of research right &gt;&gt; They're doing a lot of research right &gt;&gt; They're doing a lot of research right now. We don't currently have it right now. We don't currently have it right now. We don't currently have it right now. Non-invasive is well, listen to now. Non-invasive is well, listen to now. Non-invasive is well, listen to your patient. That's like 99% accurate. your patient. That's like 99% accurate. your patient. That's like 99% accurate. Do a pelvic ultrasound. Unfortunately, Do a pelvic ultrasound. Unfortunately, Do a pelvic ultrasound. Unfortunately, if you see it on pelvic ultrasound, it's if you see it on pelvic ultrasound, it's if you see it on pelvic ultrasound, it's already advanced disease. Or do a pelvic already advanced disease. Or do a pelvic already advanced disease. Or do a pelvic MRI because MRI can actually with a MRI because MRI can actually with a MRI because MRI can actually with a experienced radiologist, they can look experienced radiologist, they can look experienced radiologist, they can look at these specially infiltrating lesions, at these specially infiltrating lesions, at these specially infiltrating lesions, they can see those on MRI. they can see those on MRI. they can see those on MRI. &gt;&gt; Is endometriosis an autoimmune disease? &gt;&gt; Is endometriosis an autoimmune disease? &gt;&gt; Is endometriosis an autoimmune disease? &gt;&gt; Yes, it is. We talked about this. &gt;&gt; Yes, it is. We talked about this. &gt;&gt; Yes, it is. We talked about this. Absolutely. And that's why if you have Absolutely. And that's why if you have Absolutely. And that's why if you have endometriosis and you're trying to get endometriosis and you're trying to get endometriosis and you're trying to get pregnant or if you've had a miscarriage, pregnant or if you've had a miscarriage, pregnant or if you've had a miscarriage, ask your doctor for a full autoimmune ask your doctor for a full autoimmune ask your doctor for a full autoimmune panel because when you have one panel because when you have one panel because when you have one autoimmune, you have a 30% chance of autoimmune, you have a 30% chance of autoimmune, you have a 30% chance of having another autoimmune disorder. having another autoimmune disorder. having another autoimmune disorder. &gt;&gt; Is cognitive impairment in menopause &gt;&gt; Is cognitive impairment in menopause &gt;&gt; Is cognitive impairment in menopause an absolute occurrence. Like does it an absolute occurrence. Like does it an absolute occurrence. Like does it necessarily happen as what they want to necessarily happen as what they want to necessarily happen as what they want to &gt;&gt; not always but it's extremely common. I &gt;&gt; not always but it's extremely common. I &gt;&gt; not always but it's extremely common. I call it brain fog. call it brain fog. call it brain fog. You know, women lose their uh You know, women lose their uh You know, women lose their uh concentration. They don't remember concentration. They don't remember concentration. They don't remember things. you go into a room, you're like, things. you go into a room, you're like, things. you go into a room, you're like, why did I come in here? And a lot of why did I come in here? And a lot of why did I come in here? And a lot of that is because of the fluctuations in that is because of the fluctuations in that is because of the fluctuations in the hormones and uh the drop in the hormones and uh the drop in the hormones and uh the drop in the estrogen. So by replacing um by hor estrogen. So by replacing um by hor estrogen. So by replacing um by hor giving these patients hormone giving these patients hormone giving these patients hormone replacement, they feel like oh my god, replacement, they feel like oh my god, replacement, they feel like oh my god, I'm alive again. I can see again, I can I'm alive again. I can see again, I can I'm alive again. I can see again, I can think again. So it absolutely happens. think again. So it absolutely happens. think again. So it absolutely happens. It you know most symptoms of menopause, It you know most symptoms of menopause, It you know most symptoms of menopause, different women experience menopause different women experience menopause different women experience menopause differently. They all don't share the differently. They all don't share the differently. They all don't share the same exact symptoms, but a lot of women same exact symptoms, but a lot of women same exact symptoms, but a lot of women complain of brain fog. complain of brain fog. complain of brain fog. Is inositol useful for PCOS? Is inositol useful for PCOS? Is inositol useful for PCOS? &gt;&gt; Yes, absolutely. Gonna have it in OV. &gt;&gt; Yes, absolutely. Gonna have it in OV. &gt;&gt; Yes, absolutely. Gonna have it in OV. &gt;&gt; What do you think is the most overlooked &gt;&gt; What do you think is the most overlooked &gt;&gt; What do you think is the most overlooked missed cause of infertility by doctors? missed cause of infertility by doctors? missed cause of infertility by doctors? &gt;&gt; Everything we talked about endo and PCOS &gt;&gt; Everything we talked about endo and PCOS &gt;&gt; Everything we talked about endo and PCOS hands down a lot of these patients who hands down a lot of these patients who hands down a lot of these patients who are unexplained are unexplained are unexplained are undiagnosed PCOS and endometriosis are undiagnosed PCOS and endometriosis are undiagnosed PCOS and endometriosis patients. suggestions for PMDD relief suggestions for PMDD relief suggestions for PMDD relief &gt;&gt; for somebody in their 40s. &gt;&gt; for somebody in their 40s. &gt;&gt; for somebody in their 40s. &gt;&gt; And could you explain PMDD? I don't &gt;&gt; And could you explain PMDD? I don't &gt;&gt; And could you explain PMDD? I don't think we've defined that acronym. think we've defined that acronym. think we've defined that acronym. &gt;&gt; PMDD is a severe form of PMS. Very, very &gt;&gt; PMDD is a severe form of PMS. Very, very &gt;&gt; PMDD is a severe form of PMS. Very, very common. Devastating for these girls. The common. Devastating for these girls. The common. Devastating for these girls. The best way to describe it is these girls, best way to describe it is these girls, best way to describe it is these girls, two weeks out of the month, they're two weeks out of the month, they're two weeks out of the month, they're perfect. Two weeks out of the month, perfect. Two weeks out of the month, perfect. Two weeks out of the month, they destroy all their relationships. they destroy all their relationships. they destroy all their relationships. They're depressed. They're crying. They're depressed. They're crying. They're depressed. They're crying. They're unmotivated. They don't want to They're unmotivated. They don't want to They're unmotivated. They don't want to go to school. they completely decline. go to school. they completely decline. go to school. they completely decline. They don't want to go out They don't want to go out They don't want to go out and two weeks after, so I always say two and two weeks after, so I always say two and two weeks after, so I always say two weeks out of the month, you destroy all weeks out of the month, you destroy all weeks out of the month, you destroy all your relationships and then you all your relationships and then you all your relationships and then you spend two more weeks fixing it. And then spend two more weeks fixing it. And then spend two more weeks fixing it. And then the vicious cycle happens over and over the vicious cycle happens over and over the vicious cycle happens over and over again. So PMDD is a severe form of PMS. again. So PMDD is a severe form of PMS. again. So PMDD is a severe form of PMS. And what happens, it's not an abnormal And what happens, it's not an abnormal And what happens, it's not an abnormal hormonal u condition. It's actually the brain's u condition. It's actually the brain's u condition. It's actually the brain's reaction, extreme reaction to normal reaction, extreme reaction to normal reaction, extreme reaction to normal hormonal changes in the body. So PMDD, hormonal changes in the body. So PMDD, hormonal changes in the body. So PMDD, the symptoms usually start 10 days the symptoms usually start 10 days the symptoms usually start 10 days before the period and goes away 2 3 days before the period and goes away 2 3 days before the period and goes away 2 3 days after the period. And this vicious cycle after the period. And this vicious cycle after the period. And this vicious cycle happens. Believe it or not, suicide is happens. Believe it or not, suicide is happens. Believe it or not, suicide is really high in these patients during really high in these patients during really high in these patients during those weeks. I'm actually seeing a those weeks. I'm actually seeing a those weeks. I'm actually seeing a patient from out of state on Friday patient from out of state on Friday patient from out of state on Friday after my surgery because her family's after my surgery because her family's after my surgery because her family's flying her because she's not feeling flying her because she's not feeling flying her because she's not feeling well and her diagnosis is PMDD. How do well and her diagnosis is PMDD. How do well and her diagnosis is PMDD. How do you treat it? If you want to use birth you treat it? If you want to use birth you treat it? If you want to use birth control, there's one form of birth control, there's one form of birth control, there's one form of birth control. Yas, I don't usually go to it. control. Yas, I don't usually go to it. control. Yas, I don't usually go to it. It helps with the symptoms of PMDD, but It helps with the symptoms of PMDD, but It helps with the symptoms of PMDD, but these patients actually they do really these patients actually they do really these patients actually they do really well if you put them on uh SSRIs or well if you put them on uh SSRIs or well if you put them on uh SSRIs or anti-depressants just 10 days during the anti-depressants just 10 days during the anti-depressants just 10 days during the month. For these patients, you can month. For these patients, you can month. For these patients, you can prescribe 20 milligrams of Prozac 10 to prescribe 20 milligrams of Prozac 10 to prescribe 20 milligrams of Prozac 10 to 14 days before their period. So, they 14 days before their period. So, they 14 days before their period. So, they only take it 10 to 14 days per month only take it 10 to 14 days per month only take it 10 to 14 days per month after ovulation. They start taking it after ovulation. They start taking it after ovulation. They start taking it once a day and they stop at the onset of once a day and they stop at the onset of once a day and they stop at the onset of their period. You can also treat them their period. You can also treat them their period. You can also treat them with 25 milligrams of Zoloft. For some with 25 milligrams of Zoloft. For some with 25 milligrams of Zoloft. For some reason, their brain responds really well reason, their brain responds really well reason, their brain responds really well to this pulsatile treatment and it's a to this pulsatile treatment and it's a to this pulsatile treatment and it's a gamecher for these patients. PMDDD gamecher for these patients. PMDDD gamecher for these patients. PMDDD patients, you do want to make sure they patients, you do want to make sure they patients, you do want to make sure they don't have a chronic underlying anxiety don't have a chronic underlying anxiety don't have a chronic underlying anxiety depressive disorder. So, I always refer depressive disorder. So, I always refer depressive disorder. So, I always refer them to uh a psychiatrist, but you can them to uh a psychiatrist, but you can them to uh a psychiatrist, but you can absolutely treat it. For pmenopausal absolutely treat it. For pmenopausal absolutely treat it. For pmenopausal women, you can also treat them with women, you can also treat them with women, you can also treat them with hormone replacement. So, someone in her hormone replacement. So, someone in her hormone replacement. So, someone in her 40s, I want to make sure if she didn't 40s, I want to make sure if she didn't 40s, I want to make sure if she didn't have it and suddenly she has, it's not have it and suddenly she has, it's not have it and suddenly she has, it's not like she hasn't had PMDDD and suddenly like she hasn't had PMDDD and suddenly like she hasn't had PMDDD and suddenly she has PMDDD, it's probably it could be she has PMDDD, it's probably it could be she has PMDDD, it's probably it could be pmenopause. So, you don't want to miss pmenopause. So, you don't want to miss pmenopause. So, you don't want to miss that. &gt;&gt; Great. It's the first time I've heard &gt;&gt; Great. It's the first time I've heard &gt;&gt; Great. It's the first time I've heard such a thorough description of what such a thorough description of what such a thorough description of what PMDDD is and what one can do about it. PMDDD is and what one can do about it. PMDDD is and what one can do about it. Uh I think you just helped a ton of Uh I think you just helped a ton of Uh I think you just helped a ton of people. Uh a lot of questions about people. Uh a lot of questions about people. Uh a lot of questions about fasting and about low starch aka low fasting and about low starch aka low fasting and about low starch aka low carbohydrate diet. carbohydrate diet. carbohydrate diet. &gt;&gt; I 100% say yes. A lot of us are eating, &gt;&gt; I 100% say yes. A lot of us are eating, &gt;&gt; I 100% say yes. A lot of us are eating, you know, like if you're waking uh in you know, like if you're waking uh in you know, like if you're waking uh in the morning and having bread and pasta the morning and having bread and pasta the morning and having bread and pasta for lunch and then you're having ice for lunch and then you're having ice for lunch and then you're having ice cream and then you have uh rice and I cream and then you have uh rice and I cream and then you have uh rice and I don't know, pizza for dinner. Of course, don't know, pizza for dinner. Of course, don't know, pizza for dinner. Of course, it'll start that process. Diet is it'll start that process. Diet is it'll start that process. Diet is extremely important. One thing I try to extremely important. One thing I try to extremely important. One thing I try to stay away from is limiting these stay away from is limiting these stay away from is limiting these patients or telling a 22year-old you are patients or telling a 22year-old you are patients or telling a 22year-old you are not to have any carbohydrates. That's not to have any carbohydrates. That's not to have any carbohydrates. That's not sustainable. What I believe is if not sustainable. What I believe is if not sustainable. What I believe is if you fix their underlying condition and you fix their underlying condition and you fix their underlying condition and address their insulin resistance and address their insulin resistance and address their insulin resistance and help them exercise and um have healthy help them exercise and um have healthy help them exercise and um have healthy habits, you can fix these symptoms. Just habits, you can fix these symptoms. Just habits, you can fix these symptoms. Just cutting carbohydrates out. A lot of cutting carbohydrates out. A lot of cutting carbohydrates out. A lot of these PCOS patients are already doing these PCOS patients are already doing these PCOS patients are already doing this. They're literally starving this. They're literally starving this. They're literally starving themselves and they're exercising and themselves and they're exercising and themselves and they're exercising and they're not losing weight. It's because they're not losing weight. It's because they're not losing weight. It's because their underlying condition has not been their underlying condition has not been their underlying condition has not been addressed. So I would say like addressed. So I would say like addressed. So I would say like anything else at moderation. But you anything else at moderation. But you anything else at moderation. But you don't want to tell someone don't eat don't want to tell someone don't eat don't want to tell someone don't eat carbohydrates. It's not sustainable. carbohydrates. It's not sustainable. carbohydrates. It's not sustainable. &gt;&gt; Someone said that their estradiol patch &gt;&gt; Someone said that their estradiol patch &gt;&gt; Someone said that their estradiol patch is causing some hair loss. Is there is causing some hair loss. Is there is causing some hair loss. Is there another option? another option? another option? &gt;&gt; I don't think it's the estradiol patch &gt;&gt; I don't think it's the estradiol patch &gt;&gt; I don't think it's the estradiol patch causing the hair loss. Women who use causing the hair loss. Women who use causing the hair loss. Women who use estradiol patches um are going through estradiol patches um are going through estradiol patches um are going through pmenopause and menopause. One of the pmenopause and menopause. One of the pmenopause and menopause. One of the issues with pmenopause and menopause is issues with pmenopause and menopause is issues with pmenopause and menopause is that drop in estrogen does cause hair that drop in estrogen does cause hair that drop in estrogen does cause hair thinning. So for that reason I would say thinning. So for that reason I would say thinning. So for that reason I would say you know I usually treat these patients you know I usually treat these patients you know I usually treat these patients with minoxidil. You can either do like with minoxidil. You can either do like with minoxidil. You can either do like ro gain on your scalp or you can take ro gain on your scalp or you can take ro gain on your scalp or you can take oral minoxidil. Uh the prescription is oral minoxidil. Uh the prescription is oral minoxidil. Uh the prescription is 2.5. You can start as uh little as.5 2.5. You can start as uh little as.5 2.5. You can start as uh little as.5 every single day. The problem is hair every single day. The problem is hair every single day. The problem is hair thinning is very common in menopause and thinning is very common in menopause and thinning is very common in menopause and you want to hit it quick. So if you want to hit it quick. So if you want to hit it quick. So if you start noticing that you're losing hair. start noticing that you're losing hair. start noticing that you're losing hair. Take the minoxidil. It doesn't work Take the minoxidil. It doesn't work Take the minoxidil. It doesn't work overnight. You will probably start overnight. You will probably start overnight. You will probably start seeing results in about six months, but seeing results in about six months, but seeing results in about six months, but in two years it you'll see a huge in two years it you'll see a huge in two years it you'll see a huge difference in your hair. But hit it difference in your hair. But hit it difference in your hair. But hit it early. And it's not the estrogen patch. early. And it's not the estrogen patch. early. And it's not the estrogen patch. I doubt it. I doubt it. I doubt it. &gt;&gt; A number of questions about how to &gt;&gt; A number of questions about how to &gt;&gt; A number of questions about how to improve quality of eggs after age 35 improve quality of eggs after age 35 improve quality of eggs after age 35 presumably by doing all the things that presumably by doing all the things that presumably by doing all the things that we talked about for the past. lower end we talked about for the past. lower end we talked about for the past. lower end intramaler fat, lower inflammation, um intramaler fat, lower inflammation, um intramaler fat, lower inflammation, um improve insulin sensitivity, improve insulin sensitivity, improve insulin sensitivity, &gt;&gt; uh suppress endometriosis for sure &gt;&gt; uh suppress endometriosis for sure &gt;&gt; uh suppress endometriosis for sure because endometriosis will go after because endometriosis will go after because endometriosis will go after those egg count and quality. PCOS will those egg count and quality. PCOS will those egg count and quality. PCOS will go after your quality. go after your quality. go after your quality. &gt;&gt; Does endometriosis pain start to wayne &gt;&gt; Does endometriosis pain start to wayne &gt;&gt; Does endometriosis pain start to wayne with pmenopause? with pmenopause? with pmenopause? &gt;&gt; Yes, it gets better. The problem is &gt;&gt; Yes, it gets better. The problem is &gt;&gt; Yes, it gets better. The problem is women in their 40s have a lot of women in their 40s have a lot of women in their 40s have a lot of adenomiiosis which mimics the symptoms adenomiiosis which mimics the symptoms adenomiiosis which mimics the symptoms of endometriosis. So these women of endometriosis. So these women of endometriosis. So these women actually do extremely well with the actually do extremely well with the actually do extremely well with the progesterone IUD. We talked about the progesterone IUD. We talked about the progesterone IUD. We talked about the Marina IUD because it suppresses their Marina IUD because it suppresses their Marina IUD because it suppresses their pelvis and their endometriosis. And once pelvis and their endometriosis. And once pelvis and their endometriosis. And once they go through menopause, this is a they go through menopause, this is a they go through menopause, this is a very important point and I'm so glad you very important point and I'm so glad you very important point and I'm so glad you brought it up because doctors don't brought it up because doctors don't brought it up because doctors don't realize this for patients with realize this for patients with realize this for patients with endometriosis. Menopause will make the pain go away, Menopause will make the pain go away, Menopause will make the pain go away, right? Because what happens in menopause right? Because what happens in menopause right? Because what happens in menopause are ovaries are not functioning and the are ovaries are not functioning and the are ovaries are not functioning and the estrogen levels drop. However, you come estrogen levels drop. However, you come estrogen levels drop. However, you come and give these women estrogen, what and give these women estrogen, what and give these women estrogen, what happens? You can stimulate these happens? You can stimulate these happens? You can stimulate these endometriosis implants all over again. endometriosis implants all over again. endometriosis implants all over again. And this is what happens. So, And this is what happens. So, And this is what happens. So, endometriosis patients in general have a endometriosis patients in general have a endometriosis patients in general have a slightly higher increased risk of slightly higher increased risk of slightly higher increased risk of ovarian cancer, especially the ones with ovarian cancer, especially the ones with ovarian cancer, especially the ones with endometrias or advanced disease. endometrias or advanced disease. endometrias or advanced disease. And post-menopause hormone replacement, And post-menopause hormone replacement, And post-menopause hormone replacement, the estrogen, can still stimulate these the estrogen, can still stimulate these the estrogen, can still stimulate these implants. Now a lot of women in the implants. Now a lot of women in the implants. Now a lot of women in the health care system who have undergo a health care system who have undergo a health care system who have undergo a hyerectomy meaning they remove their hyerectomy meaning they remove their hyerectomy meaning they remove their uterus the doctor says you don't need uterus the doctor says you don't need uterus the doctor says you don't need progesterone cuz you know we think we progesterone cuz you know we think we progesterone cuz you know we think we give the progesterone to protect the give the progesterone to protect the give the progesterone to protect the lining of the uterus from unopposed lining of the uterus from unopposed lining of the uterus from unopposed estrogen causing uterine cancer. Well estrogen causing uterine cancer. Well estrogen causing uterine cancer. Well that's not true. In patients with that's not true. In patients with that's not true. In patients with endometriosis, even when they undergo a hyerectomy and even when they undergo a hyerectomy and even when they undergo a hyerectomy and they're using estrogen patches, you they're using estrogen patches, you they're using estrogen patches, you always want to give them the always want to give them the always want to give them the progesterone because otherwise you progesterone because otherwise you progesterone because otherwise you stimulate this these implants again stimulate this these implants again stimulate this these implants again because of unopposed estrogen. That's because of unopposed estrogen. That's because of unopposed estrogen. That's one reason. And also we use the one reason. And also we use the one reason. And also we use the progesterone micronized progesterone in progesterone micronized progesterone in progesterone micronized progesterone in hormone replacement for patients who are hormone replacement for patients who are hormone replacement for patients who are anxious, who are not sleeping well, anxious, who are not sleeping well, anxious, who are not sleeping well, regardless of whether or not they have regardless of whether or not they have regardless of whether or not they have uter they have a uterus. But uter they have a uterus. But uter they have a uterus. But endometriosis patients their hormone endometriosis patients their hormone endometriosis patients their hormone replacement should always be with replacement should always be with replacement should always be with progesterone. &gt;&gt; Are there any natural ways to increase &gt;&gt; Are there any natural ways to increase &gt;&gt; Are there any natural ways to increase progesterone? &gt;&gt; So one reason uh our body doesn't uh you &gt;&gt; So one reason uh our body doesn't uh you &gt;&gt; So one reason uh our body doesn't uh you know when we don't ovulate we don't make know when we don't ovulate we don't make know when we don't ovulate we don't make that corpus ludial cyst and we don't that corpus ludial cyst and we don't that corpus ludial cyst and we don't have that progesterone being secreted. have that progesterone being secreted. have that progesterone being secreted. So in PCOS let's say by lowering your So in PCOS let's say by lowering your So in PCOS let's say by lowering your weight by lowering that visceral fat but weight by lowering that visceral fat but weight by lowering that visceral fat but reg by regulating your insulin reg by regulating your insulin reg by regulating your insulin resistance you can increase your chance resistance you can increase your chance resistance you can increase your chance of ovulation and by ovulation then you of ovulation and by ovulation then you of ovulation and by ovulation then you start releasing the progesterone. So start releasing the progesterone. So start releasing the progesterone. So that's the best way of describing it but that's the best way of describing it but that's the best way of describing it but for pmenopausal women then you need to for pmenopausal women then you need to for pmenopausal women then you need to um prescribe them the micronized um prescribe them the micronized um prescribe them the micronized progesterone. &gt;&gt; You already answered this earlier but I &gt;&gt; You already answered this earlier but I &gt;&gt; You already answered this earlier but I think it's worth just briefly repeating. think it's worth just briefly repeating. think it's worth just briefly repeating. uh how does diet affect female hormone uh how does diet affect female hormone uh how does diet affect female hormone health? &gt;&gt; As we get closer to menopause, we become &gt;&gt; As we get closer to menopause, we become &gt;&gt; As we get closer to menopause, we become more insulin resistant regardless of more insulin resistant regardless of more insulin resistant regardless of whether we had PCOS or not. So dealing whether we had PCOS or not. So dealing whether we had PCOS or not. So dealing with insulin almost all of us women, we with insulin almost all of us women, we with insulin almost all of us women, we deal with insulin resistance at some deal with insulin resistance at some deal with insulin resistance at some point in our life at different degrees. point in our life at different degrees. point in our life at different degrees. But that goes to the uh you know what I But that goes to the uh you know what I But that goes to the uh you know what I was telling you when you load the gun was telling you when you load the gun was telling you when you load the gun with your genetics and you pull the with your genetics and you pull the with your genetics and you pull the trigger with epigenetics, your diet, trigger with epigenetics, your diet, trigger with epigenetics, your diet, your exercise, your sleep, your stress, your exercise, your sleep, your stress, your exercise, your sleep, your stress, all of that will affect it long term. all of that will affect it long term. all of that will affect it long term. &gt;&gt; What can women do to prolong their &gt;&gt; What can women do to prolong their &gt;&gt; What can women do to prolong their fertility? I suppose everything you've fertility? I suppose everything you've fertility? I suppose everything you've already talked about, already talked about, already talked about, &gt;&gt; but you see, but now you know how to &gt;&gt; but you see, but now you know how to &gt;&gt; but you see, but now you know how to answer it. Don't dismiss your answer it. Don't dismiss your answer it. Don't dismiss your endometriosis. Don't dismiss your PCOS. endometriosis. Don't dismiss your PCOS. endometriosis. Don't dismiss your PCOS. Know your egg count. Make sure you Know your egg count. Make sure you Know your egg count. Make sure you freeze your eggs early if you can afford freeze your eggs early if you can afford freeze your eggs early if you can afford it. You know, I mean, all the steps we it. You know, I mean, all the steps we it. You know, I mean, all the steps we talked about for the past four hours. talked about for the past four hours. talked about for the past four hours. &gt;&gt; I could listen to you for many, many &gt;&gt; I could listen to you for many, many &gt;&gt; I could listen to you for many, many hours and I know the audience can hours and I know the audience can hours and I know the audience can too. Um, several things. First of all, too. Um, several things. First of all, too. Um, several things. First of all, thank you for coming here today to share thank you for coming here today to share thank you for coming here today to share with us a true treasure trove of with us a true treasure trove of with us a true treasure trove of information. I mean, I have to imagine information. I mean, I have to imagine information. I mean, I have to imagine that most of what people heard, they that most of what people heard, they that most of what people heard, they have not heard before, and certainly not have not heard before, and certainly not have not heard before, and certainly not with the depth and rigor and actionable with the depth and rigor and actionable with the depth and rigor and actionable items that you've suggested. So, just items that you've suggested. So, just items that you've suggested. So, just thank you. Thank you. Thank you for thank you. Thank you. Thank you for thank you. Thank you. Thank you for taking the time. You you're very busy. taking the time. You you're very busy. taking the time. You you're very busy. You have four children. You you're You have four children. You you're You have four children. You you're happily married. You run a very happily married. You run a very happily married. You run a very active clinic and your uh story about active clinic and your uh story about active clinic and your uh story about running off to deliver babies at a rate running off to deliver babies at a rate running off to deliver babies at a rate of 80 or more per month while pregnant of 80 or more per month while pregnant of 80 or more per month while pregnant um says it all. but that you would take um says it all. but that you would take um says it all. but that you would take the time to come here and share with our the time to come here and share with our the time to come here and share with our audience, the general public, that is um audience, the general public, that is um audience, the general public, that is um I'm immensely grateful. I know they are I'm immensely grateful. I know they are I'm immensely grateful. I know they are immensely grateful. We will put links so immensely grateful. We will put links so immensely grateful. We will put links so that people can find you and the various that people can find you and the various that people can find you and the various resources discussed as well as um resources discussed as well as um resources discussed as well as um another call to action to listen to another call to action to listen to another call to action to listen to shemd uh your podcast. I also just want shemd uh your podcast. I also just want shemd uh your podcast. I also just want to thank you for being you, you know, to thank you for being you, you know, to thank you for being you, you know, which is a sort of a funny statement on which is a sort of a funny statement on which is a sort of a funny statement on the surface, but truly I mean your the surface, but truly I mean your the surface, but truly I mean your passion for what you do, your passion for what you do, your passion for what you do, your passion for women's health and just the again for women's health and just the again for women's health and just the again the depth and rigor with which you the depth and rigor with which you the depth and rigor with which you approach these things that I think for approach these things that I think for approach these things that I think for most people they you know look up one or most people they you know look up one or most people they you know look up one or two things see a few symptoms you know two things see a few symptoms you know two things see a few symptoms you know this age to this age group and you're this age to this age group and you're this age to this age group and you're giving people tools to potentially giving people tools to potentially giving people tools to potentially diagnose their own endometriosis PCOS diagnose their own endometriosis PCOS diagnose their own endometriosis PCOS and breast cancer extend fertility and breast cancer extend fertility and breast cancer extend fertility live life with far less pain, ideally no live life with far less pain, ideally no live life with far less pain, ideally no pain, and perhaps most importantly to pain, and perhaps most importantly to pain, and perhaps most importantly to give them clarity and the sense that give them clarity and the sense that give them clarity and the sense that they are indeed sane in a world that they are indeed sane in a world that they are indeed sane in a world that basically is sending back basically is sending back basically is sending back &gt;&gt; the opposite message because it just &gt;&gt; the opposite message because it just &gt;&gt; the opposite message because it just doesn't understand what they're going doesn't understand what they're going doesn't understand what they're going through. So, um, you know, words really through. So, um, you know, words really through. So, um, you know, words really can't say enough for how grateful I am can't say enough for how grateful I am can't say enough for how grateful I am to have you here and to share this to have you here and to share this to have you here and to share this knowledge and that the audience is sure knowledge and that the audience is sure knowledge and that the audience is sure to glean from you. I would really like to glean from you. I would really like to glean from you. I would really like to have you back again to talk about to have you back again to talk about to have you back again to talk about where these things are going because it where these things are going because it where these things are going because it sounds like the field is advancing very sounds like the field is advancing very sounds like the field is advancing very quickly too. And everybody out there um quickly too. And everybody out there um quickly too. And everybody out there um head to the various resources that Dr. head to the various resources that Dr. head to the various resources that Dr. Aliabody shared and um and please share Aliabody shared and um and please share Aliabody shared and um and please share with me and thanking her uh through her with me and thanking her uh through her with me and thanking her uh through her social media channels, her podcast and social media channels, her podcast and social media channels, her podcast and all the rest. And just you know and all the rest. And just you know and all the rest. And just you know really truly thank you. Thank you. Thank really truly thank you. Thank you. Thank really truly thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much. you so much. you so much. &gt;&gt; Oh, you're so sweet. Thank you for &gt;&gt; Oh, you're so sweet. Thank you for &gt;&gt; Oh, you're so sweet. Thank you for having me. Thank you for giving me this having me. Thank you for giving me this having me. Thank you for giving me this opportunity, this mic so I can take, you opportunity, this mic so I can take, you opportunity, this mic so I can take, you know, so I can take this time to talk know, so I can take this time to talk know, so I can take this time to talk about women and women's health. I love about women and women's health. I love about women and women's health. I love women. I'm surrounded by them. I have women. I'm surrounded by them. I have women. I'm surrounded by them. I have four daughters. I do this for them, for four daughters. I do this for them, for four daughters. I do this for them, for the world, and this world will be a the world, and this world will be a the world, and this world will be a better place if we take care of our better place if we take care of our better place if we take care of our women. &gt;&gt; Well, God bless you for doing it. Thank &gt;&gt; Well, God bless you for doing it. Thank &gt;&gt; Well, God bless you for doing it. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Tais Aliabati. To discussion with Dr. Tais Aliabati. To discussion with Dr. Tais Aliabati. To learn more about her work and to find learn more about her work and to find learn more about her work and to find links to the various resources we links to the various resources we links to the various resources we discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Tais today's discussion with Dr. Tais today's discussion with Dr. Tais Aliabati. And last, but certainly not Aliabati. And last, but certainly not Aliabati. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]