My doctor explained to me that we were My doctor explained to me that we were My doctor explained to me that we were out of options. He said, "David, we've out of options. He said, "David, we've out of options. He said, "David, we've tried everything. You know, we tried everything. You know, we tried everything. You know, we tried these chemotherapies, we tried this one these chemotherapies, we tried this one these chemotherapies, we tried this one experimental drug. Um there's nothing experimental drug. Um there's nothing experimental drug. Um there's nothing more that we can do." There was a few more that we can do." There was a few more that we can do." There was a few minute period where my dad, my sisters, minute period where my dad, my sisters, minute period where my dad, my sisters, and my girlfriend around me, and we and my girlfriend around me, and we and my girlfriend around me, and we were just um were just um were just um just bawling our eyes out. You know, just bawling our eyes out. You know, just bawling our eyes out. You know, we're This is the world's expert, and I we're This is the world's expert, and I we're This is the world's expert, and I kept probing him like, "Is there any kept probing him like, "Is there any kept probing him like, "Is there any cell type or signaling pathway? Or is cell type or signaling pathway? Or is cell type or signaling pathway? Or is there something we can target?" Like, there something we can target?" Like, there something we can target?" Like, anything. He said, "David, there's anything. He said, "David, there's anything. He said, "David, there's nothing." "Is there anything in early nothing." "Is there anything in early nothing." "Is there anything in early stage of develop David, there is stage of develop David, there is stage of develop David, there is nothing." I heard what he was saying, nothing." I heard what he was saying, nothing." I heard what he was saying, but then I thought to myself, but then I thought to myself, but then I thought to myself, "You just gave me seven chemotherapies "You just gave me seven chemotherapies "You just gave me seven chemotherapies that were made for lymphoma and my that were made for lymphoma and my that were made for lymphoma and my multiple myeloma, multiple myeloma, multiple myeloma, and they've saved my life now three and they've saved my life now three and they've saved my life now three times. They're not It's not long-term. times. They're not It's not long-term. times. They're not It's not long-term. Like, I know I keep relapsing, but like Like, I know I keep relapsing, but like Like, I know I keep relapsing, but like if these seven chemotherapies are if these seven chemotherapies are if these seven chemotherapies are working, how do we know there's not an working, how do we know there's not an working, how do we know there's not an eighth chemotherapy or a ninth drug for eighth chemotherapy or a ninth drug for eighth chemotherapy or a ninth drug for something else? Like, you can't tell We something else? Like, you can't tell We something else? Like, you can't tell We haven't tried all 4,000 drugs. We've haven't tried all 4,000 drugs. We've haven't tried all 4,000 drugs. We've just tried the drugs that maybe we just tried the drugs that maybe we just tried the drugs that maybe we thought to try." And so, I just locked thought to try." And so, I just locked thought to try." And so, I just locked in right then, and I turned to my family in right then, and I turned to my family in right then, and I turned to my family and just sort of wiped away my tears and just sort of wiped away my tears and just sort of wiped away my tears and said, "I'm going to dedicate the rest of said, "I'm going to dedicate the rest of said, "I'm going to dedicate the rest of my life, however long that's going to my life, however long that's going to my life, however long that's going to be. It might be a couple days, maybe be. It might be a couple days, maybe be. It might be a couple days, maybe it'll be a couple months, but however it'll be a couple months, but however it'll be a couple months, but however long I've got to trying to find out, is long I've got to trying to find out, is long I've got to trying to find out, is there a drug out there that could help there a drug out there that could help there a drug out there that could help me and other patients with my disease me and other patients with my disease me and other patients with my disease that's made for another condition? I that's made for another condition? I that's made for another condition? I just believe that the 4,000 drugs we just believe that the 4,000 drugs we just believe that the 4,000 drugs we have today should help all the patients have today should help all the patients have today should help all the patients who can benefit from them." who can benefit from them." who can benefit from them." Period. Like, no one should suffer if Period. Like, no one should suffer if Period. Like, no one should suffer if there's a drug at your CVS to get help there's a drug at your CVS to get help there's a drug at your CVS to get help you. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. David Fajgenbaum. Dr. David today is Dr. David Fajgenbaum. Dr. David today is Dr. David Fajgenbaum. Dr. David Fajgenbaum is a professor of Fajgenbaum is a professor of Fajgenbaum is a professor of translational medicine and human translational medicine and human translational medicine and human genetics at the University of genetics at the University of genetics at the University of Pennsylvania. His work focuses on Pennsylvania. His work focuses on Pennsylvania. His work focuses on finding novel cures to both rare and finding novel cures to both rare and finding novel cures to both rare and common human diseases by using drugs and common human diseases by using drugs and common human diseases by using drugs and other treatments that already exist and other treatments that already exist and other treatments that already exist and that are approved for use in humans for that are approved for use in humans for that are approved for use in humans for other purposes. As it turns out, most other purposes. As it turns out, most other purposes. As it turns out, most approved drugs impact at least 40 approved drugs impact at least 40 approved drugs impact at least 40 different pathways and mechanisms across different pathways and mechanisms across different pathways and mechanisms across the human brain and body. But these the human brain and body. But these the human brain and body. But these drugs are generally approved for use in drugs are generally approved for use in drugs are generally approved for use in just one or two of those pathways. David just one or two of those pathways. David just one or two of those pathways. David shares with us the many commonly unknown shares with us the many commonly unknown shares with us the many commonly unknown yet powerful benefits of drugs that are yet powerful benefits of drugs that are yet powerful benefits of drugs that are already approved for things like heart already approved for things like heart already approved for things like heart health, combating cancer, health, combating cancer, health, combating cancer, neurodegeneration, and more. From his neurodegeneration, and more. From his neurodegeneration, and more. From his own near-death experience with own near-death experience with own near-death experience with Castleman's disease, David discovered Castleman's disease, David discovered Castleman's disease, David discovered that the medical profession already has that the medical profession already has that the medical profession already has in hand excellent treatments and perhaps in hand excellent treatments and perhaps in hand excellent treatments and perhaps even cures for many of the childhood and even cures for many of the childhood and even cures for many of the childhood and adult diseases that the medical adult diseases that the medical adult diseases that the medical profession deems incurable or profession deems incurable or profession deems incurable or untreatable. In addition to running his untreatable. In addition to running his untreatable. In addition to running his laboratory where they search for novel laboratory where they search for novel laboratory where they search for novel treatments and cures using already treatments and cures using already treatments and cures using already approved drugs, David has started a approved drugs, David has started a approved drugs, David has started a not-for-profit called Every Cure, which not-for-profit called Every Cure, which not-for-profit called Every Cure, which helps people find treatments and cures helps people find treatments and cures helps people find treatments and cures to diseases that the medical field has to diseases that the medical field has to diseases that the medical field has essentially deemed untreatable. And that essentially deemed untreatable. And that essentially deemed untreatable. And that work has already saved countless lives. work has already saved countless lives. work has already saved countless lives. Our discussion today is about how to Our discussion today is about how to Our discussion today is about how to navigate your health journey and how to navigate your health journey and how to navigate your health journey and how to approach the treatment of any illness approach the treatment of any illness approach the treatment of any illness that you or a relative may face. It's that you or a relative may face. It's that you or a relative may face. It's also about the fact that while the also about the fact that while the also about the fact that while the fields of medicine and science are truly fields of medicine and science are truly fields of medicine and science are truly incredible and well-intentioned, they do incredible and well-intentioned, they do incredible and well-intentioned, they do have a giant blind spot built into them, have a giant blind spot built into them, have a giant blind spot built into them, which is that many effective treatments which is that many effective treatments which is that many effective treatments and in some cases cures exist to and in some cases cures exist to and in some cases cures exist to diseases that we are told are hopeless diseases that we are told are hopeless diseases that we are told are hopeless to treat. And that even the best-trained to treat. And that even the best-trained to treat. And that even the best-trained and well-meaning MDs are often unaware and well-meaning MDs are often unaware and well-meaning MDs are often unaware of those treatments. Not because they of those treatments. Not because they of those treatments. Not because they are lazy or that they have some other are lazy or that they have some other are lazy or that they have some other agenda, but simply because of how agenda, but simply because of how agenda, but simply because of how medications are studied, patented, and medications are studied, patented, and medications are studied, patented, and categorized. As you'll soon learn, Dr. categorized. As you'll soon learn, Dr. categorized. As you'll soon learn, Dr. Faganbaum is on a mission to educate Faganbaum is on a mission to educate Faganbaum is on a mission to educate doctors, scientists, and most doctors, scientists, and most doctors, scientists, and most importantly you, the general public, importantly you, the general public, importantly you, the general public, about these facts. He has lived them about these facts. He has lived them about these facts. He has lived them directly. He's an MD who got very sick directly. He's an MD who got very sick directly. He's an MD who got very sick with what he was told was a terminal with what he was told was a terminal with what he was told was a terminal disease. And when the existing system disease. And when the existing system disease. And when the existing system left him at a cliff, he went about left him at a cliff, he went about left him at a cliff, he went about curing that disease using old curing that disease using old curing that disease using old medications in new ways. And he is now medications in new ways. And he is now medications in new ways. And he is now helping others who need to do the same. helping others who need to do the same. helping others who need to do the same. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. David And now for my discussion with Dr. David And now for my discussion with Dr. David Fajgenbaum. Dr. David Fajgenbaum, welcome. Thanks so Dr. David Fajgenbaum, welcome. Thanks so Dr. David Fajgenbaum, welcome. Thanks so much for having me. much for having me. much for having me. These days people are very concerned These days people are very concerned These days people are very concerned about their health even if they're about their health even if they're about their health even if they're healthy. And I think the reason for that is ever And I think the reason for that is ever And I think the reason for that is ever since uh 2020, uh 2020, uh 2020, I think people have started to realize I think people have started to realize I think people have started to realize that they need to do that they need to do that they need to do more self-advocacy in terms of their more self-advocacy in terms of their more self-advocacy in terms of their health, whether or not it's behaviors to health, whether or not it's behaviors to health, whether or not it's behaviors to take care of their health, uh learning take care of their health, uh learning take care of their health, uh learning how to explore medical and health how to explore medical and health how to explore medical and health information online more effectively. information online more effectively. information online more effectively. No one knows who to trust. No one knows who to trust. No one knows who to trust. Um and yet people are realizing that Um and yet people are realizing that Um and yet people are realizing that they are a critical element in their they are a critical element in their they are a critical element in their health. And should they encounter health. And should they encounter health. And should they encounter challenges to their health, challenges to their health, challenges to their health, they realize they can no longer be they realize they can no longer be they realize they can no longer be passive participants and just go to passive participants and just go to passive participants and just go to their doctor. Um that doctors are human, their doctor. Um that doctors are human, their doctor. Um that doctors are human, too. Um So, you have a very unique too. Um So, you have a very unique too. Um So, you have a very unique health story and we'll get into health story and we'll get into health story and we'll get into that. But that. But that. But maybe we can just start off by educating maybe we can just start off by educating maybe we can just start off by educating people a little bit about some of the um people a little bit about some of the um people a little bit about some of the um common misperceptions in order to uh common misperceptions in order to uh common misperceptions in order to uh give them more sense of agency give them more sense of agency give them more sense of agency uh about what they can do. One of the uh about what they can do. One of the uh about what they can do. One of the things that you've been uh very vocal things that you've been uh very vocal things that you've been uh very vocal about is that you believe through about is that you believe through about is that you believe through experience and observation that experience and observation that experience and observation that many of the treatments many of the treatments many of the treatments or even potential cures for the things or even potential cures for the things or even potential cures for the things that challenge people may already exist that challenge people may already exist that challenge people may already exist in the form of medicines that are in the form of medicines that are in the form of medicines that are prescribed or available, maybe even over prescribed or available, maybe even over prescribed or available, maybe even over the counter. the counter. the counter. But that people, including doctors, are But that people, including doctors, are But that people, including doctors, are not aware of that. Could you just not aware of that. Could you just not aware of that. Could you just elaborate on that? What we're basically elaborate on that? What we're basically elaborate on that? What we're basically saying is saying is saying is the answers may already be here. Sure. the answers may already be here. Sure. the answers may already be here. Sure. Well, first of all, I love that you're Well, first of all, I love that you're Well, first of all, I love that you're talking about agency in health and in talking about agency in health and in talking about agency in health and in medicine, cuz I think oftentimes we talk medicine, cuz I think oftentimes we talk medicine, cuz I think oftentimes we talk about agency, you know, I can get a good about agency, you know, I can get a good about agency, you know, I can get a good night's sleep or I can exercise and eat night's sleep or I can exercise and eat night's sleep or I can exercise and eat well in the sense of wellness, but well in the sense of wellness, but well in the sense of wellness, but oftentimes when people get really sick oftentimes when people get really sick oftentimes when people get really sick with a horrible disease, whether it's with a horrible disease, whether it's with a horrible disease, whether it's cancer or Castleman's, feel like, "Well, cancer or Castleman's, feel like, "Well, cancer or Castleman's, feel like, "Well, we're just going to do whatever our we're just going to do whatever our we're just going to do whatever our doctor our local doctor tells us to do." doctor our local doctor tells us to do." doctor our local doctor tells us to do." Um but you're right. I think that um Um but you're right. I think that um Um but you're right. I think that um there's so much more that we can do and there's so much more that we can do and there's so much more that we can do and there's so much agency that we can take. there's so much agency that we can take. there's so much agency that we can take. And part of it to your point is that And part of it to your point is that And part of it to your point is that there are drugs that we have. There's there are drugs that we have. There's there are drugs that we have. There's 4,000 FDA-approved drugs that are 4,000 FDA-approved drugs that are 4,000 FDA-approved drugs that are approved for about 4,000 diseases, but approved for about 4,000 diseases, but approved for about 4,000 diseases, but we know from laboratory work and also we know from laboratory work and also we know from laboratory work and also from clinical trials that many of those from clinical trials that many of those from clinical trials that many of those drugs can be used in more diseases, but drugs can be used in more diseases, but drugs can be used in more diseases, but unfortunately, the system really isn't unfortunately, the system really isn't unfortunately, the system really isn't set up to find new uses for old set up to find new uses for old set up to find new uses for old medicines. And so, medicines. And so, medicines. And so, that's the work that I do, but I also that's the work that I do, but I also that's the work that I do, but I also think it gives all of us uh really a think it gives all of us uh really a think it gives all of us uh really a sense of responsibility that if we're sense of responsibility that if we're sense of responsibility that if we're diagnosed with a bad disease, that we diagnosed with a bad disease, that we diagnosed with a bad disease, that we find out what's the disease organization find out what's the disease organization find out what's the disease organization advocacy group. Maybe they're aware of a advocacy group. Maybe they're aware of a advocacy group. Maybe they're aware of a drug being used in one part of the world drug being used in one part of the world drug being used in one part of the world that others aren't. Who's the leading that others aren't. Who's the leading that others aren't. Who's the leading expert? Can you go drive to see the expert? Can you go drive to see the expert? Can you go drive to see the leading expert? And can you make sure leading expert? And can you make sure leading expert? And can you make sure that once the expert tells you what to that once the expert tells you what to that once the expert tells you what to take, you ask questions like, "Is there take, you ask questions like, "Is there take, you ask questions like, "Is there is there potentially something else?" is there potentially something else?" is there potentially something else?" I think of aspirin for instance. Um most I think of aspirin for instance. Um most I think of aspirin for instance. Um most people think of aspirin as a pain people think of aspirin as a pain people think of aspirin as a pain reliever, yep, but aspirin is now used reliever, yep, but aspirin is now used reliever, yep, but aspirin is now used as a way to offset heart attacks mhm for as a way to offset heart attacks mhm for as a way to offset heart attacks mhm for its blood-thinning effects among other its blood-thinning effects among other its blood-thinning effects among other effects. Um effects. Um effects. Um just off the top of your head, I'm not just off the top of your head, I'm not just off the top of your head, I'm not trying to not trying to not trying to test you here. You're you're the MD. test you here. You're you're the MD. test you here. You're you're the MD. Uh I'm the PhD as we were talking about Uh I'm the PhD as we were talking about Uh I'm the PhD as we were talking about before. I'm not going to test you on before. I'm not going to test you on before. I'm not going to test you on medicine. I'm not I'm not equipped to. medicine. I'm not I'm not equipped to. medicine. I'm not I'm not equipped to. Um but are there other uses for aspirin but are there other uses for aspirin but are there other uses for aspirin that we perhaps haven't heard of or that we perhaps haven't heard of or that we perhaps haven't heard of or similar drugs that might surprise similar drugs that might surprise similar drugs that might surprise people? Yeah, aspirin also has been people? Yeah, aspirin also has been people? Yeah, aspirin also has been shown to reduce risk of recurrence of shown to reduce risk of recurrence of shown to reduce risk of recurrence of colon cancer. Um particularly colon cancer. Um particularly colon cancer. Um particularly individuals colon cancer that have a individuals colon cancer that have a individuals colon cancer that have a mutation actually in the mTOR pathway. mutation actually in the mTOR pathway. mutation actually in the mTOR pathway. Um but because it's aspirin because it's Um but because it's aspirin because it's Um but because it's aspirin because it's sort of widely available and it's not um sort of widely available and it's not um sort of widely available and it's not um doesn't have doesn't have doesn't have uh maybe the same sort of system behind uh maybe the same sort of system behind uh maybe the same sort of system behind its use, it's really not actually its use, it's really not actually its use, it's really not actually utilized by all the patients that have utilized by all the patients that have utilized by all the patients that have colon cancer to reduce the risk of colon cancer to reduce the risk of colon cancer to reduce the risk of recurrence of colon cancer. And like recurrence of colon cancer. And like recurrence of colon cancer. And like that's sort of mind-blowing in itself. that's sort of mind-blowing in itself. that's sort of mind-blowing in itself. And there are other great examples. Um And there are other great examples. Um And there are other great examples. Um many folks have probably heard about how folks have probably heard about how folks have probably heard about how Viagra was repurposed from heart disease Viagra was repurposed from heart disease Viagra was repurposed from heart disease to its well-known use. Most people are to its well-known use. Most people are to its well-known use. Most people are aware of erectile dysfunction, but most aware of erectile dysfunction, but most aware of erectile dysfunction, but most people don't realize that it's also been people don't realize that it's also been people don't realize that it's also been repurposed for a rare pediatric lung repurposed for a rare pediatric lung repurposed for a rare pediatric lung disease. Kids were dying cuz they disease. Kids were dying cuz they disease. Kids were dying cuz they weren't getting enough blood flow to weren't getting enough blood flow to weren't getting enough blood flow to their lungs, and if they take Viagra, their lungs, and if they take Viagra, their lungs, and if they take Viagra, they can actually get blood flow to they can actually get blood flow to they can actually get blood flow to their lungs and live full lives on their lungs and live full lives on their lungs and live full lives on Viagra. And that fortunately was Viagra. And that fortunately was Viagra. And that fortunately was discovered early on in the patent life discovered early on in the patent life discovered early on in the patent life of Viagra, so there was really a way to of Viagra, so there was really a way to of Viagra, so there was really a way to push it forward. A lot of times these push it forward. A lot of times these push it forward. A lot of times these happen after drugs are generic. Isn't it happen after drugs are generic. Isn't it happen after drugs are generic. Isn't it that the cousin of Viagra, Cialis, was that the cousin of Viagra, Cialis, was that the cousin of Viagra, Cialis, was initially tadalafil used to encourage initially tadalafil used to encourage initially tadalafil used to encourage prostate health, circulation to the prostate health, circulation to the prostate health, circulation to the prostate, and then only later was it prostate, and then only later was it prostate, and then only later was it discovered to have these other effects discovered to have these other effects discovered to have these other effects related to sexual function? related to sexual function? related to sexual function? &gt;&gt; That's right. Yeah, and you know, we &gt;&gt; That's right. Yeah, and you know, we &gt;&gt; That's right. Yeah, and you know, we talked about the side effect of a drug talked about the side effect of a drug talked about the side effect of a drug can be bad or can be good. We were can be bad or can be good. We were can be bad or can be good. We were chatting earlier, you know, the average chatting earlier, you know, the average chatting earlier, you know, the average small molecule, so a drug that's small molecule, so a drug that's small molecule, so a drug that's approved for a condition can bind approved for a condition can bind approved for a condition can bind between 20 and 30 different proteins in between 20 and 30 different proteins in between 20 and 30 different proteins in the body. So we call a drug, you know, the body. So we call a drug, you know, the body. So we call a drug, you know, we say it does one thing, but actually we say it does one thing, but actually we say it does one thing, but actually it's doing a lot of other things in the it's doing a lot of other things in the it's doing a lot of other things in the body, and unless body, and unless body, and unless that drug company began working on it that drug company began working on it that drug company began working on it early on for that condition, often times early on for that condition, often times early on for that condition, often times those insights and those other roles for those insights and those other roles for those insights and those other roles for the medicines just fall through the medicines just fall through the medicines just fall through the cracks. So the idea that a drug is useful for So the idea that a drug is useful for So the idea that a drug is useful for other things aside from what it's best other things aside from what it's best other things aside from what it's best known for Yep. known for Yep. known for Yep. &gt;&gt; is &gt;&gt; is &gt;&gt; is seldom discussed, whereas side effects seldom discussed, whereas side effects seldom discussed, whereas side effects are being discussed more and more are being discussed more and more are being discussed more and more nowadays. Yep. Tell us about lidocaine. nowadays. Yep. Tell us about lidocaine. nowadays. Yep. Tell us about lidocaine. Sure. This is fascinating. Sure. This is fascinating. Sure. This is fascinating. Sure. So yeah, I couldn't believe it Sure. So yeah, I couldn't believe it Sure. So yeah, I couldn't believe it when we came across this. So so I run a when we came across this. So so I run a when we came across this. So so I run a nonprofit called Every Cure. We scan the nonprofit called Every Cure. We scan the nonprofit called Every Cure. We scan the world's knowledge of every drug and world's knowledge of every drug and world's knowledge of every drug and every disease to find new uses for the every disease to find new uses for the every disease to find new uses for the medicines we have. And when we came medicines we have. And when we came medicines we have. And when we came across lidocaine, we were just sort of across lidocaine, we were just sort of across lidocaine, we were just sort of blown away. So lidocaine, of course, the blown away. So lidocaine, of course, the blown away. So lidocaine, of course, the numbing medicine you get if you go to numbing medicine you get if you go to numbing medicine you get if you go to the dentist, and you know, the dentist, and you know, the dentist, and you know, it's used all over the body for it's used all over the body for it's used all over the body for numbing all kinds of things. There's numbing all kinds of things. There's numbing all kinds of things. There's interesting data, actually a large trial interesting data, actually a large trial interesting data, actually a large trial that was done in India um 1,600 patients that was done in India um 1,600 patients that was done in India um 1,600 patients where women who had localized breast where women who had localized breast where women who had localized breast cancer, if they had lidocaine injected cancer, if they had lidocaine injected cancer, if they had lidocaine injected around the tumor before surgery, 8 to 10 around the tumor before surgery, 8 to 10 around the tumor before surgery, 8 to 10 minutes before surgery, there was a 29% minutes before surgery, there was a 29% minutes before surgery, there was a 29% reduction in mortality at 5 years versus reduction in mortality at 5 years versus reduction in mortality at 5 years versus those who did not have lidocaine those who did not have lidocaine those who did not have lidocaine injected. Now, lidocaine is already injected. Now, lidocaine is already injected. Now, lidocaine is already going to be used during the surgery. going to be used during the surgery. going to be used during the surgery. It's used at the site of the incision. It's used at the site of the incision. It's used at the site of the incision. It's widely used, you know, in so many It's widely used, you know, in so many It's widely used, you know, in so many cases. And what's so interesting, it was cases. And what's so interesting, it was cases. And what's so interesting, it was published in a great journal, the published in a great journal, the published in a great journal, the Journal of Clinical Oncology, yet Journal of Clinical Oncology, yet Journal of Clinical Oncology, yet there's still been barely any uptake all there's still been barely any uptake all there's still been barely any uptake all around the world. And so, this is just around the world. And so, this is just around the world. And so, this is just sort of another example for us sort of another example for us sort of another example for us for why you've got to have an entity for why you've got to have an entity for why you've got to have an entity that's looking for these great that's looking for these great that's looking for these great opportunities and then actually doing opportunities and then actually doing opportunities and then actually doing the work to make sure that they get into the work to make sure that they get into the work to make sure that they get into patients. Cuz there's close to no patients. Cuz there's close to no patients. Cuz there's close to no downside of something like lidocaine. downside of something like lidocaine. downside of something like lidocaine. And and if the upside is high as a 30% And and if the upside is high as a 30% And and if the upside is high as a 30% reduction in mortality, I don't know how reduction in mortality, I don't know how reduction in mortality, I don't know how it's not being used all over the place. it's not being used all over the place. it's not being used all over the place. Is lidocaine an expensive drug? It's a Is lidocaine an expensive drug? It's a Is lidocaine an expensive drug? It's a very inexpensive drug. Um it's, you very inexpensive drug. Um it's, you very inexpensive drug. Um it's, you know, pennies an injection. And that know, pennies an injection. And that know, pennies an injection. And that doesn't mean anyone's hiding lidocaine. doesn't mean anyone's hiding lidocaine. doesn't mean anyone's hiding lidocaine. I'm of the belief that drug companies do I'm of the belief that drug companies do I'm of the belief that drug companies do such important work to develop brand new such important work to develop brand new such important work to develop brand new drugs. And they're so good at it. They drugs. And they're so good at it. They drugs. And they're so good at it. They do a great job getting those drugs to be do a great job getting those drugs to be do a great job getting those drugs to be used for the uses that they're intended used for the uses that they're intended used for the uses that they're intended for. And it's no one's fault. But once for. And it's no one's fault. But once for. And it's no one's fault. But once that drug becomes generic, like that drug becomes generic, like that drug becomes generic, like lidocaine's been generic for decades, lidocaine's been generic for decades, lidocaine's been generic for decades, that means that there's a number of that means that there's a number of that means that there's a number of other companies that make the exact same other companies that make the exact same other companies that make the exact same drug. And the profit for each of those drug. And the profit for each of those drug. And the profit for each of those doses becomes close to, you know, doses becomes close to, you know, doses becomes close to, you know, pennies an injection. And so, again, pennies an injection. And so, again, pennies an injection. And so, again, it's not that anyone's hiding it, but it's not that anyone's hiding it, but it's not that anyone's hiding it, but it's just that no entity is incentivized it's just that no entity is incentivized it's just that no entity is incentivized to actually go call on doctors and say, to actually go call on doctors and say, to actually go call on doctors and say, "Hey, did you do the lidocaine before "Hey, did you do the lidocaine before "Hey, did you do the lidocaine before your surgery?" Or to like to really push your surgery?" Or to like to really push your surgery?" Or to like to really push to get them into guidelines. And I will to get them into guidelines. And I will to get them into guidelines. And I will say this was a really major study, this say this was a really major study, this say this was a really major study, this study that was published or that was study that was published or that was study that was published or that was done in India. It was published in a done in India. It was published in a done in India. It was published in a great journal. There's interesting great journal. There's interesting great journal. There's interesting laboratory data. But we at EverCure laboratory data. But we at EverCure laboratory data. But we at EverCure actually feel responsible to better actually feel responsible to better actually feel responsible to better understand the potential mechanism for understand the potential mechanism for understand the potential mechanism for how it might work. And also to review how it might work. And also to review how it might work. And also to review the evidence wholly before we actually the evidence wholly before we actually the evidence wholly before we actually go out and start, you know, encouraging go out and start, you know, encouraging go out and start, you know, encouraging everyone to do it. So, there's everyone to do it. So, there's everyone to do it. So, there's still steps that have to be taken. But still steps that have to be taken. But still steps that have to be taken. But but our belief is that when you come but our belief is that when you come but our belief is that when you come across something, you know, that looks across something, you know, that looks across something, you know, that looks promising like this, promising like this, promising like this, we need to have some group that's we need to have some group that's we need to have some group that's actually pushing and pushing to make actually pushing and pushing to make actually pushing and pushing to make sure that it actually gets to patients sure that it actually gets to patients sure that it actually gets to patients once you feel comfortable with the data. once you feel comfortable with the data. once you feel comfortable with the data. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep automatically regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your unique needs. Eight Sleep has just unique needs. Eight Sleep has just unique needs. Eight Sleep has just launched their latest model, the Pod 5, launched their latest model, the Pod 5, launched their latest model, the Pod 5, and the Pod 5 has several new important and the Pod 5 has several new important and the Pod 5 has several new important features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. The base shifts to optimize your sleep. The base shifts to optimize your sleep. The base on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated speaker that syncs to the Eight Sleep speaker that syncs to the Eight Sleep speaker that syncs to the Eight Sleep app and can play audio to support app and can play audio to support app and can play audio to support relaxation and recovery. I've been relaxation and recovery. I've been relaxation and recovery. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for over 4 years now, and it has cover for over 4 years now, and it has cover for over 4 years now, and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. If you'd like to quality of my sleep. If you'd like to quality of my sleep. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to try Eight Sleep, go to try Eight Sleep, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Aura. Aura makes what I believe are the Aura. Aura makes what I believe are the Aura. Aura makes what I believe are the best water filters on the market. It's best water filters on the market. It's best water filters on the market. It's an unfortunate reality, but tap water an unfortunate reality, but tap water an unfortunate reality, but tap water often contains contaminants that often contains contaminants that often contains contaminants that negatively impact our health. In fact, a negatively impact our health. In fact, a negatively impact our health. In fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental Working 2020 study by the Environmental Working 2020 study by the Environmental Working Group estimated that more than 200 Group estimated that more than 200 Group estimated that more than 200 million Americans are exposed to PFAS million Americans are exposed to PFAS million Americans are exposed to PFAS chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, through drinking of tap chemicals, through drinking of tap chemicals, through drinking of tap water. These forever chemicals are water. These forever chemicals are water. These forever chemicals are linked to serious health issues such as linked to serious health issues such as linked to serious health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome hormone disruption, gut microbiome hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many disruption, fertility issues, and many disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. The Environmental other health problems. The Environmental other health problems. The Environmental Working Group has also shown that over Working Group has also shown that over Working Group has also shown that over 122 million Americans drink tap water 122 million Americans drink tap water 122 million Americans drink tap water with high levels of chemicals known to with high levels of chemicals known to with high levels of chemicals known to cause cancer. It's for all these reasons cause cancer. It's for all these reasons cause cancer. It's for all these reasons that I'm thrilled to have Rora as a that I'm thrilled to have Rora as a that I'm thrilled to have Rora as a sponsor of this podcast. I've been using sponsor of this podcast. I've been using sponsor of this podcast. I've been using the Rora countertop system for almost a the Rora countertop system for almost a the Rora countertop system for almost a year now. Rora's filtration technology year now. Rora's filtration technology year now. Rora's filtration technology removes harmful substances, including removes harmful substances, including removes harmful substances, including endocrine disruptors and disinfection endocrine disruptors and disinfection endocrine disruptors and disinfection byproducts, while preserving beneficial byproducts, while preserving beneficial byproducts, while preserving beneficial minerals like magnesium and calcium. It minerals like magnesium and calcium. It minerals like magnesium and calcium. It requires no installation or plumbing. requires no installation or plumbing. requires no installation or plumbing. It's built from medical-grade stainless It's built from medical-grade stainless It's built from medical-grade stainless steel, and its sleek design fits steel, and its sleek design fits steel, and its sleek design fits beautifully on your countertop. In fact, beautifully on your countertop. In fact, beautifully on your countertop. In fact, I consider it a welcome addition to my I consider it a welcome addition to my I consider it a welcome addition to my kitchen. It looks great, and the water kitchen. It looks great, and the water kitchen. It looks great, and the water is delicious. If you'd like to try Rora, is delicious. If you'd like to try Rora, is delicious. If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to rora.com/huberman you can go to rora.com/huberman you can go to rora.com/huberman and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, that's rora, r o r a.com/huberman. There are a couple avenues that we can There are a couple avenues that we can There are a couple avenues that we can explore given what you've said so far, explore given what you've said so far, explore given what you've said so far, but the one I'd like to drill into a bit but the one I'd like to drill into a bit but the one I'd like to drill into a bit is this thing related to drug companies is this thing related to drug companies is this thing related to drug companies and patents. I don't want to set up the and patents. I don't want to set up the and patents. I don't want to set up the idea that um everything is um idea that um everything is um idea that um everything is um conspiratorial. And yet, years ago when conspiratorial. And yet, years ago when conspiratorial. And yet, years ago when my laboratory was working on eye my laboratory was working on eye my laboratory was working on eye diseases, glaucoma in particular, I diseases, glaucoma in particular, I diseases, glaucoma in particular, I spent a lot of time around people spent a lot of time around people spent a lot of time around people working at companies that develop drug working at companies that develop drug working at companies that develop drug treatments for eye diseases. They've treatments for eye diseases. They've treatments for eye diseases. They've developed great drugs for the treatment developed great drugs for the treatment developed great drugs for the treatment of um over vascularization of the eye, of um over vascularization of the eye, of um over vascularization of the eye, for instance, that can cause blindness for instance, that can cause blindness for instance, that can cause blindness or it's related to some blinding or it's related to some blinding or it's related to some blinding diseases. And I learned that many of diseases. And I learned that many of diseases. And I learned that many of these drugs um go to market, they are these drugs um go to market, they are these drugs um go to market, they are quote-unquote blockbuster drugs, quote-unquote blockbuster drugs, quote-unquote blockbuster drugs, people's symptoms improve, these drug people's symptoms improve, these drug people's symptoms improve, these drug companies make a lot of money, companies make a lot of money, companies make a lot of money, and then the patent is headed toward and then the patent is headed toward and then the patent is headed toward expiration, and at that point the cost expiration, and at that point the cost expiration, and at that point the cost of the drug drops Yep. markedly. of the drug drops Yep. markedly. of the drug drops Yep. markedly. So, the drug companies are heavily So, the drug companies are heavily So, the drug companies are heavily incentivized, I learned, to find new I learned, to find new I learned, to find new uses for that drug to renew the patent uses for that drug to renew the patent uses for that drug to renew the patent under this new application. Yep. under this new application. Yep. under this new application. Yep. To basically keep the generics away. To basically keep the generics away. To basically keep the generics away. And on the one hand it makes sense And on the one hand it makes sense And on the one hand it makes sense because the research and development because the research and development because the research and development for a drug is exceedingly expensive. And for a drug is exceedingly expensive. And for a drug is exceedingly expensive. And so if they can repurpose the drug and so if they can repurpose the drug and so if they can repurpose the drug and maintain the patent for two diseases maintain the patent for two diseases maintain the patent for two diseases essentially, one drug two diseases, essentially, one drug two diseases, essentially, one drug two diseases, this is kind of the bread and butter this is kind of the bread and butter this is kind of the bread and butter of how drug companies get and remain of how drug companies get and remain of how drug companies get and remain very wealthy. very wealthy. very wealthy. It has two what I consider um kind of It has two what I consider um kind of It has two what I consider um kind of darker sides to it. One is that the darker sides to it. One is that the darker sides to it. One is that the generic cheaper drugs generic cheaper drugs generic cheaper drugs um don't arrive on market for a much um don't arrive on market for a much um don't arrive on market for a much longer period of time. longer period of time. longer period of time. The other The other The other side of the coin however is that side of the coin however is that side of the coin however is that you know, people suffering from a you know, people suffering from a you know, people suffering from a different disease now can take this different disease now can take this different disease now can take this drug. Yeah. But that second darker piece drug. Yeah. But that second darker piece drug. Yeah. But that second darker piece is that is that is that drug companies are not very incentivized drug companies are not very incentivized drug companies are not very incentivized to go look for new molecules to treat to go look for new molecules to treat to go look for new molecules to treat new uh conditions. They are heavily new uh conditions. They are heavily new uh conditions. They are heavily incentivized to use old molecules to incentivized to use old molecules to incentivized to use old molecules to treat new conditions and maintain treat new conditions and maintain treat new conditions and maintain control. There's a lot in this statement but There's a lot in this statement but There's a lot in this statement but my understanding is this is how it my understanding is this is how it my understanding is this is how it works. And so how do you reconcile that? works. And so how do you reconcile that? works. And so how do you reconcile that? I mean, how is it that we should be I mean, how is it that we should be I mean, how is it that we should be exploring existing drugs for new exploring existing drugs for new exploring existing drugs for new conditions but do it in a way that's really driven but do it in a way that's really driven but do it in a way that's really driven toward curing a disease as opposed to toward curing a disease as opposed to toward curing a disease as opposed to just kind of finding a new purpose so we just kind of finding a new purpose so we just kind of finding a new purpose so we can keep the generics out for a while. can keep the generics out for a while. can keep the generics out for a while. Yeah, it's such a good question. So Yeah, it's such a good question. So Yeah, it's such a good question. So you're absolutely right that as you're absolutely right that as you're absolutely right that as drugs begin to reach their patent cliff, drugs begin to reach their patent cliff, drugs begin to reach their patent cliff, often times the drug we the dose might often times the drug we the dose might often times the drug we the dose might be changed slightly, the formulation be changed slightly, the formulation be changed slightly, the formulation might be changed slightly to create new might be changed slightly to create new might be changed slightly to create new intellectual property so that way this intellectual property so that way this intellectual property so that way this sort of new version can be used in that sort of new version can be used in that sort of new version can be used in that same initial disease. same initial disease. same initial disease. Um which to your point there's Um which to your point there's Um which to your point there's you know, I wouldn't say pros and cons. you know, I wouldn't say pros and cons. you know, I wouldn't say pros and cons. There's there's you know, side There's there's you know, side There's there's you know, side effects of that sort of a system. But effects of that sort of a system. But effects of that sort of a system. But what is pretty clear is that companies what is pretty clear is that companies what is pretty clear is that companies will typically not as it's getting close will typically not as it's getting close will typically not as it's getting close to patent exclusivity find a new disease to patent exclusivity find a new disease to patent exclusivity find a new disease to go after with that drug. It's usually to go after with that drug. It's usually to go after with that drug. It's usually the same disease, it's just a new the same disease, it's just a new the same disease, it's just a new formulation. Um so that way they can formulation. Um so that way they can formulation. Um so that way they can keep working that disease. And what that keep working that disease. And what that keep working that disease. And what that means is that means is that means is that though that drug might be able to use be though that drug might be able to use be though that drug might be able to use be used for a different disease, that's used for a different disease, that's used for a different disease, that's rarely explored. And so especially to rarely explored. And so especially to rarely explored. And so especially to your point, once it's generic, I mean, your point, once it's generic, I mean, your point, once it's generic, I mean, all research and development all research and development all research and development discontinues. And even discontinues. And even discontinues. And even I mentioned earlier that there's 4,000 I mentioned earlier that there's 4,000 I mentioned earlier that there's 4,000 FDA-approved drugs. They work for FDA-approved drugs. They work for FDA-approved drugs. They work for 4,000 diseases. That's incredible. Um 4,000 diseases. That's incredible. Um 4,000 diseases. That's incredible. Um but there's still 14,000 diseases that but there's still 14,000 diseases that but there's still 14,000 diseases that don't have a single treatment right now. don't have a single treatment right now. don't have a single treatment right now. And of the 4,000 drugs we have, 80% of And of the 4,000 drugs we have, 80% of And of the 4,000 drugs we have, 80% of them are already generic, which means them are already generic, which means them are already generic, which means that there is no incentive to find a new that there is no incentive to find a new that there is no incentive to find a new use for this medicine. So like, every use for this medicine. So like, every use for this medicine. So like, every time I walk past the CVS, all I think time I walk past the CVS, all I think time I walk past the CVS, all I think about is how many drugs are in there about is how many drugs are in there about is how many drugs are in there that are used for one condition, but that are used for one condition, but that are used for one condition, but could actually help so many more kids or could actually help so many more kids or could actually help so many more kids or adults with other conditions. And or adults with other conditions. And or adults with other conditions. And we're hearing a lot these days about we're hearing a lot these days about we're hearing a lot these days about lithium Mhm. as a potential um lithium Mhm. as a potential um lithium Mhm. as a potential um protectant Yep. uh for Alzheimer's or protectant Yep. uh for Alzheimer's or protectant Yep. uh for Alzheimer's or other forms of dementia. I don't know other forms of dementia. I don't know other forms of dementia. I don't know that the data are so solid that I'm that the data are so solid that I'm that the data are so solid that I'm ready to run out and take lithium, so ready to run out and take lithium, so ready to run out and take lithium, so I'm not suggesting that to anybody. But I'm not suggesting that to anybody. But I'm not suggesting that to anybody. But I know a few psychiatrists that uh tell I know a few psychiatrists that uh tell I know a few psychiatrists that uh tell me for years they've been taking me for years they've been taking me for years they've been taking low-dose lithium for a couple months out low-dose lithium for a couple months out low-dose lithium for a couple months out of the year Mhm. based on their of the year Mhm. based on their of the year Mhm. based on their understanding of the data. So you've got understanding of the data. So you've got understanding of the data. So you've got doctors doing things. People don't often doctors doing things. People don't often doctors doing things. People don't often talk about this, but doctors often will talk about this, but doctors often will talk about this, but doctors often will do things that based on their read of do things that based on their read of do things that based on their read of the literature that they're not talking the literature that they're not talking the literature that they're not talking to their patients about because they're to their patients about because they're to their patients about because they're not in a position to do it ethically. not in a position to do it ethically. not in a position to do it ethically. They There's too much liability there. They There's too much liability there. They There's too much liability there. Where and how should the typical person Where and how should the typical person Where and how should the typical person without any training in medicine or without any training in medicine or without any training in medicine or science or even a little background in science or even a little background in science or even a little background in science go to find information about science go to find information about science go to find information about existing drugs, generic or otherwise, existing drugs, generic or otherwise, existing drugs, generic or otherwise, that could help them treat their that could help them treat their that could help them treat their ailments, be it a skin condition Yeah. ailments, be it a skin condition Yeah. ailments, be it a skin condition Yeah. or something as serious as cancer? What or something as serious as cancer? What or something as serious as cancer? What I'd recommend is The first is to make I'd recommend is The first is to make I'd recommend is The first is to make sure that you're connecting with sure that you're connecting with sure that you're connecting with whatever the disease group is for your whatever the disease group is for your whatever the disease group is for your condition. They often times are so well condition. They often times are so well condition. They often times are so well connected physicians all over the world, connected physicians all over the world, connected physicians all over the world, they hear about what things are being they hear about what things are being they hear about what things are being tried. So connect with whatever your tried. So connect with whatever your tried. So connect with whatever your condition, whatever that disease condition, whatever that disease condition, whatever that disease organization is. Could you explain organization is. Could you explain organization is. Could you explain disease organization? disease organization? disease organization? &gt;&gt; like the Castleman Disease Collaborative &gt;&gt; like the Castleman Disease Collaborative &gt;&gt; like the Castleman Disease Collaborative Network is the group that's come Network is the group that's come Network is the group that's come together to support Castleman's patients together to support Castleman's patients together to support Castleman's patients and to physicians and researchers. and to physicians and researchers. and to physicians and researchers. There's an ALS Association, for example. There's an ALS Association, for example. There's an ALS Association, for example. There's Michael J. Fox for Parkinson's There's Michael J. Fox for Parkinson's There's Michael J. Fox for Parkinson's disease. So, find that group that has disease. So, find that group that has disease. So, find that group that has coalesced around your condition cuz coalesced around your condition cuz coalesced around your condition cuz they'll often times have, to your point, they'll often times have, to your point, they'll often times have, to your point, understanding about, "Hey, I heard this understanding about, "Hey, I heard this understanding about, "Hey, I heard this one patient's using this one thing." So, one patient's using this one thing." So, one patient's using this one thing." So, I'd go to I'd go there first. The second I'd go to I'd go there first. The second I'd go to I'd go there first. The second is I would figure out where is the is I would figure out where is the is I would figure out where is the world's expert? Who is that person that world's expert? Who is that person that world's expert? Who is that person that really is the guru? They'll often really is the guru? They'll often really is the guru? They'll often times have insights on these things. And times have insights on these things. And times have insights on these things. And then the third then the third then the third is to is to really keep asking is to is to really keep asking is to is to really keep asking questions. So, like even when they say, questions. So, like even when they say, questions. So, like even when they say, "This is the first that's recommended." "This is the first that's recommended." "This is the first that's recommended." Well, is there something else that's Well, is there something else that's Well, is there something else that's like used somewhere else and like used somewhere else and like used somewhere else and Sure, one example of this, Sure, one example of this, Sure, one example of this, it's a bit heartbreaking, but it's a bit heartbreaking, but it's a bit heartbreaking, but also um also um also um really powerful and informative. And really powerful and informative. And really powerful and informative. And that's that there's a rare condition that's that there's a rare condition that's that there's a rare condition called dada2. Basically, kids are born called dada2. Basically, kids are born called dada2. Basically, kids are born with a mutation in a gene that results with a mutation in a gene that results with a mutation in a gene that results in them having dozens and dozens of in them having dozens and dozens of in them having dozens and dozens of strokes from the time they're born until strokes from the time they're born until strokes from the time they're born until they usually pass away in their teenage they usually pass away in their teenage they usually pass away in their teenage years because of the accumulated effect years because of the accumulated effect years because of the accumulated effect of literally dozens of strokes. It's of literally dozens of strokes. It's of literally dozens of strokes. It's horrible. Well, about 20 years ago, a horrible. Well, about 20 years ago, a horrible. Well, about 20 years ago, a doctor apparently was treating a patient doctor apparently was treating a patient doctor apparently was treating a patient with dada2 and also treating a patient with dada2 and also treating a patient with dada2 and also treating a patient with a form of vasculitis and with a form of vasculitis and with a form of vasculitis and treated that patient with vasculitis treated that patient with vasculitis treated that patient with vasculitis with what's called a TNF inhibitor. It with what's called a TNF inhibitor. It with what's called a TNF inhibitor. It inhibits this one side of kind called inhibits this one side of kind called inhibits this one side of kind called TNF. And he apparently had left TNF TNF. And he apparently had left TNF TNF. And he apparently had left TNF inhibitor in his vial. And he was like, inhibitor in his vial. And he was like, inhibitor in his vial. And he was like, "You know what? We've got this kid over "You know what? We've got this kid over "You know what? We've got this kid over here having all these strokes. Why don't here having all these strokes. Why don't here having all these strokes. Why don't I just try what I've got in this vial in I just try what I've got in this vial in I just try what I've got in this vial in this kid?" this kid?" this kid?" Well, the kid stopped having strokes. Well, the kid stopped having strokes. Well, the kid stopped having strokes. And that was amazing. And so, this And that was amazing. And so, this And that was amazing. And so, this doctor, the next few patients he had doctor, the next few patients he had doctor, the next few patients he had with dada2, he treated them for their with dada2, he treated them for their with dada2, he treated them for their strokes. But about 10 years went by. strokes. But about 10 years went by. strokes. But about 10 years went by. Meanwhile, hundreds and thousands of Meanwhile, hundreds and thousands of Meanwhile, hundreds and thousands of kids around the world are dying from kids around the world are dying from kids around the world are dying from dada2 where the word wasn't being spread dada2 where the word wasn't being spread dada2 where the word wasn't being spread until this amazing doctor named Chip until this amazing doctor named Chip until this amazing doctor named Chip Chambers sadly had two children born Chambers sadly had two children born Chambers sadly had two children born with dada2. And he started looking with dada2. And he started looking with dada2. And he started looking around to figure out and learned about, around to figure out and learned about, around to figure out and learned about, "Oh my gosh, TNF inhibitors." Um, was "Oh my gosh, TNF inhibitors." Um, was "Oh my gosh, TNF inhibitors." Um, was um, honored to be able to help Chip and um, honored to be able to help Chip and um, honored to be able to help Chip and his team to basically bring data his team to basically bring data his team to basically bring data together on the effectiveness of TNF together on the effectiveness of TNF together on the effectiveness of TNF inhibitors. Also, even come up with inhibitors. Also, even come up with inhibitors. Also, even come up with treatment guidelines for how do you treatment guidelines for how do you treatment guidelines for how do you treat data, too. And it turns out that treat data, too. And it turns out that treat data, too. And it turns out that if you start kids on a TNF inhibitor, if you start kids on a TNF inhibitor, if you start kids on a TNF inhibitor, they stop having strokes. they stop having strokes. they stop having strokes. All over the world, literally, it's a All over the world, literally, it's a All over the world, literally, it's a life-changer. And so, the reason I share life-changer. And so, the reason I share life-changer. And so, the reason I share this as an example is that this as an example is that this as an example is that the world knew, someone in the world the world knew, someone in the world the world knew, someone in the world knew that you could save kids' lives knew that you could save kids' lives knew that you could save kids' lives with a TNF inhibitor, but the world with a TNF inhibitor, but the world with a TNF inhibitor, but the world didn't know. And we hadn't gotten the didn't know. And we hadn't gotten the didn't know. And we hadn't gotten the word out about it. And to me, like, word out about it. And to me, like, word out about it. And to me, like, that's such that's so heartbreaking. that's such that's so heartbreaking. that's such that's so heartbreaking. It's almost like a travesty, you know? It's almost like a travesty, you know? It's almost like a travesty, you know? It's one thing if you have a horrible It's one thing if you have a horrible It's one thing if you have a horrible disease, um, and everyone dies from disease, um, and everyone dies from disease, um, and everyone dies from it and there's nothing out there. But I it and there's nothing out there. But I it and there's nothing out there. But I think it's so much more heartbreaking think it's so much more heartbreaking think it's so much more heartbreaking when you think that, "Oh my gosh, there when you think that, "Oh my gosh, there when you think that, "Oh my gosh, there was something there. We just we as a was something there. We just we as a was something there. We just we as a system hadn't done the work to make sure system hadn't done the work to make sure system hadn't done the work to make sure people get the medicine." people get the medicine." people get the medicine." Yeah, I think it's a harsh reality Yeah, I think it's a harsh reality Yeah, I think it's a harsh reality that one's knowledge network really has that one's knowledge network really has that one's knowledge network really has a big impact on outcomes to disease. I a big impact on outcomes to disease. I a big impact on outcomes to disease. I mean, I sit surrounded by MDs and PhDs mean, I sit surrounded by MDs and PhDs mean, I sit surrounded by MDs and PhDs and people working on disease and people working on disease and people working on disease and treating disease. And I'll tell you, treating disease. And I'll tell you, treating disease. And I'll tell you, there's no question in my mind that, there's no question in my mind that, there's no question in my mind that, because I've experienced it when a because I've experienced it when a because I've experienced it when a friend's spouse or kid is dealing with friend's spouse or kid is dealing with friend's spouse or kid is dealing with something, I I'm just one example of somebody who I'm just one example of somebody who I'm just one example of somebody who knows who to call knows who to call knows who to call &gt;&gt; Yeah. because I don't know the answer, &gt;&gt; Yeah. because I don't know the answer, &gt;&gt; Yeah. because I don't know the answer, but I know who might know the answer. but I know who might know the answer. but I know who might know the answer. And within two or three calls, that And within two or three calls, that And within two or three calls, that person is in touch with somebody who is person is in touch with somebody who is person is in touch with somebody who is in communication with the five or six is in communication with the five or six is in communication with the five or six people who are best at this around the people who are best at this around the people who are best at this around the world. But most people don't have access world. But most people don't have access world. But most people don't have access to that. I mean, it's one of the reasons to that. I mean, it's one of the reasons to that. I mean, it's one of the reasons I started this podcast, frankly, uh, to I started this podcast, frankly, uh, to I started this podcast, frankly, uh, to get people like you on here, people like get people like you on here, people like get people like you on here, people like Eddie Chang, who's a lifetime friend and Eddie Chang, who's a lifetime friend and Eddie Chang, who's a lifetime friend and chair of neurosurgery at UCSF. Like, I chair of neurosurgery at UCSF. Like, I chair of neurosurgery at UCSF. Like, I always say, "May you never need his always say, "May you never need his always say, "May you never need his help." Right? You know, but these are help." Right? You know, but these are help." Right? You know, but these are the people that I call when friends have the people that I call when friends have the people that I call when friends have questions about things unrelated to questions about things unrelated to questions about things unrelated to neurosurgery. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. For instance. For instance. For instance. So, it seems to me there there's it seems to me there there's it seems to me there there's a pretty straightforward solution a pretty straightforward solution a pretty straightforward solution that in addition to these groups that in addition to these groups that in addition to these groups um that are centered around certain that are centered around certain that are centered around certain diseases, there should be databases. diseases, there should be databases. diseases, there should be databases. There should be ways that people can not There should be ways that people can not There should be ways that people can not just go online and ask a question, just go online and ask a question, just go online and ask a question, but go to a database and say uh you but go to a database and say uh you but go to a database and say uh you know, I was just diagnosed with or I'm know, I was just diagnosed with or I'm know, I was just diagnosed with or I'm having symptoms that are the following having symptoms that are the following having symptoms that are the following and what are the existing prescription and what are the existing prescription and what are the existing prescription and non-prescription meds known to treat and non-prescription meds known to treat and non-prescription meds known to treat this. What are the side effects? But this. What are the side effects? But this. What are the side effects? But also, what are the potential pathways also, what are the potential pathways also, what are the potential pathways that overlap with other approved drugs that overlap with other approved drugs that overlap with other approved drugs that are prescription or that are prescription or that are prescription or over-the-counter. And then it should over-the-counter. And then it should over-the-counter. And then it should feed into a pipeline of how to get a feed into a pipeline of how to get a feed into a pipeline of how to get a hold of the people that could help treat hold of the people that could help treat hold of the people that could help treat that. It should be that straightforward. that. It should be that straightforward. that. It should be that straightforward. I mean, this is 2025. Like I mean, I mean, this is 2025. Like I mean, I mean, this is 2025. Like I mean, there's no reason why people should have there's no reason why people should have there's no reason why people should have to know somebody in the medical or to know somebody in the medical or to know somebody in the medical or scientific field at a major institution scientific field at a major institution scientific field at a major institution in order to be able to navigate this. I in order to be able to navigate this. I in order to be able to navigate this. I totally agree and I think that the more totally agree and I think that the more totally agree and I think that the more I've gotten into this, the more I've gotten into this, the more I've gotten into this, the more surprised I've been that there hasn't surprised I've been that there hasn't surprised I've been that there hasn't been something like that. Um this is not been something like that. Um this is not been something like that. Um this is not probably dimension every cure. So, we probably dimension every cure. So, we probably dimension every cure. So, we use this um use this um use this um we call they're called biomedical we call they're called biomedical we call they're called biomedical knowledge graphs. Basically, mapping out knowledge graphs. Basically, mapping out knowledge graphs. Basically, mapping out what the world knows about human what the world knows about human what the world knows about human biology. We use an AI platform biology. We use an AI platform biology. We use an AI platform and machine learning models to quantify and machine learning models to quantify and machine learning models to quantify how likely every drug is to treat every how likely every drug is to treat every how likely every drug is to treat every disease. And then we start at the top to disease. And then we start at the top to disease. And then we start at the top to go, you know, what match looks go, you know, what match looks go, you know, what match looks promising. We've got nine active promising. We've got nine active promising. We've got nine active programs and from those we're moving programs and from those we're moving programs and from those we're moving them forward to reach patients. And the them forward to reach patients. And the them forward to reach patients. And the idea is that, you know, let's hope all idea is that, you know, let's hope all idea is that, you know, let's hope all nine of them end up being effective in nine of them end up being effective in nine of them end up being effective in helping patients. helping patients. helping patients. That's sort of the start of this That's sort of the start of this That's sort of the start of this hopefully master list of additional uses hopefully master list of additional uses hopefully master list of additional uses for medicines that we already have. But for medicines that we already have. But for medicines that we already have. But to your point, it's not just to your point, it's not just to your point, it's not just that they are speculative, but really that they are speculative, but really that they are speculative, but really that the work's been done to really that the work's been done to really that the work's been done to really prove that they actually work. prove that they actually work. prove that they actually work. I can't help but ask of some other I can't help but ask of some other I can't help but ask of some other examples of drugs that have been shown examples of drugs that have been shown examples of drugs that have been shown to treat things other than what most to treat things other than what most to treat things other than what most people associate that drug with. Sure, a people associate that drug with. Sure, a people associate that drug with. Sure, a few come to mind. So, the first few come to mind. So, the first few come to mind. So, the first one's thalidomide. You probably have one's thalidomide. You probably have one's thalidomide. You probably have heard about the horrible birth defects heard about the horrible birth defects heard about the horrible birth defects that thalidomide caused 50 plus years that thalidomide caused 50 plus years that thalidomide caused 50 plus years ago. Originally designed as a mis- ago. Originally designed as a mis- ago. Originally designed as a mis- anti-miscarriage drug. Well, it was anti-miscarriage drug. Well, it was anti-miscarriage drug. Well, it was originally designed as anti-nausea for originally designed as anti-nausea for originally designed as anti-nausea for um for pregnant women. Um so the thought um for pregnant women. Um so the thought um for pregnant women. Um so the thought was that it could help them with their was that it could help them with their was that it could help them with their nausea, but it ended up causing horrible nausea, but it ended up causing horrible nausea, but it ended up causing horrible birth defects. Um children were born birth defects. Um children were born birth defects. Um children were born without limbs, and so it was taken off without limbs, and so it was taken off without limbs, and so it was taken off the market, but then about 20 years the market, but then about 20 years the market, but then about 20 years later researchers figured out that it later researchers figured out that it later researchers figured out that it could be effective for leprosy. So it's could be effective for leprosy. So it's could be effective for leprosy. So it's FDA approved for leprosy, and then FDA approved for leprosy, and then FDA approved for leprosy, and then what's crazy is that shortly thereafter what's crazy is that shortly thereafter what's crazy is that shortly thereafter it got FDA approval for multiple it got FDA approval for multiple it got FDA approval for multiple myeloma, a rare or somewhat rare um myeloma, a rare or somewhat rare um myeloma, a rare or somewhat rare um hematologic blood cancer. And the reason hematologic blood cancer. And the reason hematologic blood cancer. And the reason that it can work for leprosy and that it can work for leprosy and that it can work for leprosy and multiple myeloma, and also the reason multiple myeloma, and also the reason multiple myeloma, and also the reason that it causes birth defects, is it has that it causes birth defects, is it has that it causes birth defects, is it has um a major anti-angiogenic effect. So it um a major anti-angiogenic effect. So it um a major anti-angiogenic effect. So it reduces blood vessel growth. So in it reduces blood vessel growth. So in it reduces blood vessel growth. So in the same way that you need blood vessel the same way that you need blood vessel the same way that you need blood vessel growth to grow limbs, um you also need growth to grow limbs, um you also need growth to grow limbs, um you also need blood vessels uh or you need uh or over blood vessels uh or you need uh or over blood vessels uh or you need uh or over uh production or increased blood flow uh production or increased blood flow uh production or increased blood flow for multiple myeloma cells to survive um for multiple myeloma cells to survive um for multiple myeloma cells to survive um and also in leprosy. And so the same and also in leprosy. And so the same and also in leprosy. And so the same compound that causes birth defects helps compound that causes birth defects helps compound that causes birth defects helps treat leprosy, also treats multiple treat leprosy, also treats multiple treat leprosy, also treats multiple myeloma. It's saved thousands and myeloma. It's saved thousands and myeloma. It's saved thousands and thousands of lives of multiple myeloma thousands of lives of multiple myeloma thousands of lives of multiple myeloma patients. Again, the reason that in patients. Again, the reason that in patients. Again, the reason that in particular has been utilized um in particular has been utilized um in particular has been utilized um in multiple ways was that it had a full multiple ways was that it had a full multiple ways was that it had a full patent life when the work was first patent life when the work was first patent life when the work was first begun for leprosy, and then myeloma was begun for leprosy, and then myeloma was begun for leprosy, and then myeloma was discovered shortly thereafter. But you discovered shortly thereafter. But you discovered shortly thereafter. But you know, if a drug like thalidomide was you know, if a drug like thalidomide was you know, if a drug like thalidomide was you know, was discovered for leprosy and know, was discovered for leprosy and know, was discovered for leprosy and then 20 years later someone figured out then 20 years later someone figured out then 20 years later someone figured out it could be useful for multiple myeloma, it could be useful for multiple myeloma, it could be useful for multiple myeloma, patent is gone. Um and so there wouldn't patent is gone. Um and so there wouldn't patent is gone. Um and so there wouldn't have been an incentive to then figure have been an incentive to then figure have been an incentive to then figure out that oh, thalidomide could also be out that oh, thalidomide could also be out that oh, thalidomide could also be useful for multiple myeloma. Um the useful for multiple myeloma. Um the useful for multiple myeloma. Um the list sort of sadly um the list sort of sadly um the list sort of sadly um goes on and on. I mean, one of my goes on and on. I mean, one of my goes on and on. I mean, one of my favorite examples is a drug called favorite examples is a drug called favorite examples is a drug called pembrolizumab that is now used for pembrolizumab that is now used for pembrolizumab that is now used for dozens of cancers, but initially it was dozens of cancers, but initially it was dozens of cancers, but initially it was uh first developed for melanoma and for uh first developed for melanoma and for uh first developed for melanoma and for lung cancer. And actually um the lung cancer. And actually um the lung cancer. And actually um the work that we did in my lab um I guess work that we did in my lab um I guess work that we did in my lab um I guess this is 2016. Um and it was actually this is 2016. Um and it was actually this is 2016. Um and it was actually simple work. I simple work. I simple work. I A patient came to us in 2016 with A patient came to us in 2016 with A patient came to us in 2016 with metastatic angiosarcoma, which is a metastatic angiosarcoma, which is a metastatic angiosarcoma, which is a horrible form of cancer, and um horrible form of cancer, and um horrible form of cancer, and um his doctors told him that he was out of his doctors told him that he was out of his doctors told him that he was out of options, and we did something really options, and we did something really options, and we did something really simple. We went on PubMed and looked for simple. We went on PubMed and looked for simple. We went on PubMed and looked for like angiosarcoma treatment. I mean, it like angiosarcoma treatment. I mean, it like angiosarcoma treatment. I mean, it was that simple, and we came across was that simple, and we came across was that simple, and we came across a paper from 2013 a paper from 2013 a paper from 2013 where um where um where um a researcher had looked at five tumors a researcher had looked at five tumors a researcher had looked at five tumors from five different patients with from five different patients with from five different patients with angiosarcoma, and four out of the five angiosarcoma, and four out of the five angiosarcoma, and four out of the five tumors had increased expression of tumors had increased expression of tumors had increased expression of PD-L1, which is a marker that you might PD-L1, which is a marker that you might PD-L1, which is a marker that you might respond to a PD-1 inhibitor. And so, respond to a PD-1 inhibitor. And so, respond to a PD-1 inhibitor. And so, even though the paper was published in even though the paper was published in even though the paper was published in 2013 and this gentleman came to us 2013 and this gentleman came to us 2013 and this gentleman came to us in 2016, and of course, hundreds of in 2016, and of course, hundreds of in 2016, and of course, hundreds of people had died in the previous 3 years, people had died in the previous 3 years, people had died in the previous 3 years, no one had ever actually tested whether no one had ever actually tested whether no one had ever actually tested whether a PD-1 inhibitor could be useful for a PD-1 inhibitor could be useful for a PD-1 inhibitor could be useful for angiosarcoma, even though again, it was angiosarcoma, even though again, it was angiosarcoma, even though again, it was just it was a laboratory study published just it was a laboratory study published just it was a laboratory study published 3 years earlier, but no one had ever 3 years earlier, but no one had ever 3 years earlier, but no one had ever translated that insight into using it in translated that insight into using it in translated that insight into using it in a patient. So, we treated Michael as the a patient. So, we treated Michael as the a patient. So, we treated Michael as the first patient ever that we're aware of first patient ever that we're aware of first patient ever that we're aware of with a PD-1 inhibitor, and he responded with a PD-1 inhibitor, and he responded with a PD-1 inhibitor, and he responded so incredibly well. A couple of things so incredibly well. A couple of things so incredibly well. A couple of things happened. One is that his doctors happened. One is that his doctors happened. One is that his doctors started prescribing it to all patients started prescribing it to all patients started prescribing it to all patients with angiosarcoma. It turns out it works with angiosarcoma. It turns out it works with angiosarcoma. It turns out it works in about 18% of patients. So, it was a in about 18% of patients. So, it was a in about 18% of patients. So, it was a uniformly fatal cancer within 1 year. uniformly fatal cancer within 1 year. uniformly fatal cancer within 1 year. Now, about 20% of people will live Now, about 20% of people will live Now, about 20% of people will live beyond a year, and it can be really beyond a year, and it can be really beyond a year, and it can be really transformative. So, it changed clinical transformative. So, it changed clinical transformative. So, it changed clinical practice for um for angiosarcoma. practice for um for angiosarcoma. practice for um for angiosarcoma. The other thing it did, specifically for The other thing it did, specifically for The other thing it did, specifically for um for Michael, is that it has put him um for Michael, is that it has put him um for Michael, is that it has put him into now a 9-year remission. Just last into now a 9-year remission. Just last into now a 9-year remission. Just last month, he walked his daughter down the month, he walked his daughter down the month, he walked his daughter down the aisle on her wedding day in Nashville, aisle on her wedding day in Nashville, aisle on her wedding day in Nashville, Tennessee, 9 years after he was told Tennessee, 9 years after he was told Tennessee, 9 years after he was told that this is it. And so, these drugs are that this is it. And so, these drugs are that this is it. And so, these drugs are out there, um and sometimes there's even out there, um and sometimes there's even out there, um and sometimes there's even breadcrumbs. Like, it didn't require any breadcrumbs. Like, it didn't require any breadcrumbs. Like, it didn't require any brilliance from my lab. We we literally brilliance from my lab. We we literally brilliance from my lab. We we literally just had to find a study that was just had to find a study that was just had to find a study that was published 3 years earlier, and that published 3 years earlier, and that published 3 years earlier, and that again is really what drives us with again is really what drives us with again is really what drives us with this with this work now to say, "Can we this with this work now to say, "Can we this with this work now to say, "Can we find all these breadcrumbs? Can we put find all these breadcrumbs? Can we put find all these breadcrumbs? Can we put them together?" And can we make sure them together?" And can we make sure them together?" And can we make sure people actually benefit from all the people actually benefit from all the people actually benefit from all the great science that's being done all over great science that's being done all over great science that's being done all over the world? Let's actually translate them the world? Let's actually translate them the world? Let's actually translate them into patients. into patients. into patients. Yeah, it seems to me that PubMed and Yeah, it seems to me that PubMed and Yeah, it seems to me that PubMed and other sources of science knowledge um other sources of science knowledge um other sources of science knowledge um are great for stacking papers and are great for stacking papers and are great for stacking papers and they're pretty they're pretty they're pretty decent in terms of how they're decent in terms of how they're decent in terms of how they're organized, you know, by keyword search. organized, you know, by keyword search. organized, you know, by keyword search. I mean, they're not perfect, but you can I mean, they're not perfect, but you can I mean, they're not perfect, but you can find stuff. find stuff. find stuff. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you get suggestions about related And you get suggestions about related And you get suggestions about related articles and somebody with a little articles and somebody with a little articles and somebody with a little bit of time and energy bit of time and energy bit of time and energy will get some degree of information will get some degree of information will get some degree of information there. But it seems to me that no one there. But it seems to me that no one there. But it seems to me that no one has really organized the enormous has really organized the enormous has really organized the enormous database of information about science as database of information about science as database of information about science as it relates to disease. it relates to disease. it relates to disease. It occurred to me a moment ago, It occurred to me a moment ago, It occurred to me a moment ago, there should be a database there should be a database there should be a database where one can enter where one can enter where one can enter whatever knowledge they have about how whatever knowledge they have about how whatever knowledge they have about how old their grandparents were when they old their grandparents were when they old their grandparents were when they died and of what, how old their parents died and of what, how old their parents died and of what, how old their parents are or were, are or were, are or were, maybe they're alive, maybe they're maybe they're alive, maybe they're maybe they're alive, maybe they're deceased. Any knowledge, any kind of family Any knowledge, any kind of family Any knowledge, any kind of family history. This is the first thing a history. This is the first thing a history. This is the first thing a doctor would ask you. If I come in and doctor would ask you. If I come in and doctor would ask you. If I come in and you're the MD and if I say, "Hey, you're the MD and if I say, "Hey, you're the MD and if I say, "Hey, listen, you know, I've got like this listen, you know, I've got like this listen, you know, I've got like this swollen lymph node on the left-hand swollen lymph node on the left-hand swollen lymph node on the left-hand side." I don't I don't think you're side." I don't I don't think you're side." I don't I don't think you're going to say, "Hey, like go get it going to say, "Hey, like go get it going to say, "Hey, like go get it scanned." You'll say, "Any history of scanned." You'll say, "Any history of scanned." You'll say, "Any history of blank and blank in your family?" First blank and blank in your family?" First blank and blank in your family?" First thing, right? One should be able to do thing, right? One should be able to do thing, right? One should be able to do this from home and then this from home and then this from home and then enter any symptom profiles they might be enter any symptom profiles they might be enter any symptom profiles they might be having and with the appropriate having and with the appropriate having and with the appropriate cautionary notes, cautionary notes, cautionary notes, get some ideas back of what might get some ideas back of what might get some ideas back of what might be going on. Now, that might sound like, be going on. Now, that might sound like, be going on. Now, that might sound like, "Oh, this is people playing their own "Oh, this is people playing their own "Oh, this is people playing their own doctor." But I'll tell you right now, if doctor." But I'll tell you right now, if doctor." But I'll tell you right now, if I put in I put in I put in left armpit lymph node pain left armpit lymph node pain left armpit lymph node pain or swelling into any online search or swelling into any online search or swelling into any online search engine, it's going to tell me engine, it's going to tell me engine, it's going to tell me some of the worst possible outcomes. some of the worst possible outcomes. some of the worst possible outcomes. &gt;&gt; Yes. So, it's not like we need to shield &gt;&gt; Yes. So, it's not like we need to shield &gt;&gt; Yes. So, it's not like we need to shield people from potential outcomes, but it people from potential outcomes, but it people from potential outcomes, but it seems to me that this should be pushed seems to me that this should be pushed seems to me that this should be pushed through an AI read of PubMed, which through an AI read of PubMed, which through an AI read of PubMed, which already exists, right? Most of the large already exists, right? Most of the large already exists, right? Most of the large language models are trained on the language models are trained on the language models are trained on the entire internet including PubMed. entire internet including PubMed. entire internet including PubMed. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And that it should point somebody in And that it should point somebody in And that it should point somebody in some actionable directions including some actionable directions including some actionable directions including which of these groups, I meant to ask which of these groups, I meant to ask which of these groups, I meant to ask this earlier, this earlier, this earlier, excuse me, which of the various groups excuse me, which of the various groups excuse me, which of the various groups for a given disease is the best one? for a given disease is the best one? for a given disease is the best one? &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Like like if somebody is kid, you know, &gt;&gt; Like like if somebody is kid, you know, &gt;&gt; Like like if somebody is kid, you know, God forbid has a has a blood cancer. God forbid has a has a blood cancer. God forbid has a has a blood cancer. &gt;&gt; Yep. Which group do you go to? Is there &gt;&gt; Yep. Which group do you go to? Is there &gt;&gt; Yep. Which group do you go to? Is there a best one? Are these rated by anybody? a best one? Are these rated by anybody? a best one? Are these rated by anybody? I mean, I mean, I mean, I'm not trying to throw our arms around I'm not trying to throw our arms around I'm not trying to throw our arms around all of medicine here and all of the all of medicine here and all of the all of medicine here and all of the problems in the world, but it seems to problems in the world, but it seems to problems in the world, but it seems to me that all of this is tractable. me that all of this is tractable. me that all of this is tractable. Someone just needs to get organized Someone just needs to get organized Someone just needs to get organized about the databases. I completely agree. about the databases. I completely agree. about the databases. I completely agree. I think that there's such randomness to I think that there's such randomness to I think that there's such randomness to healthcare and to our biomedical healthcare and to our biomedical healthcare and to our biomedical research system. I think that's probably research system. I think that's probably research system. I think that's probably maybe the most heartbreaking part of maybe the most heartbreaking part of maybe the most heartbreaking part of this all is it because it's so random, this all is it because it's so random, this all is it because it's so random, you know, Michael gets a drug and he you know, Michael gets a drug and he you know, Michael gets a drug and he walks his daughter down the aisle 9 walks his daughter down the aisle 9 walks his daughter down the aisle 9 years later and a bunch of other people years later and a bunch of other people years later and a bunch of other people don't get a drug and they aren't don't get a drug and they aren't don't get a drug and they aren't alive. And so alive. And so alive. And so I love the idea of that centralized I love the idea of that centralized I love the idea of that centralized database. I think that there's a company database. I think that there's a company database. I think that there's a company called Open Evidence, which is trying to called Open Evidence, which is trying to called Open Evidence, which is trying to basically create a GPT but for to basically create a GPT but for to basically create a GPT but for healthcare. I don't know if it's as I healthcare. I don't know if it's as I healthcare. I don't know if it's as I don't think it's to where you don't think it's to where you don't think it's to where you described it where you can really put in described it where you can really put in described it where you can really put in your personal family information and get your personal family information and get your personal family information and get answers, but I'm hopeful that others answers, but I'm hopeful that others answers, but I'm hopeful that others will. Um, you know, the role that I see will. Um, you know, the role that I see will. Um, you know, the role that I see our work and in my work fitting our work and in my work fitting our work and in my work fitting into that into that into that is basically finding as many of these is basically finding as many of these is basically finding as many of these connections and proving them out in the connections and proving them out in the connections and proving them out in the lab and in clinical trials as possible. lab and in clinical trials as possible. lab and in clinical trials as possible. So that way when you type in your So that way when you type in your So that way when you type in your disease and your situation, that disease and your situation, that disease and your situation, that drug that we worked on, you know, rises drug that we worked on, you know, rises drug that we worked on, you know, rises to the top because it wasn't just a to the top because it wasn't just a to the top because it wasn't just a connection in PubMed, but it was a connection in PubMed, but it was a connection in PubMed, but it was a connection in PubMed that we've connection in PubMed that we've connection in PubMed that we've validated in the lab and that we did the validated in the lab and that we did the validated in the lab and that we did the trial to prove that it works. Yeah, it's trial to prove that it works. Yeah, it's trial to prove that it works. Yeah, it's kind of wild that on a completely kind of wild that on a completely kind of wild that on a completely different end of the spectrum, um, you different end of the spectrum, um, you different end of the spectrum, um, you know, recently everyone's talking about know, recently everyone's talking about know, recently everyone's talking about creatine. Mhm, yeah. creatine. Mhm, yeah. creatine. Mhm, yeah. &gt;&gt; Creatine, creatine, creatine. Okay. &gt;&gt; Creatine, creatine, creatine. Okay. &gt;&gt; Creatine, creatine, creatine. Okay. Taking creatine since my teens cuz I Taking creatine since my teens cuz I Taking creatine since my teens cuz I heard back then that it would help make heard back then that it would help make heard back then that it would help make me stronger. It will make you stronger. me stronger. It will make you stronger. me stronger. It will make you stronger. Now people are talking about creatine Now people are talking about creatine Now people are talking about creatine for women, for men, for older people and for women, for men, for older people and for women, for men, for older people and under conditions of sleep deprivation, under conditions of sleep deprivation, under conditions of sleep deprivation, for cognitive support. for cognitive support. for cognitive support. Let's face it. Let's face it. Let's face it. The effects, while documented, are The effects, while documented, are The effects, while documented, are fairly mild for cognitive support, but fairly mild for cognitive support, but fairly mild for cognitive support, but they're there. Mhm. And they're there. Mhm. And they're there. Mhm. And this is not being touted as a treatment this is not being touted as a treatment this is not being touted as a treatment for like dementia, although it might for like dementia, although it might for like dementia, although it might help offset some minor dementia or help offset some minor dementia or help offset some minor dementia or something like that. I don't know. But something like that. I don't know. But something like that. I don't know. But the point is that people are talking the point is that people are talking the point is that people are talking about it. It's in the news. It's covered about it. It's in the news. It's covered about it. It's in the news. It's covered all the time. all the time. all the time. But we really should be talking about But we really should be talking about But we really should be talking about or also talking about drugs like aspirin or also talking about drugs like aspirin or also talking about drugs like aspirin that can be very useful for potentially that can be very useful for potentially that can be very useful for potentially for colon cancer and for heart attack, for colon cancer and for heart attack, for colon cancer and for heart attack, not just for pain. And all the other not just for pain. And all the other not just for pain. And all the other examples that are out there. But I think examples that are out there. But I think examples that are out there. But I think there's this fear that if you talk about there's this fear that if you talk about there's this fear that if you talk about a drug a drug a drug that people are just going to start that people are just going to start that people are just going to start taking it. Yes. Uh it as an attempt taking it. Yes. Uh it as an attempt taking it. Yes. Uh it as an attempt at a prophylactic, right? And I think at a prophylactic, right? And I think at a prophylactic, right? And I think that um there's a lot of that um there's a lot of that um there's a lot of caution around that for understandable caution around that for understandable caution around that for understandable reasons. But I want to know, I just reasons. But I want to know, I just reasons. But I want to know, I just turned 50. I want to know turned 50. I want to know turned 50. I want to know all the things that I could be taking all the things that I could be taking all the things that I could be taking Mhm. to potentially offset heart attack Mhm. to potentially offset heart attack Mhm. to potentially offset heart attack because I'm already exercising and because I'm already exercising and because I'm already exercising and trying to get my sleep and doing all trying to get my sleep and doing all trying to get my sleep and doing all that stuff. And then I can make a that stuff. And then I can make a that stuff. And then I can make a decision. So, where is the database of decision. So, where is the database of decision. So, where is the database of information about as a 50-year-old male information about as a 50-year-old male information about as a 50-year-old male who does the following things to support who does the following things to support who does the following things to support his health, no history of heart disease his health, no history of heart disease his health, no history of heart disease in my family that I'm aware of. Well, in my family that I'm aware of. Well, in my family that I'm aware of. Well, what drugs are on the counter what drugs are on the counter what drugs are on the counter um or molecules that exist in um or molecules that exist in um or molecules that exist in behind a script from a doctor that could behind a script from a doctor that could behind a script from a doctor that could potentially extend my life. I want to potentially extend my life. I want to potentially extend my life. I want to know that information. Yeah. And we're know that information. Yeah. And we're know that information. Yeah. And we're talking about creatine. Yeah. So, for talking about creatine. Yeah. So, for talking about creatine. Yeah. So, for once I'm kind of like uh I'm not once I'm kind of like uh I'm not once I'm kind of like uh I'm not being disparaging of supplements, but being disparaging of supplements, but being disparaging of supplements, but I'm like it doesn't make any sense. The I'm like it doesn't make any sense. The I'm like it doesn't make any sense. The conversation is skewed in the wrong conversation is skewed in the wrong conversation is skewed in the wrong direction. Yeah, I mean I think that direction. Yeah, I mean I think that direction. Yeah, I mean I think that what we're trying to do with every what we're trying to do with every what we're trying to do with every cure with our work is trying to start cure with our work is trying to start cure with our work is trying to start this conversation and keep the this conversation and keep the this conversation and keep the conversation going so that way you can conversation going so that way you can conversation going so that way you can go to your doctor with, you know, with X go to your doctor with, you know, with X go to your doctor with, you know, with X drug. Um you know, I mentioned that we drug. Um you know, I mentioned that we drug. Um you know, I mentioned that we have nine active programs. So, on the have nine active programs. So, on the have nine active programs. So, on the one end of the spectrum really common is one end of the spectrum really common is one end of the spectrum really common is our program with lidocaine in breast is our program with lidocaine in breast is our program with lidocaine in breast cancer where we're doing laboratory cancer where we're doing laboratory cancer where we're doing laboratory work. We're also evaluating clinical work. We're also evaluating clinical work. We're also evaluating clinical data. And I hope at some point in the data. And I hope at some point in the data. And I hope at some point in the future that the data is strong enough. future that the data is strong enough. future that the data is strong enough. And if it is, then we'll And if it is, then we'll And if it is, then we'll work to encourage every woman who's work to encourage every woman who's work to encourage every woman who's about to go in for breast cancer surgery about to go in for breast cancer surgery about to go in for breast cancer surgery to talk to their surgeon beforehand and to talk to their surgeon beforehand and to talk to their surgeon beforehand and say, "Hey, I want to make sure you do say, "Hey, I want to make sure you do say, "Hey, I want to make sure you do this." Instead of really empowering them this." Instead of really empowering them this." Instead of really empowering them in that way. But all the way through in that way. But all the way through in that way. But all the way through even to the rarest of conditions, even to the rarest of conditions, even to the rarest of conditions, there's a condition called Bachmann-Bupp there's a condition called Bachmann-Bupp there's a condition called Bachmann-Bupp syndrome where kids are born with a syndrome where kids are born with a syndrome where kids are born with a mutation that cause them to have mutation that cause them to have mutation that cause them to have elevated levels of an enzyme called OCE1 elevated levels of an enzyme called OCE1 elevated levels of an enzyme called OCE1 and basically they're uh on feeding and basically they're uh on feeding and basically they're uh on feeding tubes, they are tubes, they are tubes, they are uh wheelchair or bed-bound um uh wheelchair or bed-bound um uh wheelchair or bed-bound um unless you give them a drug that was unless you give them a drug that was unless you give them a drug that was made for African sleeping sickness, made for African sleeping sickness, made for African sleeping sickness, which is a perfect covalent binder to which is a perfect covalent binder to which is a perfect covalent binder to OCE1. So, that enzyme that's too high in OCE1. So, that enzyme that's too high in OCE1. So, that enzyme that's too high in these kids, African sleeping sickness these kids, African sleeping sickness these kids, African sleeping sickness medicine actually binds to OCE1 and if medicine actually binds to OCE1 and if medicine actually binds to OCE1 and if you start it early enough in life, these you start it early enough in life, these you start it early enough in life, these kids get their feeding tube taken out. kids get their feeding tube taken out. kids get their feeding tube taken out. They might be able to sit up. They can They might be able to sit up. They can They might be able to sit up. They can even play with their siblings. And so, even play with their siblings. And so, even play with their siblings. And so, the reason I mention this is that there the reason I mention this is that there the reason I mention this is that there aren't that many people with aren't that many people with aren't that many people with Bachmann-Bupp. In fact, it's only been Bachmann-Bupp. In fact, it's only been Bachmann-Bupp. In fact, it's only been described in 20 kids, which means described in 20 kids, which means described in 20 kids, which means there's probably hundreds of kids um there's probably hundreds of kids um there's probably hundreds of kids um because the medical uh literature's because the medical uh literature's because the medical uh literature's typically behind reality. But, let's say typically behind reality. But, let's say typically behind reality. But, let's say there's hundreds of kids. there's hundreds of kids. there's hundreds of kids. At some point, we're going to get the At some point, we're going to get the At some point, we're going to get the word out. So, that way, you know, we can word out. So, that way, you know, we can word out. So, that way, you know, we can find every kid possible, you know, with find every kid possible, you know, with find every kid possible, you know, with Bachmann-Bupp so they can get this Bachmann-Bupp so they can get this Bachmann-Bupp so they can get this medication DFMO. And so, um that these medication DFMO. And so, um that these medication DFMO. And so, um that these are microcosms of what you're talking are microcosms of what you're talking are microcosms of what you're talking about, which is that like no one should about, which is that like no one should about, which is that like no one should suffer from Bachmann-Bupp without being suffer from Bachmann-Bupp without being suffer from Bachmann-Bupp without being on DFMO. No one should have breast on DFMO. No one should have breast on DFMO. No one should have breast cancer without having had lidocaine. No cancer without having had lidocaine. No cancer without having had lidocaine. No one should be a healthy 50-year-old man one should be a healthy 50-year-old man one should be a healthy 50-year-old man who might be able to have their risk of who might be able to have their risk of who might be able to have their risk of heart attack reduced. It might be that heart attack reduced. It might be that heart attack reduced. It might be that colchicine um is helpful for um for colchicine um is helpful for um for colchicine um is helpful for um for reducing your risk of heart disease. reducing your risk of heart disease. reducing your risk of heart disease. But, to your point But, to your point But, to your point how can we get this more proactively so how can we get this more proactively so how can we get this more proactively so we're not just sort of like hoping and we're not just sort of like hoping and we're not just sort of like hoping and waiting that all these random waiting that all these random waiting that all these random things line up? things line up? things line up? Let's use colchicine in the lab. So, Let's use colchicine in the lab. So, Let's use colchicine in the lab. So, colchicine's an interesting one. So, um colchicine's an interesting one. So, um colchicine's an interesting one. So, um colchicine uh is typically utilized for colchicine uh is typically utilized for colchicine uh is typically utilized for gout. Um it's this it's been around gout. Um it's this it's been around gout. Um it's this it's been around forever. Actually, I learned that it's forever. Actually, I learned that it's forever. Actually, I learned that it's like 3,000 years ago is when it started like 3,000 years ago is when it started like 3,000 years ago is when it started being used um because uh gout often being used um because uh gout often being used um because uh gout often occurs in individuals who consume too occurs in individuals who consume too occurs in individuals who consume too much alcohol. And so, like apparently much alcohol. And so, like apparently much alcohol. And so, like apparently in like Egypt 3,000 years ago, some of in like Egypt 3,000 years ago, some of in like Egypt 3,000 years ago, some of the um wealthy people were drinking too the um wealthy people were drinking too the um wealthy people were drinking too much alcohol and somehow they figured much alcohol and somehow they figured much alcohol and somehow they figured out that this out that this out that this molecule uh colchicine, of course, I molecule uh colchicine, of course, I molecule uh colchicine, of course, I think it was a root at the time, could think it was a root at the time, could think it was a root at the time, could be helpful for reducing gout. Um and we be helpful for reducing gout. Um and we be helpful for reducing gout. Um and we should fact-check that statement should fact-check that statement should fact-check that statement because I need know the exact details, because I need know the exact details, because I need know the exact details, but it's been around a long time. If but it's been around a long time. If but it's been around a long time. If there were a database, you could just go there were a database, you could just go there were a database, you could just go to the database. You know where You know to the database. You know where You know to the database. You know where You know where my mind's going. where my mind's going. where my mind's going. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. So, so colchicine's &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. So, so colchicine's &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. So, so colchicine's around forever. It's been used for gout around forever. It's been used for gout around forever. It's been used for gout for many for decades. Um people have for many for decades. Um people have for many for decades. Um people have gouty arthritis, they get these painful gouty arthritis, they get these painful gouty arthritis, they get these painful joints, give them colchicine, helps them joints, give them colchicine, helps them joints, give them colchicine, helps them out. Well, out. Well, out. Well, a researcher a couple decades ago um had a researcher a couple decades ago um had a researcher a couple decades ago um had a hypothesis that because of its a hypothesis that because of its a hypothesis that because of its anti-inflammatory properties um and anti-inflammatory properties um and anti-inflammatory properties um and a few other properties of colchicine a few other properties of colchicine a few other properties of colchicine that it might be able to reduce the risk that it might be able to reduce the risk that it might be able to reduce the risk of heart attacks in people who've of heart attacks in people who've of heart attacks in people who've already had a heart attack or maybe already had a heart attack or maybe already had a heart attack or maybe in general, but in particular in people in general, but in particular in people in general, but in particular in people who've already had a heart attack. And who've already had a heart attack. And who've already had a heart attack. And um it because it's been around forever, it because it's been around forever, it because it's been around forever, they couldn't um they really couldn't they couldn't um they really couldn't they couldn't um they really couldn't raise the funding needed to do all the raise the funding needed to do all the raise the funding needed to do all the trials to prove it cuz um heart disease trials to prove it cuz um heart disease trials to prove it cuz um heart disease prevention trials are big expensive prevention trials are big expensive prevention trials are big expensive trials. You got to follow people for trials. You got to follow people for trials. You got to follow people for years to prove that they didn't get a years to prove that they didn't get a years to prove that they didn't get a heart attack versus people who did who heart attack versus people who did who heart attack versus people who did who got a placebo. So, they ended up got a placebo. So, they ended up got a placebo. So, they ended up changing the dose uh of that medicine of changing the dose uh of that medicine of changing the dose uh of that medicine of colchicine. So, it's a slightly different dose from So, it's a slightly different dose from So, it's a slightly different dose from the one that you use for gouty the one that you use for gouty the one that you use for gouty arthritis, but it has a very substantial arthritis, but it has a very substantial arthritis, but it has a very substantial reduction in heart disease risk if you reduction in heart disease risk if you reduction in heart disease risk if you had a prior heart attack, and in had a prior heart attack, and in had a prior heart attack, and in particular if you had a prior heart particular if you had a prior heart particular if you had a prior heart attack and you have diabetes. A really attack and you have diabetes. A really attack and you have diabetes. A really meaningful reduction. So, it got really meaningful reduction. So, it got really meaningful reduction. So, it got FDA approval for that particular FDA approval for that particular FDA approval for that particular subpopulation. But I mention it because subpopulation. But I mention it because subpopulation. But I mention it because if they hadn't changed the dose, it if they hadn't changed the dose, it if they hadn't changed the dose, it would have been a paper that some would have been a paper that some would have been a paper that some academic would have published that I academic would have published that I academic would have published that I think colchicine could help, and no one think colchicine could help, and no one think colchicine could help, and no one would have ever done the big trial. And would have ever done the big trial. And would have ever done the big trial. And again, that's sort of the tragedy here again, that's sort of the tragedy here again, that's sort of the tragedy here is that people are literally not having is that people are literally not having is that people are literally not having heart attacks right now cuz they're on heart attacks right now cuz they're on heart attacks right now cuz they're on colchicine, but if not for someone colchicine, but if not for someone colchicine, but if not for someone figuring out a way to make the system figuring out a way to make the system figuring out a way to make the system work, you know, they would have had work, you know, they would have had work, you know, they would have had their heart attack. their heart attack. their heart attack. We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take, things like magnesium 38, can take, things like magnesium 38, can take, things like magnesium 38, theanine, chamomile extract, and theanine, chamomile extract, and theanine, chamomile extract, and glycine. Along with lesser-known things glycine. Along with lesser-known things glycine. Along with lesser-known things like saffron and valerian root. These like saffron and valerian root. These like saffron and valerian root. These are all clinically supported ingredients are all clinically supported ingredients are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay that can help you fall asleep, stay that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more asleep, and wake up feeling more asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our refreshed. I'm excited to share that our refreshed. I'm excited to share that our long-time sponsor AG1 just created a new long-time sponsor AG1 just created a new long-time sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink product called AGZ, a nightly drink product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep designed to help you get better sleep designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up feeling super and have you wake up feeling super and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've refreshed. Over the past few years, I've refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help worked with the team at AG1 to help worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the create this new AGZ formula. It has the create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting compounds in best sleep supporting compounds in best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in one exactly the right ratios in one exactly the right ratios in one easy-to-drink mix. This removes all the easy-to-drink mix. This removes all the easy-to-drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forge the vast complexity of trying to forge the vast complexity of trying to forge the vast landscape of supplements focused on landscape of supplements focused on landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way. And it delicious, by the way. And it delicious, by the way. And it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I think, chocolate mint. But I really like think, chocolate mint. But I really like think, chocolate mint. But I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by David. David makes a protein bar unlike David. David makes a protein bar unlike David. David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only any other. It has 28 g of protein, only any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein and 75% of its calories come from protein. That's 50% calories come from protein. That's 50% calories come from protein. That's 50% higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein bar. These bars from David also taste bar. These bars from David also taste bar. These bars from David also taste amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I also like the chocolate chip cookie also like the chocolate chip cookie also like the chocolate chip cookie dough flavor, and I also like the salted dough flavor, and I also like the salted dough flavor, and I also like the salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like all the flavors. They're all delicious. all the flavors. They're all delicious. all the flavors. They're all delicious. Also, big news, David bars are now back Also, big news, David bars are now back Also, big news, David bars are now back in stock. They were sold out for several in stock. They were sold out for several in stock. They were sold out for several months because they are that popular, months because they are that popular, months because they are that popular, but they are now back in stock. By but they are now back in stock. By but they are now back in stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 g eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 g eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 g of protein in the calories of a snack, of protein in the calories of a snack, of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it very easy for me to meet which makes it very easy for me to meet which makes it very easy for me to meet my protein goals of 1 g of protein per my protein goals of 1 g of protein per my protein goals of 1 g of protein per pound of body weight per day, and to do pound of body weight per day, and to do pound of body weight per day, and to do so without eating excess calories. I so without eating excess calories. I so without eating excess calories. I generally eat a David bar most generally eat a David bar most generally eat a David bar most afternoons and I always keep them with afternoons and I always keep them with afternoons and I always keep them with me when I'm away from home or traveling me when I'm away from home or traveling me when I'm away from home or traveling because they're incredibly convenient to because they're incredibly convenient to because they're incredibly convenient to get enough protein. As I mentioned, get enough protein. As I mentioned, get enough protein. As I mentioned, they're incredibly delicious and given they're incredibly delicious and given they're incredibly delicious and given that 28 grams of protein, they're pretty that 28 grams of protein, they're pretty that 28 grams of protein, they're pretty filling for just 150 calories. So filling for just 150 calories. So filling for just 150 calories. So they're great between meals as well. If they're great between meals as well. If they're great between meals as well. If you'd like to try David, you can go to you'd like to try David, you can go to you'd like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Well, I feel like we could spend hours Well, I feel like we could spend hours Well, I feel like we could spend hours going through the catalog of drugs for going through the catalog of drugs for going through the catalog of drugs for which uh these examples exist. Um and we which uh these examples exist. Um and we which uh these examples exist. Um and we may return to a few more, but I'm may return to a few more, but I'm may return to a few more, but I'm putting in a strong vote for this putting in a strong vote for this putting in a strong vote for this database. I know you're working hard on database. I know you're working hard on database. I know you're working hard on this. I'd like to talk about your this. I'd like to talk about your this. I'd like to talk about your journey into this because you are not a journey into this because you are not a journey into this because you are not a typical doctor. typical doctor. typical doctor. Um I think that's apparent to people Um I think that's apparent to people Um I think that's apparent to people already. Uh you care very much about human health Uh you care very much about human health Uh you care very much about human health and treating human disease. and treating human disease. and treating human disease. Uh but you have a very unusual and Uh but you have a very unusual and Uh but you have a very unusual and interesting trajectory into medicine and interesting trajectory into medicine and interesting trajectory into medicine and I do believe it's I do believe it's I do believe it's helped lead you to this uh very unique helped lead you to this uh very unique helped lead you to this uh very unique orientation within the field of medicine orientation within the field of medicine orientation within the field of medicine and science. So, and science. So, and science. So, tell us that story and uh tell us that story and uh tell us that story and uh teach us about Castleman's disease. teach us about Castleman's disease. teach us about Castleman's disease. Sure. Um well, my story um I think Sure. Um well, my story um I think Sure. Um well, my story um I think really starts back when I was 18 years really starts back when I was 18 years really starts back when I was 18 years old and um I was a freshman at old and um I was a freshman at old and um I was a freshman at Georgetown. Um we were talking earlier Georgetown. Um we were talking earlier Georgetown. Um we were talking earlier about I played football at Georgetown about I played football at Georgetown about I played football at Georgetown and that for me growing up, that was my and that for me growing up, that was my and that for me growing up, that was my dream to be a Division I college dream to be a Division I college dream to be a Division I college quarterback. That's all I could think quarterback. That's all I could think quarterback. That's all I could think about. I was not quite as jacked as you, about. I was not quite as jacked as you, about. I was not quite as jacked as you, but somewhere in that realm. but somewhere in that realm. but somewhere in that realm. &gt;&gt; larger than I was. &gt;&gt; larger than I was. &gt;&gt; larger than I was. We'll put up a link to a photo. I We'll put up a link to a photo. I We'll put up a link to a photo. I David was 230. You're taller than I am. David was 230. You're taller than I am. David was 230. You're taller than I am. I'm 6'1", so you're probably about 6'2", I'm 6'1", so you're probably about 6'2", I'm 6'1", so you're probably about 6'2", 6'3". I think you might be 6'3". Either that I think you might be 6'3". Either that I think you might be 6'3". Either that or I'm shrinking. or I'm shrinking. or I'm shrinking. Um and uh Um and uh Um and uh super large, fit, low body fat. I mean, super large, fit, low body fat. I mean, super large, fit, low body fat. I mean, you're you look um you're you look um you're you look um clearly you're a quarterback, but you're clearly you're a quarterback, but you're clearly you're a quarterback, but you're large even for a quarterback. large even for a quarterback. large even for a quarterback. &gt;&gt; yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, you know, that was &gt;&gt; yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, you know, that was &gt;&gt; yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, you know, that was my dream. I was, you know, I want to my dream. I was, you know, I want to my dream. I was, you know, I want to play college football and I got there play college football and I got there play college football and I got there and I was I'd been on campus at and I was I'd been on campus at and I was I'd been on campus at Georgetown for a couple weeks and um Georgetown for a couple weeks and um Georgetown for a couple weeks and um I got a call that changed my life. My I got a call that changed my life. My I got a call that changed my life. My dad called and told me that my mom dad called and told me that my mom dad called and told me that my mom had brain cancer. And Andrew, I went had brain cancer. And Andrew, I went had brain cancer. And Andrew, I went from like all I could think about was from like all I could think about was from like all I could think about was football and like, you know, I'm finally football and like, you know, I'm finally football and like, you know, I'm finally at this like, you know, goal that I'd at this like, you know, goal that I'd at this like, you know, goal that I'd always set to oh my gosh, this is just always set to oh my gosh, this is just always set to oh my gosh, this is just changed everything. My my mom just changed everything. My my mom just changed everything. My my mom uh my mom and I were so close, and I was my mom and I were so close, and I was my mom and I were so close, and I was heartbroken for it. Glioblastoma brain heartbroken for it. Glioblastoma brain heartbroken for it. Glioblastoma brain tumors are tumors are tumors are uh uniformly fatal. They're horrible. Um uh uniformly fatal. They're horrible. Um uh uniformly fatal. They're horrible. Um you know, I was only 18, so I don't you know, I was only 18, so I don't you know, I was only 18, so I don't think I knew just how bad it was, but think I knew just how bad it was, but think I knew just how bad it was, but I knew it was really bad. And um I knew it was really bad. And um I knew it was really bad. And um watching her battle with cancer over the watching her battle with cancer over the watching her battle with cancer over the next 15 months um just changed next 15 months um just changed next 15 months um just changed everything in me. Um it completely everything in me. Um it completely everything in me. Um it completely locked me in, and I told her just locked me in, and I told her just locked me in, and I told her just before she passed away that I would before she passed away that I would before she passed away that I would dedicate my life to trying to find dedicate my life to trying to find dedicate my life to trying to find treatments for patients like her. And um treatments for patients like her. And um treatments for patients like her. And um she couldn't say many words um at she couldn't say many words um at she couldn't say many words um at the at the end, but she said the at the end, but she said the at the end, but she said unconditional love. Those were the two unconditional love. Those were the two unconditional love. Those were the two words that she said when I told her I words that she said when I told her I words that she said when I told her I would do that. And I was like, all would do that. And I was like, all would do that. And I was like, all right, I got to do this, you know. She right, I got to do this, you know. She right, I got to do this, you know. She she um you know, she wants me to do it. she um you know, she wants me to do it. she um you know, she wants me to do it. And for me, I sort of haven't been And for me, I sort of haven't been And for me, I sort of haven't been able to stop thinking about helping able to stop thinking about helping able to stop thinking about helping people like her from the moment that I people like her from the moment that I people like her from the moment that I started seeing this um horrible cancer started seeing this um horrible cancer started seeing this um horrible cancer um uh you know, take her life in front of uh you know, take her life in front of uh you know, take her life in front of me. And um and of course the promise me. And um and of course the promise me. And um and of course the promise that I made to her, I also learned so that I made to her, I also learned so that I made to her, I also learned so much from her in watching her battle much from her in watching her battle much from her in watching her battle against brain cancer. I mean, I'll against brain cancer. I mean, I'll against brain cancer. I mean, I'll just tell one quick story. Um just tell one quick story. Um just tell one quick story. Um so I got that call from my dad. I so I got that call from my dad. I so I got that call from my dad. I immediately came home to North Carolina. immediately came home to North Carolina. immediately came home to North Carolina. And within a few days, she was having And within a few days, she was having And within a few days, she was having brain surgery to get the tumor um brain surgery to get the tumor um brain surgery to get the tumor um resected. And they did a surgery where resected. And they did a surgery where resected. And they did a surgery where um they put you to sleep to open up your they put you to sleep to open up your they put you to sleep to open up your skull, and then they actually wake you skull, and then they actually wake you skull, and then they actually wake you up while your skull's open. And the up while your skull's open. And the up while your skull's open. And the reason for that, which you're very reason for that, which you're very reason for that, which you're very familiar with, is that as they're familiar with, is that as they're familiar with, is that as they're cutting out particularly on the left cutting out particularly on the left cutting out particularly on the left side of the brain, cutting out parts of side of the brain, cutting out parts of side of the brain, cutting out parts of the brain tumor, you want to be able to the brain tumor, you want to be able to the brain tumor, you want to be able to see where how far you want to go. Um you see where how far you want to go. Um you see where how far you want to go. Um you ask people to speak, and sort of when ask people to speak, and sort of when ask people to speak, and sort of when they start slurring their speech, you they start slurring their speech, you they start slurring their speech, you stop cutting. And so, they went through stop cutting. And so, they went through stop cutting. And so, they went through this whole surgery. It was like a 4 and this whole surgery. It was like a 4 and this whole surgery. It was like a 4 and 1/2 hour surgery, cut out most of the 1/2 hour surgery, cut out most of the 1/2 hour surgery, cut out most of the tumor, but not everything. And um they tumor, but not everything. And um they tumor, but not everything. And um they you know, uh you know, uh you know, uh woke her back up after the surgery woke her back up after the surgery woke her back up after the surgery and um she was in the waiting area and um she was in the waiting area and um she was in the waiting area and we went back to see her and I remember we went back to see her and I remember we went back to see her and I remember um my dad I've got two amazing older um my dad I've got two amazing older um my dad I've got two amazing older sisters and my dad and I we um went back sisters and my dad and I we um went back sisters and my dad and I we um went back to see her and we were you know so to see her and we were you know so to see her and we were you know so nervous like is it going to be our mom nervous like is it going to be our mom nervous like is it going to be our mom who's going to come out? They took out a who's going to come out? They took out a who's going to come out? They took out a lot of her brain um as part of the lot of her brain um as part of the lot of her brain um as part of the surgery and um surgery and um surgery and um so nervous and we walked back Andrew and so nervous and we walked back Andrew and so nervous and we walked back Andrew and pulled the curtain back and I'll never pulled the curtain back and I'll never pulled the curtain back and I'll never forget I saw my mom sitting there just forget I saw my mom sitting there just forget I saw my mom sitting there just about as far away as you are and she had about as far away as you are and she had about as far away as you are and she had a wrap around her head um a wrap around her head um a wrap around her head um bandages and she had this bulb coming bandages and she had this bulb coming bandages and she had this bulb coming out um those collecting fluid and she out um those collecting fluid and she out um those collecting fluid and she looked at her at her uh she looked at us looked at her at her uh she looked at us looked at her at her uh she looked at us and she pointed up to her head and she and she pointed up to her head and she and she pointed up to her head and she said Chiquita Banana Lady. said Chiquita Banana Lady. said Chiquita Banana Lady. And we just burst into laughter. She was And we just burst into laughter. She was And we just burst into laughter. She was saying she looked like the Chiquita saying she looked like the Chiquita saying she looked like the Chiquita Banana Lady and like that for me was Banana Lady and like that for me was Banana Lady and like that for me was this incredible moment of just like this incredible moment of just like this incredible moment of just like taking agency back from this like taking agency back from this like taking agency back from this like horrible cancer. Like you just went horrible cancer. Like you just went horrible cancer. Like you just went through surgery but like you're going to through surgery but like you're going to through surgery but like you're going to find something to laugh about and find something to laugh about and find something to laugh about and something to get your family to laugh at something to get your family to laugh at something to get your family to laugh at and to show that like you're still and to show that like you're still and to show that like you're still there. Um and so that was sort of the there. Um and so that was sort of the there. Um and so that was sort of the first of many lessons that I the first of many lessons that I the first of many lessons that I learned from my mom obviously in her learned from my mom obviously in her learned from my mom obviously in her health but also in her illness. And so health but also in her illness. And so health but also in her illness. And so that set me on this journey which is that set me on this journey which is that set me on this journey which is okay I'm going to dedicate my life to okay I'm going to dedicate my life to okay I'm going to dedicate my life to trying to find treatments for patients trying to find treatments for patients trying to find treatments for patients like my mom. I'm going to try to live um like my mom. I'm going to try to live um like my mom. I'm going to try to live um in the in the way that she in the in the way that she in the in the way that she did and um I was sort of well on my way. did and um I was sort of well on my way. did and um I was sort of well on my way. I um I um I um finished medical or sorry finished medical or sorry finished medical or sorry finished undergrad at Georgetown I had a undergrad at Georgetown I had a undergrad at Georgetown I had a graduate degree at Oxford and then I was graduate degree at Oxford and then I was graduate degree at Oxford and then I was couple years into med school at Penn um couple years into med school at Penn um couple years into med school at Penn um when uh you mentioned Castleman disease when uh you mentioned Castleman disease when uh you mentioned Castleman disease when I went from being totally healthy I when I went from being totally healthy I when I went from being totally healthy I shared earlier I won a bench pressing shared earlier I won a bench pressing shared earlier I won a bench pressing contest right around that time I was so contest right around that time I was so contest right around that time I was so healthy to uh being in the ICU with all healthy to uh being in the ICU with all healthy to uh being in the ICU with all my organs shutting down. my organs shutting down. my organs shutting down. The story about your mom is a remarkable The story about your mom is a remarkable The story about your mom is a remarkable one. Uh my first thought when uh one. Uh my first thought when uh one. Uh my first thought when uh you mentioned the Chiquita Banana Lady you mentioned the Chiquita Banana Lady you mentioned the Chiquita Banana Lady reference is that uh even though she was reference is that uh even though she was reference is that uh even though she was the patient it seemed like she was uh the patient it seemed like she was uh the patient it seemed like she was uh successfully taking care of all of you. successfully taking care of all of you. successfully taking care of all of you. &gt;&gt; try She was trying to take care of us. &gt;&gt; try She was trying to take care of us. &gt;&gt; try She was trying to take care of us. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know very little about her only &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know very little about her only &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know very little about her only what you've shared but she sounds like a what you've shared but she sounds like a what you've shared but she sounds like a very impressive woman. She was amazing. very impressive woman. She was amazing. very impressive woman. She was amazing. I so appreciate you saying that. Yeah. I so appreciate you saying that. Yeah. I so appreciate you saying that. Yeah. Um that comes through. Um that comes through. Um that comes through. So, Castleman's, I've never heard of it. So, Castleman's, I've never heard of it. So, Castleman's, I've never heard of it. Who's Castleman? And uh these physicians Who's Castleman? And uh these physicians Who's Castleman? And uh these physicians like to name diseases after themselves, like to name diseases after themselves, like to name diseases after themselves, um but my guess is that they're not the um but my guess is that they're not the um but my guess is that they're not the ones with the diseases, they're the ones with the diseases, they're the ones with the diseases, they're the ones that discovered the diseases, correct? that discovered the diseases, correct? that discovered the diseases, correct? That's right. Yep. So, Benjamin That's right. Yep. So, Benjamin That's right. Yep. So, Benjamin Castleman was a doctor in um Boston at Castleman was a doctor in um Boston at Castleman was a doctor in um Boston at Harvard. He'd been getting these cases of He'd been getting these cases of He'd been getting these cases of patients that were thought to have patients that were thought to have patients that were thought to have lymphoma, and they appeared like lymphoma, and they appeared like lymphoma, and they appeared like they had lymphoma, getting very, very they had lymphoma, getting very, very they had lymphoma, getting very, very sick very quickly. Um but when he looked sick very quickly. Um but when he looked sick very quickly. Um but when he looked under the microscope at them, they under the microscope at them, they under the microscope at them, they didn't look like a typical lymphoma didn't look like a typical lymphoma didn't look like a typical lymphoma patient. And so, um maybe as I as I patient. And so, um maybe as I as I patient. And so, um maybe as I as I share, you know, sort of what my share, you know, sort of what my share, you know, sort of what my progression looked like. I mean, I was progression looked like. I mean, I was progression looked like. I mean, I was third-year med student. I just um third-year med student. I just um third-year med student. I just um finished uh an OBGYN rotation. I just finished uh an OBGYN rotation. I just finished uh an OBGYN rotation. I just delivered babies into the world, which delivered babies into the world, which delivered babies into the world, which is sort of a is sort of a is sort of a peak um moment in medical school. And peak um moment in medical school. And peak um moment in medical school. And then, within a couple weeks, I noticed then, within a couple weeks, I noticed then, within a couple weeks, I noticed that I had uh enlarged lymph nodes in my that I had uh enlarged lymph nodes in my that I had uh enlarged lymph nodes in my neck. Um I felt more tired than I'd ever neck. Um I felt more tired than I'd ever neck. Um I felt more tired than I'd ever felt. Um and you're tired in med school felt. Um and you're tired in med school felt. Um and you're tired in med school and grad school, you know, well, but I and grad school, you know, well, but I and grad school, you know, well, but I was more tired than ever. I had horrible was more tired than ever. I had horrible was more tired than ever. I had horrible abdominal pain. And I noticed fluid abdominal pain. And I noticed fluid abdominal pain. And I noticed fluid pooling around my ankles. And I was pooling around my ankles. And I was pooling around my ankles. And I was like, this is so weird. What's going on? like, this is so weird. What's going on? like, this is so weird. What's going on? Um but the fatigue got worse and worse Um but the fatigue got worse and worse Um but the fatigue got worse and worse and worse. Um and over the course of and worse. Um and over the course of and worse. Um and over the course of really just a couple weeks, um I got so really just a couple weeks, um I got so really just a couple weeks, um I got so bad that I went I took a med school bad that I went I took a med school bad that I went I took a med school exam, then I went down the hall to the exam, then I went down the hall to the exam, then I went down the hall to the emergency department. I basically emergency department. I basically emergency department. I basically stumbled down to the ER and just stumbled down to the ER and just stumbled down to the ER and just told them my symptoms, and they ran told them my symptoms, and they ran told them my symptoms, and they ran blood work, and um blood work, and um blood work, and um I remember my doctor coming back and I remember my doctor coming back and I remember my doctor coming back and um and looking at me and saying, "David, um and looking at me and saying, "David, um and looking at me and saying, "David, your liver, your kidneys, and your bone your liver, your kidneys, and your bone your liver, your kidneys, and your bone marrow are all shutting down. We have to marrow are all shutting down. We have to marrow are all shutting down. We have to hospitalize you right away." And I'm hospitalize you right away." And I'm hospitalize you right away." And I'm like, "What do you mean? Like, I was like, "What do you mean? Like, I was like, "What do you mean? Like, I was just like I delivered a baby a couple just like I delivered a baby a couple just like I delivered a baby a couple weeks ago. Like, how what all my organs weeks ago. Like, how what all my organs weeks ago. Like, how what all my organs are shutting down?" And so, they are shutting down?" And so, they are shutting down?" And so, they hospitalized me, and I and I hospitalized me, and I and I hospitalized me, and I and I deteriorated really rapidly. I had a deteriorated really rapidly. I had a deteriorated really rapidly. I had a retinal hemorrhage that made me retinal hemorrhage that made me retinal hemorrhage that made me temporarily blind in my left eye. temporarily blind in my left eye. temporarily blind in my left eye. I gained a total of about 100 lb of I gained a total of about 100 lb of I gained a total of about 100 lb of fluid because my liver and my kidneys fluid because my liver and my kidneys fluid because my liver and my kidneys stopped working. You saw that picture stopped working. You saw that picture stopped working. You saw that picture where I just fluid everywhere um where I just fluid everywhere um where I just fluid everywhere um because of the multi-organ failure. because of the multi-organ failure. because of the multi-organ failure. And um I needed daily transfusions of And um I needed daily transfusions of And um I needed daily transfusions of red blood cells and platelets just to red blood cells and platelets just to red blood cells and platelets just to keep me alive. I was on dialysis at the keep me alive. I was on dialysis at the keep me alive. I was on dialysis at the time as well. So basically everything time as well. So basically everything time as well. So basically everything was shutting down and we had no was shutting down and we had no was shutting down and we had no diagnosis. So we didn't know what it diagnosis. So we didn't know what it diagnosis. So we didn't know what it was. My doctor Some doctors thought it was. My doctor Some doctors thought it was. My doctor Some doctors thought it was lymphoma, others thought it maybe was lymphoma, others thought it maybe was lymphoma, others thought it maybe was an autoimmune disease, others had no was an autoimmune disease, others had no was an autoimmune disease, others had no idea what it was. Um but over the course idea what it was. Um but over the course idea what it was. Um but over the course of about 11 weeks I got worse and worse of about 11 weeks I got worse and worse of about 11 weeks I got worse and worse and worse and at one point I was so sick and worse and at one point I was so sick and worse and at one point I was so sick that um I said goodbye to my dad, my that um I said goodbye to my dad, my that um I said goodbye to my dad, my sisters, and my girlfriend at the time sisters, and my girlfriend at the time sisters, and my girlfriend at the time Caitlin, and um a priest came in my room Caitlin, and um a priest came in my room Caitlin, and um a priest came in my room and read me my last rites and read me my last rites and read me my last rites when I was 25 years old. when I was 25 years old. when I was 25 years old. Fortunately, right around the time um of Fortunately, right around the time um of Fortunately, right around the time um of having my last rites read to me, which having my last rites read to me, which having my last rites read to me, which was really the end. I mean I didn't was really the end. I mean I didn't was really the end. I mean I didn't have more than a couple days didn't have more than a couple days didn't have more than a couple days left, that's when the diagnosis came in left, that's when the diagnosis came in left, that's when the diagnosis came in of Castleman disease. Um so basically a of Castleman disease. Um so basically a of Castleman disease. Um so basically a pathologist looked at my lymph node and pathologist looked at my lymph node and pathologist looked at my lymph node and they thought I had lymphoma. They they thought I had lymphoma. They they thought I had lymphoma. They figured it was a really aggressive figured it was a really aggressive figured it was a really aggressive lymphoma, which is a form of cancer. Um lymphoma, which is a form of cancer. Um lymphoma, which is a form of cancer. Um but they looked at it and just like but they looked at it and just like but they looked at it and just like Benjamin Castleman did, looked at it and Benjamin Castleman did, looked at it and Benjamin Castleman did, looked at it and said, "This doesn't look like lymphoma, said, "This doesn't look like lymphoma, said, "This doesn't look like lymphoma, this actually looks different. It looks this actually looks different. It looks this actually looks different. It looks like this thing called Castleman like this thing called Castleman like this thing called Castleman disease." Um which is basically um disease." Um which is basically um disease." Um which is basically um what we call it atypical what we call it atypical what we call it atypical lymphoproliferative disorder. So it's lymphoproliferative disorder. So it's lymphoproliferative disorder. So it's kind of like lymphoma, um but it's got kind of like lymphoma, um but it's got kind of like lymphoma, um but it's got features that are more like an features that are more like an features that are more like an autoimmune disease. And so basically autoimmune disease. And so basically autoimmune disease. And so basically your immune system becomes highly your immune system becomes highly your immune system becomes highly activated and starts attacking all your activated and starts attacking all your activated and starts attacking all your vital organs. So the reason that all my vital organs. So the reason that all my vital organs. So the reason that all my organs were shutting down is because my organs were shutting down is because my organs were shutting down is because my immune system was producing cytokines immune system was producing cytokines immune system was producing cytokines and other factors that were and other factors that were and other factors that were basically um shutting it down. basically um shutting it down. basically um shutting it down. Do you think that the um long hours of Do you think that the um long hours of Do you think that the um long hours of medical school plus being athletic, medical school plus being athletic, medical school plus being athletic, they're very driven, contributed to the they're very driven, contributed to the they're very driven, contributed to the autoimmune flare-up? I mean we don't autoimmune flare-up? I mean we don't autoimmune flare-up? I mean we don't often discuss this, but anyone that's often discuss this, but anyone that's often discuss this, but anyone that's dealt with an autoimmune issue, even if dealt with an autoimmune issue, even if dealt with an autoimmune issue, even if it's like psoriasis or something, um it's like psoriasis or something, um it's like psoriasis or something, um which can be very severe, but in most which can be very severe, but in most which can be very severe, but in most cases it's kind of minor to you know, cases it's kind of minor to you know, cases it's kind of minor to you know, they're over-the-counter things you can they're over-the-counter things you can they're over-the-counter things you can use, things, but um use, things, but um use, things, but um it's associated with people who are it's associated with people who are it's associated with people who are pushing very, very hard and uh tend pushing very, very hard and uh tend pushing very, very hard and uh tend to pull long hours and as a to pull long hours and as a to pull long hours and as a consequence the immune system consequence the immune system consequence the immune system understandably ramps up its activity and understandably ramps up its activity and understandably ramps up its activity and then goes past a tipping point where it then goes past a tipping point where it then goes past a tipping point where it starts attacking one's native tissue. starts attacking one's native tissue. starts attacking one's native tissue. Yeah, it's funny. No one ever Yeah, it's funny. No one ever Yeah, it's funny. No one ever asked that, but it's the right question asked that, but it's the right question asked that, but it's the right question to ask. And I think people are always to ask. And I think people are always to ask. And I think people are always sort of afraid to you know, get into sort of afraid to you know, get into sort of afraid to you know, get into like the whys of these things happening like the whys of these things happening like the whys of these things happening to you. I'm glad you asked because to you. I'm glad you asked because to you. I'm glad you asked because actually there was a paper that was actually there was a paper that was actually there was a paper that was published a couple years ago. Um I think published a couple years ago. Um I think published a couple years ago. Um I think it was in Cell where mice that were it was in Cell where mice that were it was in Cell where mice that were sleep-deprived, like significantly sleep-deprived, like significantly sleep-deprived, like significantly multi-day sleep-deprived, multi-day sleep-deprived, multi-day sleep-deprived, what actually killed them was a cytokine what actually killed them was a cytokine what actually killed them was a cytokine storm due to their immune system storm due to their immune system storm due to their immune system producing all these cytokines. Like they producing all these cytokines. Like they producing all these cytokines. Like they actually So like you know as we know actually So like you know as we know actually So like you know as we know that sleep deprivation is deadly, right? that sleep deprivation is deadly, right? that sleep deprivation is deadly, right? You don't sleep enough, you know this You don't sleep enough, you know this You don't sleep enough, you know this very well. But again, in these mouse very well. But again, in these mouse very well. But again, in these mouse studies, this the actual thing that studies, this the actual thing that studies, this the actual thing that killed them was their immune system killed them was their immune system killed them was their immune system producing cytokines, including producing cytokines, including producing cytokines, including interleukin 6, which is an important interleukin 6, which is an important interleukin 6, which is an important cytokine in Castleman's. Um cytokine in Castleman's. Um cytokine in Castleman's. Um And by just trying a couple medicines And by just trying a couple medicines And by just trying a couple medicines that basically blocked the production of that basically blocked the production of that basically blocked the production of some cytokines, you could keep the mice some cytokines, you could keep the mice some cytokines, you could keep the mice alive longer. Really pointing to this alive longer. Really pointing to this alive longer. Really pointing to this idea that it's sleep causing some idea that it's sleep causing some idea that it's sleep causing some disruption in immune balance causing disruption in immune balance causing disruption in immune balance causing excess production of cytokines causing excess production of cytokines causing excess production of cytokines causing death. And and so um I don't know if you death. And and so um I don't know if you death. And and so um I don't know if you Had you Had you seen I can share the Had you Had you seen I can share the Had you Had you seen I can share the paper with you. It's it's pretty paper with you. It's it's pretty paper with you. It's it's pretty fascinating. &gt;&gt; with that one. I've just &gt;&gt; with that one. I've just &gt;&gt; with that one. I've just &gt;&gt; But it connects to your point, right? &gt;&gt; But it connects to your point, right? &gt;&gt; But it connects to your point, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean grow I mean again, this is &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean grow I mean again, this is &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean grow I mean again, this is all anecdotal coming from my side anyway all anecdotal coming from my side anyway all anecdotal coming from my side anyway is that, you know, but growing up in the is that, you know, but growing up in the is that, you know, but growing up in the in Silicon Valley and I've known a lot in Silicon Valley and I've known a lot in Silicon Valley and I've known a lot of people who've cancers and who seem to of people who've cancers and who seem to of people who've cancers and who seem to be dealing with autoimmune things. And I be dealing with autoimmune things. And I be dealing with autoimmune things. And I know a lot of very ambitious know a lot of very ambitious know a lot of very ambitious hard-driving people. It's baked into the hard-driving people. It's baked into the hard-driving people. It's baked into the culture I grew up. culture I grew up. culture I grew up. And you know, and um and sometimes I've And you know, and um and sometimes I've And you know, and um and sometimes I've just wondered about these naturalistic just wondered about these naturalistic just wondered about these naturalistic observations. Again, these are not observations. Again, these are not observations. Again, these are not controlled studies where some of the controlled studies where some of the controlled studies where some of the most um most um most um hard-working uh long-hour hard-working uh long-hour hard-working uh long-hour athletic academic hybrid founder people athletic academic hybrid founder people athletic academic hybrid founder people are the ones that are the ones that are the ones that often times are dealing with severe often times are dealing with severe often times are dealing with severe health issues. And you know, like how health issues. And you know, like how health issues. And you know, like how could that be? Well, maybe there's a could that be? Well, maybe there's a could that be? Well, maybe there's a relationship. And the more I learn about relationship. And the more I learn about relationship. And the more I learn about the kind of general backdrop of the kind of general backdrop of the kind of general backdrop of supporting health, sleep being supporting health, sleep being supporting health, sleep being fundamental, and all the rest, and you know, natural and all the rest, and you know, natural and all the rest, and you know, natural light exposure, but not too much UV, and light exposure, but not too much UV, and light exposure, but not too much UV, and you know, this kind of thing. You got to you know, this kind of thing. You got to you know, this kind of thing. You got to kind of wonder. You I'm not saying kind of wonder. You I'm not saying kind of wonder. You I'm not saying people shouldn't work hard. I people shouldn't work hard. I people shouldn't work hard. I Otherwise, I'm headed for a quick for a Otherwise, I'm headed for a quick for a Otherwise, I'm headed for a quick for a quick death cuz I've always worked very quick death cuz I've always worked very quick death cuz I've always worked very long hours at mostly from a place of long hours at mostly from a place of long hours at mostly from a place of enthusiasm, sometimes fear. enthusiasm, sometimes fear. enthusiasm, sometimes fear. Um, but Um, but Um, but I guess you know you the immune system I guess you know you the immune system I guess you know you the immune system is a is a highly uh conditional system. is a is a highly uh conditional system. is a is a highly uh conditional system. Yeah. I'm not saying mellow laid-back Yeah. I'm not saying mellow laid-back Yeah. I'm not saying mellow laid-back people don't get cancers, but has that people don't get cancers, but has that people don't get cancers, but has that ever been looked at whether or not ever been looked at whether or not ever been looked at whether or not temperament and propensity for temperament and propensity for temperament and propensity for autoimmune-induced diseases uh autoimmune-induced diseases uh autoimmune-induced diseases uh correlate? &gt;&gt; seen it. I'm There may be I mean, &gt;&gt; seen it. I'm There may be I mean, &gt;&gt; seen it. I'm There may be I mean, what I have seen and to your point, I what I have seen and to your point, I what I have seen and to your point, I think there's really strong data that think there's really strong data that think there's really strong data that among people who have autoimmune among people who have autoimmune among people who have autoimmune diseases stress results in flares of diseases stress results in flares of diseases stress results in flares of their autoimmune diseases. And so So their autoimmune diseases. And so So their autoimmune diseases. And so So if you have it, stress, lack of sleep, if you have it, stress, lack of sleep, if you have it, stress, lack of sleep, all this reserve can result in all this reserve can result in all this reserve can result in flares. I haven't seen data on whether flares. I haven't seen data on whether flares. I haven't seen data on whether it's sort of like at the ideological it's sort of like at the ideological it's sort of like at the ideological level of actually causing it, but I level of actually causing it, but I level of actually causing it, but I think that you know, this mouse study of think that you know, this mouse study of think that you know, this mouse study of these mice was sort of you know, these mice was sort of you know, these mice was sort of you know, eye-opening for me. And I was, you know, eye-opening for me. And I was, you know, eye-opening for me. And I was, you know, working crazy hours and as you heard, working crazy hours and as you heard, working crazy hours and as you heard, I was on a mission. And I'm still on a I was on a mission. And I'm still on a I was on a mission. And I'm still on a mission, which is to find drugs for mission, which is to find drugs for mission, which is to find drugs for patients like my mom. Um, and that you patients like my mom. Um, and that you patients like my mom. Um, and that you know, that meant that I worked crazy know, that meant that I worked crazy know, that meant that I worked crazy hours. I crazy hours. I crazy hours. I teach medical students and um they work teach medical students and um they work teach medical students and um they work crazy hours. crazy hours. crazy hours. &gt;&gt; It's really impressive and &gt;&gt; It's really impressive and &gt;&gt; It's really impressive and striking and at times a little striking and at times a little striking and at times a little concerning, but um concerning, but um concerning, but um So you get this diagnosis. Thank So you get this diagnosis. Thank So you get this diagnosis. Thank goodness they figured out it wasn't goodness they figured out it wasn't goodness they figured out it wasn't lymphoma and it was Castleman's cuz that lymphoma and it was Castleman's cuz that lymphoma and it was Castleman's cuz that at least gave you a kind of a thin end at least gave you a kind of a thin end at least gave you a kind of a thin end of the wedge to start exploring various of the wedge to start exploring various of the wedge to start exploring various treatments. At the time was there any treatments. At the time was there any treatments. At the time was there any treatment for Castleman's disease? Known treatment for Castleman's disease? Known treatment for Castleman's disease? Known treatment? At the time there were no treatment? At the time there were no treatment? At the time there were no approved treatments. Um, but sort of as approved treatments. Um, but sort of as approved treatments. Um, but sort of as we were talking about earlier about like we were talking about earlier about like we were talking about earlier about like sort of information asymmetry, um, there sort of information asymmetry, um, there sort of information asymmetry, um, there was a drug that was um, was a drug that was um, was a drug that was um, uh originally developed in Japan uh for uh originally developed in Japan uh for uh originally developed in Japan uh for Castleman's. Um, Castleman's. Um, Castleman's. Um, but my doctors didn't know to try it. but my doctors didn't know to try it. but my doctors didn't know to try it. They gave a form of chemotherapy to me, They gave a form of chemotherapy to me, They gave a form of chemotherapy to me, um, which fortunately chemo sort of um, which fortunately chemo sort of um, which fortunately chemo sort of saved my life just in time, but there saved my life just in time, but there saved my life just in time, but there was this drug in Japan that like has was this drug in Japan that like has was this drug in Japan that like has pretty strong data that works for pretty strong data that works for pretty strong data that works for Castleman's, but that just like Castleman's, but that just like Castleman's, but that just like information hadn't and the drug is information hadn't and the drug is information hadn't and the drug is available in the US for another available in the US for another available in the US for another condition. That information exchange condition. That information exchange condition. That information exchange just hadn't happened. And actually I'll just hadn't happened. And actually I'll just hadn't happened. And actually I'll share a quick story about that drug. share a quick story about that drug. share a quick story about that drug. It's called tocilizumab and um It's called tocilizumab and um It's called tocilizumab and um it was made by a doctor named it was made by a doctor named it was made by a doctor named Kazuyoshi Zaki or discovered by a doctor Kazuyoshi Zaki or discovered by a doctor Kazuyoshi Zaki or discovered by a doctor named Kazuyoshi Zaki, and um uh named Kazuyoshi Zaki, and um uh named Kazuyoshi Zaki, and um uh I had heard from a colleague that Kazu I had heard from a colleague that Kazu I had heard from a colleague that Kazu had given it himself before it was given had given it himself before it was given had given it himself before it was given to any other humans to prove that it was to any other humans to prove that it was to any other humans to prove that it was safe. And um Old school medicine. safe. And um Old school medicine. safe. And um Old school medicine. &gt;&gt; Right. This is the '90s, and &gt;&gt; Right. This is the '90s, and &gt;&gt; Right. This is the '90s, and monoclonal antibodies were a new monoclonal antibodies were a new monoclonal antibodies were a new technology. And so, apparently, he was technology. And so, apparently, he was technology. And so, apparently, he was afraid to give it to patients cuz he afraid to give it to patients cuz he afraid to give it to patients cuz he didn't know what it was going to do. So, didn't know what it was going to do. So, didn't know what it was going to do. So, he's like, "I'll give it to myself." So, he's like, "I'll give it to myself." So, he's like, "I'll give it to myself." So, I heard that, and I said, "Kazu, I heard I heard that, and I said, "Kazu, I heard I heard that, and I said, "Kazu, I heard you gave your yourself tocilizumab." He you gave your yourself tocilizumab." He you gave your yourself tocilizumab." He said, "No, no, I didn't give it to said, "No, no, I didn't give it to said, "No, no, I didn't give it to myself. The nurse The nurse gave it to myself. The nurse The nurse gave it to myself. The nurse The nurse gave it to me." So, all right. All right, Kazu. I love So, all right. All right, Kazu. I love So, all right. All right, Kazu. I love the specificity. the specificity. the specificity. &gt;&gt; Um and so, he gave it himself, and he &gt;&gt; Um and so, he gave it himself, and he &gt;&gt; Um and so, he gave it himself, and he didn't die when he got it. Um but, you didn't die when he got it. Um but, you didn't die when he got it. Um but, you know, it was safe enough for him. So, know, it was safe enough for him. So, know, it was safe enough for him. So, he studied it in Castleman's patients, he studied it in Castleman's patients, he studied it in Castleman's patients, he got approval for Castleman's in he got approval for Castleman's in he got approval for Castleman's in Japan, um and then it got repurposed for Japan, um and then it got repurposed for Japan, um and then it got repurposed for rheumatoid arthritis here in the US and rheumatoid arthritis here in the US and rheumatoid arthritis here in the US and a number of other autoimmune diseases. a number of other autoimmune diseases. a number of other autoimmune diseases. So, it's approved in the US for So, it's approved in the US for So, it's approved in the US for autoimmune diseases. Um but, like I autoimmune diseases. Um but, like I autoimmune diseases. Um but, like I said, it was made for Castleman's in said, it was made for Castleman's in said, it was made for Castleman's in Japan, approved and available, but my Japan, approved and available, but my Japan, approved and available, but my doctors didn't even think to try it. Um doctors didn't even think to try it. Um doctors didn't even think to try it. Um chemo saved my life, um chemo saved my life, um chemo saved my life, um but then I relapsed a few weeks later. but then I relapsed a few weeks later. but then I relapsed a few weeks later. We tried that drug from Kazu from We tried that drug from Kazu from We tried that drug from Kazu from Japan. It didn't work for me. It works Japan. It didn't work for me. It works Japan. It didn't work for me. It works in about a third of patients. And so, um in about a third of patients. And so, um in about a third of patients. And so, um I ended up needing a combination of I ended up needing a combination of I ended up needing a combination of seven different chemotherapies: seven different chemotherapies: seven different chemotherapies: Adriamycin, Cytoxan, etoposide, Velcade, Adriamycin, Cytoxan, etoposide, Velcade, Adriamycin, Cytoxan, etoposide, Velcade, Revlimid, bortezomib. We're talking like Revlimid, bortezomib. We're talking like Revlimid, bortezomib. We're talking like the worst chemos out there, the worst chemos out there, the worst chemos out there, um was what I ended up needing to get my um was what I ended up needing to get my um was what I ended up needing to get my disease into remission. And disease into remission. And disease into remission. And just to give you a sense for how sick I just to give you a sense for how sick I just to give you a sense for how sick I was, this is now the third time that I was, this is now the third time that I was, this is now the third time that I almost died in a 6-month period. I was almost died in a 6-month period. I was almost died in a 6-month period. I was so sick that once they started giving me so sick that once they started giving me so sick that once they started giving me that combo of seven chemos, I started that combo of seven chemos, I started that combo of seven chemos, I started feeling better with every dose. And feeling better with every dose. And feeling better with every dose. And these are like the worst chemos in the these are like the worst chemos in the these are like the worst chemos in the world, but because they were killing my world, but because they were killing my world, but because they were killing my immune system, which was producing immune system, which was producing immune system, which was producing cytokines, which was killing me, I cytokines, which was killing me, I cytokines, which was killing me, I actually felt better on chemotherapy. actually felt better on chemotherapy. actually felt better on chemotherapy. And eventually, um I got well enough And eventually, um I got well enough And eventually, um I got well enough to where I could be discharged from the to where I could be discharged from the to where I could be discharged from the hospital. And there's that picture I hospital. And there's that picture I hospital. And there's that picture I showed you from the book, which is me a showed you from the book, which is me a showed you from the book, which is me a couple weeks after I got out of the couple weeks after I got out of the couple weeks after I got out of the hospital. Um and I was just so thankful hospital. Um and I was just so thankful hospital. Um and I was just so thankful to be alive. Yeah, we'll post a link to be alive. Yeah, we'll post a link to be alive. Yeah, we'll post a link to that photo as well and your book. Of that photo as well and your book. Of that photo as well and your book. Of course, um course, um course, um yeah, that photo. yeah, that photo. yeah, that photo. If you show that If you show that If you show that photo to the typical person, they're photo to the typical person, they're photo to the typical person, they're not going to say that's a they're not going to say that's a they're not going to say that's a healthy-looking person, but you said you healthy-looking person, but you said you healthy-looking person, but you said you were so grateful to be alive because were so grateful to be alive because were so grateful to be alive because relative to where you were before, I relative to where you were before, I relative to where you were before, I mean, 100 lb of fluid mean, 100 lb of fluid mean, 100 lb of fluid accumulating in your legs and body prior accumulating in your legs and body prior accumulating in your legs and body prior to that. to that. to that. You were in a very unique position You were in a very unique position You were in a very unique position because you have this um because you have this um because you have this um inquisitive mind. inquisitive mind. inquisitive mind. It's very clear you were motivated, not It's very clear you were motivated, not It's very clear you were motivated, not just from your illness, but motivated just from your illness, but motivated just from your illness, but motivated generally based on generally based on generally based on the story about your mom. Um the story about your mom. Um the story about your mom. Um and people would listen to you, is my and people would listen to you, is my and people would listen to you, is my guess. They would at least listen to guess. They would at least listen to guess. They would at least listen to your questions. That's I'm reading your questions. That's I'm reading your questions. That's I'm reading into this a bit, but into this a bit, but into this a bit, but I think many patients I think many patients I think many patients don't know what questions to ask. They don't know what questions to ask. They don't know what questions to ask. They don't know whether the person they're don't know whether the person they're don't know whether the person they're asking has access to the best answers or asking has access to the best answers or asking has access to the best answers or even the answers. even the answers. even the answers. Um I like to think most doctors are I like to think most doctors are I like to think most doctors are benevolent, so let's just assume that, benevolent, so let's just assume that, benevolent, so let's just assume that, but they're also busy and um they get as but they're also busy and um they get as but they're also busy and um they get as confused as anybody. I'm not trying to confused as anybody. I'm not trying to confused as anybody. I'm not trying to knock on medicine here, but this is just knock on medicine here, but this is just knock on medicine here, but this is just the reality. So, simple question, the reality. So, simple question, the reality. So, simple question, when a physician when a physician when a physician finishes their finishes their finishes their training all the way through their training all the way through their training all the way through residency and they and they start residency and they and they start residency and they and they start practicing, let's say an oncologist or a practicing, let's say an oncologist or a practicing, let's say an oncologist or a general practitioner in the United general practitioner in the United general practitioner in the United States, but perhaps elsewhere, is the typical but perhaps elsewhere, is the typical but perhaps elsewhere, is the typical physician accessing the literature physician accessing the literature physician accessing the literature often? I know they're required to do often? I know they're required to do often? I know they're required to do some continuing medical education, but some continuing medical education, but some continuing medical education, but it could be the case that their it could be the case that their it could be the case that their education around a disease is just education around a disease is just education around a disease is just locked in at the time they finish their locked in at the time they finish their locked in at the time they finish their residency plus any major updates that residency plus any major updates that residency plus any major updates that come through. How does this work? come through. How does this work? come through. How does this work? Because I want to know when my physician Because I want to know when my physician Because I want to know when my physician finished training and I want to know how finished training and I want to know how finished training and I want to know how often they read papers and I want to often they read papers and I want to often they read papers and I want to know who else is on their committee of know who else is on their committee of know who else is on their committee of people that they share ideas with. of people that they share ideas with. of people that they share ideas with. I want the most connected physician in I want the most connected physician in I want the most connected physician in the world to be treating me. the world to be treating me. the world to be treating me. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I do too, and I think that the &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I do too, and I think that the &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I do too, and I think that the problem is that given all the problem is that given all the problem is that given all the constraints and requirements of a constraints and requirements of a constraints and requirements of a typical physician, they just don't typical physician, they just don't typical physician, they just don't really have that much time to do all the really have that much time to do all the really have that much time to do all the things that we want them to be things that we want them to be things that we want them to be doing. So, um you're right, physicians doing. So, um you're right, physicians doing. So, um you're right, physicians are reading the literature, but are reading the literature, but are reading the literature, but typically it's because they have a typically it's because they have a typically it's because they have a patient with something that maybe led patient with something that maybe led patient with something that maybe led them to it or maybe them to it or maybe them to it or maybe um someone sent that paper to them. It's um someone sent that paper to them. It's um someone sent that paper to them. It's very random and sort of piecemeal. It's very random and sort of piecemeal. It's very random and sort of piecemeal. You know, no doctor can look at You know, no doctor can look at You know, no doctor can look at millions of papers, for example, and millions of papers, for example, and millions of papers, for example, and they can't even look at the hundreds they can't even look at the hundreds they can't even look at the hundreds that they maybe would be relevant for that they maybe would be relevant for that they maybe would be relevant for the diseases that they treat. And so, the diseases that they treat. And so, the diseases that they treat. And so, they get sort of some watered-down they get sort of some watered-down they get sort of some watered-down summaries. They go to a conference and summaries. They go to a conference and summaries. They go to a conference and they hear sort of what's being told, but they hear sort of what's being told, but they hear sort of what's being told, but it's very piecemeal. And I think the big it's very piecemeal. And I think the big it's very piecemeal. And I think the big takeaway from this whole takeaway from this whole takeaway from this whole conversation is that so much of this is conversation is that so much of this is conversation is that so much of this is piecemeal and it's not systematic and it piecemeal and it's not systematic and it piecemeal and it's not systematic and it is random and it's Did your doctor is random and it's Did your doctor is random and it's Did your doctor happen to come across this one paper? Um happen to come across this one paper? Um happen to come across this one paper? Um as opposed to the world that we should as opposed to the world that we should as opposed to the world that we should be in, which is where um where it be in, which is where um where it be in, which is where um where it shouldn't matter what doctor you go to shouldn't matter what doctor you go to shouldn't matter what doctor you go to see cuz the data's the data. I mean, see cuz the data's the data. I mean, see cuz the data's the data. I mean, this whole idea of like, you know, we this whole idea of like, you know, we this whole idea of like, you know, we talk about getting second opinions from talk about getting second opinions from talk about getting second opinions from doctors. It's like, for some reason we doctors. It's like, for some reason we doctors. It's like, for some reason we call it a second opinion, yet we believe call it a second opinion, yet we believe call it a second opinion, yet we believe that what's being told is like exactly that what's being told is like exactly that what's being told is like exactly what should be done. And it's like, what should be done. And it's like, what should be done. And it's like, well, it's an opinion, right? And and well, it's an opinion, right? And and well, it's an opinion, right? And and oftentimes second opinions, you know, um oftentimes second opinions, you know, um oftentimes second opinions, you know, um aren't consistent with the first opinion aren't consistent with the first opinion aren't consistent with the first opinion because they're opinions. I mean, because they're opinions. I mean, because they're opinions. I mean, they're educated, they're driven in they're educated, they're driven in they're educated, they're driven in science, and driven in um are oftentimes science, and driven in um are oftentimes science, and driven in um are oftentimes grounded in evidence, um but it's still grounded in evidence, um but it's still grounded in evidence, um but it's still you just don't know if your you just don't know if your you just don't know if your doctor's going to have the information doctor's going to have the information doctor's going to have the information that's needed for you. Which is sort of that's needed for you. Which is sort of that's needed for you. Which is sort of scary, right? Like, we sort of we scary, right? Like, we sort of we scary, right? Like, we sort of we want to go to our doctor and believe we want to go to our doctor and believe we want to go to our doctor and believe that like we like, you know, full trust that like we like, you know, full trust that like we like, you know, full trust like you know, you've got all the like you know, you've got all the like you know, you've got all the answers. And actually, I'd sort of have answers. And actually, I'd sort of have answers. And actually, I'd sort of have this concept that I talk about in my this concept that I talk about in my this concept that I talk about in my book, which um book, which um book, which um maybe you've already resonated with you maybe you've already resonated with you maybe you've already resonated with you in what we're talking about now. I in what we're talking about now. I in what we're talking about now. I called it the Santa Claus theory of called it the Santa Claus theory of called it the Santa Claus theory of civilization, which is before I got sick civilization, which is before I got sick civilization, which is before I got sick with Castleman's and when I was a with Castleman's and when I was a with Castleman's and when I was a medical student, I had this sort of idea medical student, I had this sort of idea medical student, I had this sort of idea that there were like rooms of scientists that there were like rooms of scientists that there were like rooms of scientists and doctors collaborating, working and doctors collaborating, working and doctors collaborating, working together to come up with solutions, kind together to come up with solutions, kind together to come up with solutions, kind of like Santa's, you know, workshop, and of like Santa's, you know, workshop, and of like Santa's, you know, workshop, and all the elves are working together. And all the elves are working together. And all the elves are working together. And as soon as they as soon as humanly as soon as they as soon as humanly as soon as they as soon as humanly possible that a drug could be possible that a drug could be possible that a drug could be discovered, it's at your doorstep. Like discovered, it's at your doorstep. Like discovered, it's at your doorstep. Like as soon as they can figure out but then as soon as they can figure out but then as soon as they can figure out but then I've sort of realized that actually I've sort of realized that actually I've sort of realized that actually like there isn't a you know, there like there isn't a you know, there like there isn't a you know, there aren't workshops. There aren't groups of aren't workshops. There aren't groups of aren't workshops. There aren't groups of scientists and doctors, you know, of scientists and doctors, you know, of scientists and doctors, you know, sitting together to figure out sitting together to figure out sitting together to figure out solutions. Um and if they are, it's just not Um and if they are, it's just not Um and if they are, it's just not necessarily at the pace that you would necessarily at the pace that you would necessarily at the pace that you would hope that it would be at. And so I think hope that it would be at. And so I think hope that it would be at. And so I think that that's just, you know, one of the that that's just, you know, one of the that that's just, you know, one of the many things that's been a bit the many things that's been a bit the many things that's been a bit depressing. Yeah, I mean I'll I'm going to resist Yeah, I mean I'll I'm going to resist Yeah, I mean I'll I'm going to resist the temptation to editorialize too much the temptation to editorialize too much the temptation to editorialize too much on that point because I want to get more on that point because I want to get more on that point because I want to get more information from you, but I can't resist information from you, but I can't resist information from you, but I can't resist saying that one of the things I've saying that one of the things I've saying that one of the things I've really wished for a long time is really wished for a long time is really wished for a long time is that the model of how biomedical that the model of how biomedical that the model of how biomedical research is done in the United States research is done in the United States research is done in the United States would shift from what we call the would shift from what we call the would shift from what we call the independent investigator model where we independent investigator model where we independent investigator model where we each have a lab, you know, Huberman lab each have a lab, you know, Huberman lab each have a lab, you know, Huberman lab is not just a podcast. It you know, was is not just a podcast. It you know, was is not just a podcast. It you know, was and to some extent still is a and to some extent still is a and to some extent still is a laboratory space although I've certainly laboratory space although I've certainly laboratory space although I've certainly appeared down the size of my lab in appeared down the size of my lab in appeared down the size of my lab in recent years for the podcast reasons and recent years for the podcast reasons and recent years for the podcast reasons and other reasons, but the point is that other reasons, but the point is that other reasons, but the point is that in this country in this country in this country you get a PhD if you decide to do a you get a PhD if you decide to do a you get a PhD if you decide to do a post-doc and start a laboratory. post-doc and start a laboratory. post-doc and start a laboratory. You have a laboratory that's named after You have a laboratory that's named after You have a laboratory that's named after you. Yeah. You get funding to do things you. Yeah. You get funding to do things you. Yeah. You get funding to do things that are really associated with your that are really associated with your that are really associated with your name. It's like a small startup that can name. It's like a small startup that can name. It's like a small startup that can grow into a medium-size startup grow into a medium-size startup grow into a medium-size startup or a large startup, but you stay or a large startup, but you stay or a large startup, but you stay independent. The whole notion of the independent. The whole notion of the independent. The whole notion of the independent investigator is it it's a independent investigator is it it's a independent investigator is it it's a very romantic model of science, but I very romantic model of science, but I very romantic model of science, but I think we've reached the point nowadays think we've reached the point nowadays think we've reached the point nowadays where the sharing of information and where the sharing of information and where the sharing of information and collaboration around a particular goal collaboration around a particular goal collaboration around a particular goal is far more powerful and I don't have a is far more powerful and I don't have a is far more powerful and I don't have a magic wand and magic wand and magic wand and the level of influence I will have over the level of influence I will have over the level of influence I will have over the NIH is questionable, but what I'm the NIH is questionable, but what I'm the NIH is questionable, but what I'm really pushing for is laboratories named really pushing for is laboratories named really pushing for is laboratories named after a puzzle a puzzle a puzzle or a disease or a or a disease or a or a disease or a Yep. and people coming together to try Yep. and people coming together to try Yep. and people coming together to try and solve those issues because it's not and solve those issues because it's not and solve those issues because it's not just a matter of naming and branding. It just a matter of naming and branding. It just a matter of naming and branding. It has everything to do with how willing has everything to do with how willing has everything to do with how willing people are to share ideas as opposed to people are to share ideas as opposed to people are to share ideas as opposed to feeling like they have to fight for feeling like they have to fight for feeling like they have to fight for their piece of the pie. That's exactly their piece of the pie. That's exactly their piece of the pie. That's exactly right. &gt;&gt; So, this is a perhaps a conversation for &gt;&gt; So, this is a perhaps a conversation for &gt;&gt; So, this is a perhaps a conversation for another time, but um another time, but um another time, but um you've done a marvelous job of not just you've done a marvelous job of not just you've done a marvelous job of not just trying to educate people about trying to educate people about trying to educate people about Castleman's, but your story, and we'll Castleman's, but your story, and we'll Castleman's, but your story, and we'll continue down that path in a moment, of continue down that path in a moment, of continue down that path in a moment, of trying to solve a problem that was life trying to solve a problem that was life trying to solve a problem that was life or death for you, and then taking that or death for you, and then taking that or death for you, and then taking that knowledge, and instead of just saying, knowledge, and instead of just saying, knowledge, and instead of just saying, "Hey, I'm going to help other people "Hey, I'm going to help other people "Hey, I'm going to help other people with Castleman's," which you have, with Castleman's," which you have, with Castleman's," which you have, to really say, "Hey, let's do this to really say, "Hey, let's do this to really say, "Hey, let's do this for all of disease, all of medicine." for all of disease, all of medicine." for all of disease, all of medicine." And it's just so admirable. Uh I have to And it's just so admirable. Uh I have to And it's just so admirable. Uh I have to ask, are there other physicians doing ask, are there other physicians doing ask, are there other physicians doing what you are doing, or are you the lone what you are doing, or are you the lone what you are doing, or are you the lone wolf out there? I think I'm probably wolf out there? I think I'm probably wolf out there? I think I'm probably the lone wolf in the in the lone wolf in the in the lone wolf in the in the uh scope of what we're doing. It's all scope of what we're doing. It's all scope of what we're doing. It's all FDA-approved drugs, all 4,000, and all FDA-approved drugs, all 4,000, and all FDA-approved drugs, all 4,000, and all 18,000 human diseases. So, I'm not aware 18,000 human diseases. So, I'm not aware 18,000 human diseases. So, I'm not aware of anyone else who's taking this sort of anyone else who's taking this sort of anyone else who's taking this sort of all versus all systematic, like, let's all versus all systematic, like, let's all versus all systematic, like, let's find the lowest-hanging fruit. find the lowest-hanging fruit. find the lowest-hanging fruit. But there are amazing colleagues of mine But there are amazing colleagues of mine But there are amazing colleagues of mine who work within hematology who the who work within hematology who the who work within hematology who the doctor named Luke Chen, who calls me up doctor named Luke Chen, who calls me up doctor named Luke Chen, who calls me up when he's got patients on death's when he's got patients on death's when he's got patients on death's doorstep to figure out, "What can we do? doorstep to figure out, "What can we do? doorstep to figure out, "What can we do? What can we try?" We're brainstorming, What can we try?" We're brainstorming, What can we try?" We're brainstorming, "Let's try this or try that." And and "Let's try this or try that." And and "Let's try this or try that." And and oftentimes they work, and this patient's oftentimes they work, and this patient's oftentimes they work, and this patient's alive because we tried a combination of alive because we tried a combination of alive because we tried a combination of five different chemotherapies that five different chemotherapies that five different chemotherapies that weren't made for that cancer. And weren't made for that cancer. And weren't made for that cancer. And so, there are certainly, you know, so, there are certainly, you know, so, there are certainly, you know, really incredible and there's so really incredible and there's so really incredible and there's so many incredible doctors all over all many incredible doctors all over all many incredible doctors all over all over the country. Um and there are some over the country. Um and there are some over the country. Um and there are some who are really, you know, pushing the who are really, you know, pushing the who are really, you know, pushing the boundaries of what's possible. But I'm boundaries of what's possible. But I'm boundaries of what's possible. But I'm not aware of any other effort that's not aware of any other effort that's not aware of any other effort that's being made that's really at the system being made that's really at the system being made that's really at the system level of like, "I don't care in level of like, "I don't care in level of like, "I don't care in particular the name of the disease or particular the name of the disease or particular the name of the disease or the name of the drug. I just believe the name of the drug. I just believe the name of the drug. I just believe that the 4,000 drugs we have today that the 4,000 drugs we have today that the 4,000 drugs we have today should help all the patients who can should help all the patients who can should help all the patients who can benefit from them." benefit from them." benefit from them." Period. Like, no one should suffer if Period. Like, no one should suffer if Period. Like, no one should suffer if there's a drug at your CVS to get help there's a drug at your CVS to get help there's a drug at your CVS to get help you. And so, the problem is that's you. And so, the problem is that's you. And so, the problem is that's not the world we're in. The problem is not the world we're in. The problem is not the world we're in. The problem is that we got to we got to create that we got to we got to create that we got to we got to create that world. Um and so, that's what we're world. Um and so, that's what we're world. Um and so, that's what we're doing. Yeah, and most scientists are doing. Yeah, and most scientists are doing. Yeah, and most scientists are incentivized to find new things. Mhm. incentivized to find new things. Mhm. incentivized to find new things. Mhm. And most physicians are not scientists. And most physicians are not scientists. And most physicians are not scientists. That's right. not saying scientists are That's right. not saying scientists are That's right. not saying scientists are better, but they the two need each better, but they the two need each better, but they the two need each other. That's right. other. That's right. other. That's right. So, anyway, I will now pull back on my So, anyway, I will now pull back on my So, anyway, I will now pull back on my desire to editorialize about how the desire to editorialize about how the desire to editorialize about how the system could be better. system could be better. system could be better. Um I hope is that it some of this will Um I hope is that it some of this will Um I hope is that it some of this will be implemented going forward, but be implemented going forward, but be implemented going forward, but if you would if you would if you would you're sitting here now very much you're sitting here now very much you're sitting here now very much alive. How did the story progress? Sure. So, um How did the story progress? Sure. So, um How did the story progress? Sure. So, um you know, I mentioned I got that you know, I mentioned I got that you know, I mentioned I got that chemotherapy, got out of the hospital, chemotherapy, got out of the hospital, chemotherapy, got out of the hospital, um went back to med school at 10 um as a went back to med school at 10 um as a went back to med school at 10 um as a third-year med student um How much time third-year med student um How much time third-year med student um How much time did you Spent 6 months in the hospital did you Spent 6 months in the hospital did you Spent 6 months in the hospital and then about 6 months in medical leave and then about 6 months in medical leave and then about 6 months in medical leave just sort of building myself back up. Um just sort of building myself back up. Um just sort of building myself back up. Um uh amazingly I had this um girlfriend uh amazingly I had this um girlfriend uh amazingly I had this um girlfriend Caitlyn by my side through it all. Um Caitlyn by my side through it all. Um Caitlyn by my side through it all. Um Caitlyn never left my side. Um was just Caitlyn never left my side. Um was just Caitlyn never left my side. Um was just amazing. And um got back to med school. amazing. And um got back to med school. amazing. And um got back to med school. So, it was now a total of a year cuz 6 So, it was now a total of a year cuz 6 So, it was now a total of a year cuz 6 months in the hospital, 6 months um months in the hospital, 6 months um months in the hospital, 6 months um recovering. And I was so excited to be back and to And I was so excited to be back and to And I was so excited to be back and to really get back on that path that I had really get back on that path that I had really get back on that path that I had before, which is that I'm going to go before, which is that I'm going to go before, which is that I'm going to go into oncology and I'm going to help into oncology and I'm going to help into oncology and I'm going to help patients like my mom. And um I was on an patients like my mom. And um I was on an patients like my mom. And um I was on an experimental drug. Uh it's actually a experimental drug. Uh it's actually a experimental drug. Uh it's actually a drug that's very similar to the drug that's very similar to the drug that's very similar to the drug that um that my friend Kazu made. And um that um that my friend Kazu made. And um that um that my friend Kazu made. And um unfortunately, about a year after I got unfortunately, about a year after I got unfortunately, about a year after I got out of the hospital, I was back in the out of the hospital, I was back in the out of the hospital, I was back in the hospital again with a relapse. And um hospital again with a relapse. And um hospital again with a relapse. And um that relapse is really tough um for a that relapse is really tough um for a that relapse is really tough um for a few reasons. One, I almost died again few reasons. One, I almost died again few reasons. One, I almost died again for the fourth time. Um and I was in the for the fourth time. Um and I was in the for the fourth time. Um and I was in the ICU for a month. Um ICU for a month. Um ICU for a month. Um All of my organs shutting down. But All of my organs shutting down. But All of my organs shutting down. But maybe what was even harder than that maybe what was even harder than that maybe what was even harder than that was that I was on that experimental drug was that I was on that experimental drug was that I was on that experimental drug that we had hoped would keep me in that we had hoped would keep me in that we had hoped would keep me in remission. And it was helping other remission. And it was helping other remission. And it was helping other patients. And um And um And um my doctor explained to me that we were my doctor explained to me that we were my doctor explained to me that we were out of options. He said, "David, we've out of options. He said, "David, we've out of options. He said, "David, we've tried everything. You know, we tried everything. You know, we tried everything. You know, we tried these chemotherapies, we tried this one these chemotherapies, we tried this one these chemotherapies, we tried this one experimental drug. Um there's nothing experimental drug. Um there's nothing experimental drug. Um there's nothing more that we can do." And um there was a more that we can do." And um there was a more that we can do." And um there was a few minute period where my dad and my a few minute period where my dad and my a few minute period where my dad and my sisters and my girlfriend around me sisters and my girlfriend around me sisters and my girlfriend around me and we were just um and we were just um and we were just um just bawling our eyes out. You know, just bawling our eyes out. You know, just bawling our eyes out. You know, we're This is the world's expert, you we're This is the world's expert, you we're This is the world's expert, you know, to use the Santa Claus theory. know, to use the Santa Claus theory. know, to use the Santa Claus theory. Like this is Santa Claus telling you Like this is Santa Claus telling you Like this is Santa Claus telling you like there's nothing more. And I kept like there's nothing more. And I kept like there's nothing more. And I kept probing him like is there any cell type probing him like is there any cell type probing him like is there any cell type or signaling pathway or is there or signaling pathway or is there or signaling pathway or is there something we can target like anything something we can target like anything something we can target like anything said David there's nothing. Is there said David there's nothing. Is there said David there's nothing. Is there anything in early stage develop? David anything in early stage develop? David anything in early stage develop? David there is nothing. there is nothing. there is nothing. And um so we just you know, we just And um so we just you know, we just And um so we just you know, we just balled um balled um balled um and then and then and then I had a really sort of moment of a I had a really sort of moment of a I had a really sort of moment of a moment of clarity where it was basically moment of clarity where it was basically moment of clarity where it was basically I heard what he was saying, but then I heard what he was saying, but then I heard what he was saying, but then I thought to myself thought to myself thought to myself you just gave me seven chemotherapies you just gave me seven chemotherapies you just gave me seven chemotherapies that were made for lymphoma and my that were made for lymphoma and my that were made for lymphoma and my multiple myeloma. multiple myeloma. multiple myeloma. And they've saved my life now three And they've saved my life now three And they've saved my life now three times. They're not it's not long-term. times. They're not it's not long-term. times. They're not it's not long-term. Like I know I keep relapsing, but like Like I know I keep relapsing, but like Like I know I keep relapsing, but like if these seven chemotherapies are if these seven chemotherapies are if these seven chemotherapies are working, how do we know there's not an working, how do we know there's not an working, how do we know there's not an eighth chemotherapy or a ninth drug for eighth chemotherapy or a ninth drug for eighth chemotherapy or a ninth drug for something else? Like you can't tell me something else? Like you can't tell me something else? Like you can't tell me we haven't tried all 4,000 drugs. We've we haven't tried all 4,000 drugs. We've we haven't tried all 4,000 drugs. We've just tried the drugs that maybe we've just tried the drugs that maybe we've just tried the drugs that maybe we've thought to try. And so I just locked in thought to try. And so I just locked in thought to try. And so I just locked in right then and I turned to my family and right then and I turned to my family and right then and I turned to my family and just sort of wiped away my tears and just sort of wiped away my tears and just sort of wiped away my tears and said I'm going to dedicate the rest of said I'm going to dedicate the rest of said I'm going to dedicate the rest of my life however long that's going to be. my life however long that's going to be. my life however long that's going to be. It might be a couple days. Maybe it'll It might be a couple days. Maybe it'll It might be a couple days. Maybe it'll be a couple months, but however long be a couple months, but however long be a couple months, but however long I've got to trying to find out is there I've got to trying to find out is there I've got to trying to find out is there a drug out there that could help me and a drug out there that could help me and a drug out there that could help me and other patients with my disease that's other patients with my disease that's other patients with my disease that's made for another condition. And um made for another condition. And um made for another condition. And um I became just totally locked in on this I became just totally locked in on this I became just totally locked in on this and part of it too for why it had to and part of it too for why it had to and part of it too for why it had to be a repurposed drug is that I didn't be a repurposed drug is that I didn't be a repurposed drug is that I didn't have a billion dollars and 15 years to have a billion dollars and 15 years to have a billion dollars and 15 years to make a new drug from scratch. I mean I make a new drug from scratch. I mean I make a new drug from scratch. I mean I wouldn't even known where to start, wouldn't even known where to start, wouldn't even known where to start, right? But I had examples where my life was But I had examples where my life was But I had examples where my life was saved by drugs that weren't made for me. saved by drugs that weren't made for me. saved by drugs that weren't made for me. And so I just said well And so I just said well And so I just said well we should do everything we can to find we should do everything we can to find we should do everything we can to find something else. And so I started storing something else. And so I started storing something else. And so I started storing blood samples on myself every couple blood samples on myself every couple blood samples on myself every couple weeks um shortly thereafter started weeks um shortly thereafter started weeks um shortly thereafter started doing some work in the lab. I was doing some work in the lab. I was doing some work in the lab. I was literally an MD who had a masters in literally an MD who had a masters in literally an MD who had a masters in public health who knew nothing about the public health who knew nothing about the public health who knew nothing about the lab um but started working lab um but started working lab um but started working &gt;&gt; that uh dangerous. &gt;&gt; that uh dangerous. &gt;&gt; that uh dangerous. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. Very dangerous. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. Very dangerous. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. Very dangerous. And and with a clock ticking, right? So you got with a clock ticking, right? So you got with a clock ticking, right? So you got a lack of skills which is the clock's a lack of skills which is the clock's a lack of skills which is the clock's ticking down. Um ticking down. Um ticking down. Um very dangerous. And so I'm starting very dangerous. And so I'm starting very dangerous. And so I'm starting doing uh doing uh doing uh laboratory experiments. laboratory experiments. laboratory experiments. Did a lot of flow cytometry to Did a lot of flow cytometry to Did a lot of flow cytometry to characterize the immune cells characterize the immune cells characterize the immune cells that were activated. Did something that were activated. Did something that were activated. Did something called serum proteomics where I measured called serum proteomics where I measured called serum proteomics where I measured a thousand proteins in my blood. Who's a thousand proteins in my blood. Who's a thousand proteins in my blood. Who's letting you do all I mean who's lab letting you do all I mean who's lab letting you do all I mean who's lab space are you using? space are you using? space are you using? &gt;&gt; So a colleague No, I wasn't breaking in. &gt;&gt; So a colleague No, I wasn't breaking in. &gt;&gt; So a colleague No, I wasn't breaking in. A colleague was very generous. A colleague was very generous. A colleague was very generous. &gt;&gt; it. &gt;&gt; it. &gt;&gt; it. A very kind colleague gave me some A very kind colleague gave me some A very kind colleague gave me some space in her lab. And so space in her lab. And so space in her lab. And so I was doing this work in the lab and I was doing this work in the lab and I was doing this work in the lab and also trying to look at other drugs that also trying to look at other drugs that also trying to look at other drugs that were being used for were being used for were being used for related conditions to see you know what related conditions to see you know what related conditions to see you know what could work for me. And we were what could work for me. And we were what could work for me. And we were making progress. I started a foundation making progress. I started a foundation making progress. I started a foundation called the Cast Disease Collaborative called the Cast Disease Collaborative called the Cast Disease Collaborative Network. We really were pushing Network. We really were pushing Network. We really were pushing things forward. And I was optimistic things forward. And I was optimistic things forward. And I was optimistic that we would find something. that we would find something. that we would find something. And then I relapsed. Fifth time. Back in And then I relapsed. Fifth time. Back in And then I relapsed. Fifth time. Back in the ICU. Organs shutting down. Doctor the ICU. Organs shutting down. Doctor the ICU. Organs shutting down. Doctor explaining to my family that this is it. explaining to my family that this is it. explaining to my family that this is it. In fact, it was so bad at one point that In fact, it was so bad at one point that In fact, it was so bad at one point that for some reason over these years I think for some reason over these years I think for some reason over these years I think it was maybe a bit of denial. I'd never it was maybe a bit of denial. I'd never it was maybe a bit of denial. I'd never put together a will. But this time, the put together a will. But this time, the put together a will. But this time, the fifth time, my doctor told family like fifth time, my doctor told family like fifth time, my doctor told family like you need this you need to put down. And you need this you need to put down. And you need this you need to put down. And so I like had a printer piece of printer I like had a printer piece of printer I like had a printer piece of printer paper that the nurse gave me and I sort paper that the nurse gave me and I sort paper that the nurse gave me and I sort of wrote down who I wanted my things to of wrote down who I wanted my things to of wrote down who I wanted my things to go to. And I didn't have much but go to. And I didn't have much but go to. And I didn't have much but um cried, hugged my girlfriend. We were my cried, hugged my girlfriend. We were my cried, hugged my girlfriend. We were my she was my fiance at that time, Kaylin. she was my fiance at that time, Kaylin. she was my fiance at that time, Kaylin. Like just Like just Like just so disappointed that like I hadn't so disappointed that like I hadn't so disappointed that like I hadn't figured something out cuz what I didn't figured something out cuz what I didn't figured something out cuz what I didn't mention is that from that lab work I mention is that from that lab work I mention is that from that lab work I thought two drugs might be able to work thought two drugs might be able to work thought two drugs might be able to work and we tried both of them. We tried and we tried both of them. We tried and we tried both of them. We tried cyclosporine and we tried IVIG and it cyclosporine and we tried IVIG and it cyclosporine and we tried IVIG and it didn't work. didn't work. didn't work. And I got worse and I ended up you know And I got worse and I ended up you know And I got worse and I ended up you know back in the hospital. And so the two back in the hospital. And so the two back in the hospital. And so the two drugs we tried I thought I that was it drugs we tried I thought I that was it drugs we tried I thought I that was it like I got my shot and I and I missed. like I got my shot and I and I missed. like I got my shot and I and I missed. Um and I felt so disappointed. Um I felt so disappointed. Um I felt so disappointed. Um and I remember saying goodbye to and I remember saying goodbye to and I remember saying goodbye to everyone and starting to sort of everyone and starting to sort of everyone and starting to sort of have life fade away. have life fade away. have life fade away. And I thought that was it. And they gave And I thought that was it. And they gave And I thought that was it. And they gave me all the chemo. They gave me the me all the chemo. They gave me the me all the chemo. They gave me the highest dose of topoisomerase horrible highest dose of topoisomerase horrible highest dose of topoisomerase horrible chemo that you can imagine. chemo that you can imagine. chemo that you can imagine. And Um, two days later I started to wake And Um, two days later I started to wake And Um, two days later I started to wake up. And uh Andrew, there's this sense I up. And uh Andrew, there's this sense I up. And uh Andrew, there's this sense I call it overtime and it's basically I call it overtime and it's basically I call it overtime and it's basically like it's like extra time in a game like it's like extra time in a game like it's like extra time in a game where like where like where like it every second counts and I can't tell it every second counts and I can't tell it every second counts and I can't tell you the joy that comes from like getting you the joy that comes from like getting you the joy that comes from like getting Like when you start to wake up after Like when you start to wake up after Like when you start to wake up after you've said goodbye to the people you you've said goodbye to the people you you've said goodbye to the people you love and you're looking at them and like love and you're looking at them and like love and you're looking at them and like my sister Gina is here and Caitlyn's my sister Gina is here and Caitlyn's my sister Gina is here and Caitlyn's here and my dad's there and I'm like here and my dad's there and I'm like here and my dad's there and I'm like oh my gosh. Like when you start getting oh my gosh. Like when you start getting oh my gosh. Like when you start getting life back that you thought you lost and life back that you thought you lost and life back that you thought you lost and this is now the fifth time this is now the fifth time this is now the fifth time I can't put into words what it was I can't put into words what it was I can't put into words what it was like, but I remember like as soon as I like, but I remember like as soon as I like, but I remember like as soon as I started waking up, I saw them and I was started waking up, I saw them and I was started waking up, I saw them and I was like Gina I need you to get the lymph node that's I need you to get the lymph node that's I need you to get the lymph node that's in North Carolina to Philadelphia. in North Carolina to Philadelphia. in North Carolina to Philadelphia. Caitlyn, you need to get my serum Caitlyn, you need to get my serum Caitlyn, you need to get my serum samples that are downstairs in Little samples that are downstairs in Little samples that are downstairs in Little Rock, Arkansas to Philly. Like I got Rock, Arkansas to Philly. Like I got Rock, Arkansas to Philly. Like I got another shot at this. Like and I another shot at this. Like and I another shot at this. Like and I remember like starting to wake up and remember like starting to wake up and remember like starting to wake up and being like, oh my gosh, I'm going to get being like, oh my gosh, I'm going to get being like, oh my gosh, I'm going to get another shot. And so um another shot. And so um another shot. And so um about 3 weeks later I was out of the about 3 weeks later I was out of the about 3 weeks later I was out of the hospital. I was back in Philadelphia and hospital. I was back in Philadelphia and hospital. I was back in Philadelphia and um that started about a month-long um that started about a month-long um that started about a month-long period where I thought all those period where I thought all those period where I thought all those samples, I did more flow cytometry, I samples, I did more flow cytometry, I samples, I did more flow cytometry, I did more serum proteomics, I did more serum proteomics, I did more serum proteomics, I did immunohistochemistry on my lymph node immunohistochemistry on my lymph node immunohistochemistry on my lymph node and when you put all the data together, and when you put all the data together, and when you put all the data together, um what I discovered was that a um what I discovered was that a um what I discovered was that a communication line in your immune communication line in your immune communication line in your immune system or in all of our immune systems system or in all of our immune systems system or in all of our immune systems called mTOR um was turned into overdrive called mTOR um was turned into overdrive called mTOR um was turned into overdrive and I had a lymph node that I had and I had a lymph node that I had and I had a lymph node that I had resected during my last relapse where I resected during my last relapse where I resected during my last relapse where I actually looked at it I stained it for actually looked at it I stained it for actually looked at it I stained it for mTOR activation and it came back mTOR activation and it came back mTOR activation and it came back blazingly positive. And um blazingly positive. And um blazingly positive. And um so I took the data to my doctor and um so I took the data to my doctor and um so I took the data to my doctor and um you know, said what do you think about you know, said what do you think about you know, said what do you think about trying an mTOR inhibitor on me. trying an mTOR inhibitor on me. trying an mTOR inhibitor on me. Sirolimus had never been used before. Sirolimus had never been used before. Sirolimus had never been used before. Rapamycin is the other name for this Rapamycin is the other name for this Rapamycin is the other name for this drug. It had never been used before for drug. It had never been used before for drug. It had never been used before for Castleman's, but it's approved for organ Castleman's, but it's approved for organ Castleman's, but it's approved for organ transplant rejection. transplant rejection. transplant rejection. And um And um And um I had sort of had nothing else to try I had sort of had nothing else to try I had sort of had nothing else to try and so my doctor prescribed it to me and so my doctor prescribed it to me and so my doctor prescribed it to me and um you know, um you know, um you know, rapa at the dose of a transplant dose. rapa at the dose of a transplant dose. rapa at the dose of a transplant dose. So I take rapamycin at the same dose So I take rapamycin at the same dose So I take rapamycin at the same dose that a kidney transplant patient that a kidney transplant patient that a kidney transplant patient would take. So, a lot higher than the would take. So, a lot higher than the would take. So, a lot higher than the typical longevity dosing that people do. typical longevity dosing that people do. typical longevity dosing that people do. My dose of rapa for longevity is zero. My dose of rapa for longevity is zero. My dose of rapa for longevity is zero. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not a fan. I We can talk about &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not a fan. I We can talk about &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not a fan. I We can talk about that a little later. that a little later. that a little later. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we definitely &gt;&gt; Yeah, we definitely &gt;&gt; Yeah, we definitely &gt;&gt; of people that were taking rapa for &gt;&gt; of people that were taking rapa for &gt;&gt; of people that were taking rapa for longevity purposes. I don't want to for longevity purposes. I don't want to for longevity purposes. I don't want to cuz I'll get it wrong. Like I don't know cuz I'll get it wrong. Like I don't know cuz I'll get it wrong. Like I don't know what Peter Attia is doing right now. what Peter Attia is doing right now. what Peter Attia is doing right now. He's a friend. We could call him, but He's a friend. We could call him, but He's a friend. We could call him, but my understanding is that a number of my understanding is that a number of my understanding is that a number of people who were very bullish on rapa for people who were very bullish on rapa for people who were very bullish on rapa for longevity are no longer bullish on rapa for are no longer bullish on rapa for are no longer bullish on rapa for longevity. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I've definitely seen that &gt;&gt; Yeah, I've definitely seen that &gt;&gt; Yeah, I've definitely seen that shift, and I'm not sure if it's based on shift, and I'm not sure if it's based on shift, and I'm not sure if it's based on human data cuz I don't think anyone's human data cuz I don't think anyone's human data cuz I don't think anyone's ever done the data the study in humans, ever done the data the study in humans, ever done the data the study in humans, but the reason that people were but the reason that people were but the reason that people were bullish on it is that every organism bullish on it is that every organism bullish on it is that every organism that you give rapamycin to, the earlier that you give rapamycin to, the earlier that you give rapamycin to, the earlier you give it to them, the longer they you give it to them, the longer they you give it to them, the longer they live. Now, these are organisms that are live. Now, these are organisms that are live. Now, these are organisms that are in caged settings that are not getting in caged settings that are not getting in caged settings that are not getting exposed to viruses and pathogens. So, exposed to viruses and pathogens. So, exposed to viruses and pathogens. So, that's probably part of it. I mean, I that's probably part of it. I mean, I that's probably part of it. I mean, I think that whatever maybe longevity think that whatever maybe longevity think that whatever maybe longevity benefit you get from the metabolic benefit you get from the metabolic benefit you get from the metabolic aspect of rapamycin, I think that's aspect of rapamycin, I think that's aspect of rapamycin, I think that's counteracted by the fact that we don't counteracted by the fact that we don't counteracted by the fact that we don't live in cages, and we actually get live in cages, and we actually get live in cages, and we actually get exposed to pathogens. And so, there's exposed to pathogens. And so, there's exposed to pathogens. And so, there's probably a negative effect in terms of probably a negative effect in terms of probably a negative effect in terms of survival um because rapamycin is a very survival um because rapamycin is a very survival um because rapamycin is a very potent immunosuppressant. The doses that potent immunosuppressant. The doses that potent immunosuppressant. The doses that I take I take such a high dose that if I take I take such a high dose that if I take I take such a high dose that if I were to get your kidney transplanted in were to get your kidney transplanted in were to get your kidney transplanted in me, my immune system wouldn't notice me, my immune system wouldn't notice me, my immune system wouldn't notice your kidney in my body. I mean, that's your kidney in my body. I mean, that's your kidney in my body. I mean, that's the level of dose I take. And that's the level of dose I take. And that's the level of dose I take. And so, um so, um so, um So, uh So, uh So, uh sirolimus is approved for organ sirolimus is approved for organ sirolimus is approved for organ transplant rejection. As you mentioned, transplant rejection. As you mentioned, transplant rejection. As you mentioned, it's used sometimes um in the setting of it's used sometimes um in the setting of it's used sometimes um in the setting of longevity. Um longevity. Um longevity. Um And it had never been used before for And it had never been used before for And it had never been used before for calcimims. In the three and a half years calcimims. In the three and a half years calcimims. In the three and a half years before I started taking it, I almost before I started taking it, I almost before I started taking it, I almost died five times from my disease. I said died five times from my disease. I said died five times from my disease. I said goodbye to my family on five different goodbye to my family on five different goodbye to my family on five different occasions, and my doctors were sure I occasions, and my doctors were sure I occasions, and my doctors were sure I wasn't going to survive. wasn't going to survive. wasn't going to survive. Since starting rapamycin, it's now been Since starting rapamycin, it's now been Since starting rapamycin, it's now been 11 and 3 1/4 years that I've been in 11 and 3 1/4 years that I've been in 11 and 3 1/4 years that I've been in remission on this drug, and it's just remission on this drug, and it's just remission on this drug, and it's just sort of like it feels like such a sort of like it feels like such a sort of like it feels like such a dream. Awesome. I mean, just no other word for it. I mean, just no other word for it. I mean, just no other word for it. Uh Your description of Your description of Your description of over time. Yep. It over time. Yep. It over time. Yep. It uh I think a very apt one. uh I think a very apt one. uh I think a very apt one. Um and I find it uh equally Um and I find it uh equally Um and I find it uh equally apt that when you're emerging from near apt that when you're emerging from near apt that when you're emerging from near death you're calling plays like a you're calling plays like a you're calling plays like a quarterback. You're telling your sister quarterback. You're telling your sister quarterback. You're telling your sister what she's going to do with the lymph what she's going to do with the lymph what she's going to do with the lymph nodes. She's going to run the lymph nodes. She's going to run the lymph nodes. She's going to run the lymph nodes downfield, right? You're calling nodes downfield, right? You're calling nodes downfield, right? You're calling plays. And like to me I like you know, plays. And like to me I like you know, plays. And like to me I like you know, you're the quarterback playing you're the quarterback playing you're the quarterback playing quarterback again. And I can't help but quarterback again. And I can't help but quarterback again. And I can't help but ask, you know, the past that you had as ask, you know, the past that you had as ask, you know, the past that you had as an athlete uh an athlete uh an athlete uh do you think it served you? I mean, the do you think it served you? I mean, the do you think it served you? I mean, the level of drive and determination to the level of drive and determination to the level of drive and determination to say like, "Oh, these eight drugs helped say like, "Oh, these eight drugs helped say like, "Oh, these eight drugs helped me for a while. They're no longer me for a while. They're no longer me for a while. They're no longer helping. There's got to be a ninth. Try helping. There's got to be a ninth. Try helping. There's got to be a ninth. Try the ninth. Doesn't work. Okay, let's try the ninth. Doesn't work. Okay, let's try the ninth. Doesn't work. Okay, let's try something else." Almost dead. Come out something else." Almost dead. Come out something else." Almost dead. Come out of near death. All right, you run the of near death. All right, you run the of near death. All right, you run the lymph nodes this way. I mean, it's lymph nodes this way. I mean, it's lymph nodes this way. I mean, it's almost impossible to not wonder whether almost impossible to not wonder whether almost impossible to not wonder whether or not you learned some of that or not you learned some of that or not you learned some of that resilience playing sport. A lot from playing sport. A lot from playing sport. A lot from playing sports. I mean, I think that uh your sports. I mean, I think that uh your sports. I mean, I think that uh your listeners may not know Georgetown even listeners may not know Georgetown even listeners may not know Georgetown even has a football team, but we do have a has a football team, but we do have a has a football team, but we do have a football team. Um Is it any good? Uh I'm football team. Um Is it any good? Uh I'm football team. Um Is it any good? Uh I'm just kidding. It depends on who you ask. just kidding. It depends on who you ask. just kidding. It depends on who you ask. &gt;&gt; I'm sure it's very good. We're good &gt;&gt; I'm sure it's very good. We're good &gt;&gt; I'm sure it's very good. We're good enough to be in some league, enough to be in some league, enough to be in some league, right? Yeah, this division we play right? Yeah, this division we play right? Yeah, this division we play Ivy League schools. It's like Patriot Ivy League schools. It's like Patriot Ivy League schools. It's like Patriot League Ivy League schools. Um but the League Ivy League schools. Um but the League Ivy League schools. Um but the reason I mention that is that um reason I mention that is that um reason I mention that is that um we lost a lot of football games. Um so we lost a lot of football games. Um so we lost a lot of football games. Um so uh you know, certainly uh you know, certainly uh you know, certainly there there's a bunch of things I there there's a bunch of things I there there's a bunch of things I learned from football. I mean, first off learned from football. I mean, first off learned from football. I mean, first off I decided when I was 8 years old that I decided when I was 8 years old that I decided when I was 8 years old that I wanted to be a Division 1 college wanted to be a Division 1 college wanted to be a Division 1 college quarterback. I decided as an 8-year-old. quarterback. I decided as an 8-year-old. quarterback. I decided as an 8-year-old. And Andrew, I literally had posters of And Andrew, I literally had posters of And Andrew, I literally had posters of words all over my walls with how far I words all over my walls with how far I words all over my walls with how far I could throw a football, how accurate I could throw a football, how accurate I could throw a football, how accurate I was, how fast my 40-yard dash time was, how fast my 40-yard dash time was, how fast my 40-yard dash time was, how fast my mile dash for the next 10 how fast my mile dash for the next 10 how fast my mile dash for the next 10 years. And this literally that's all I years. And this literally that's all I years. And this literally that's all I could think about. I was just locked in. could think about. I was just locked in. could think about. I was just locked in. And that sort of like 10 years of like And that sort of like 10 years of like And that sort of like 10 years of like working towards a mission is sort of the working towards a mission is sort of the working towards a mission is sort of the same sort of approach you need to take same sort of approach you need to take same sort of approach you need to take to solve a massive problem in to solve a massive problem in to solve a massive problem in healthcare, you know, to discover a healthcare, you know, to discover a healthcare, you know, to discover a drug. It's that same sort of you drug. It's that same sort of you drug. It's that same sort of you know, just constant drive. So I think know, just constant drive. So I think know, just constant drive. So I think one part was that it was the first one part was that it was the first one part was that it was the first of what's now been a few of these like of what's now been a few of these like of what's now been a few of these like sprints that I've gone on. So, I think sprints that I've gone on. So, I think sprints that I've gone on. So, I think that was that was part of it. Another is that was that was part of it. Another is that was that was part of it. Another is um mentioned sort of loss and resilience. mentioned sort of loss and resilience. mentioned sort of loss and resilience. You know, we lost a lot of football You know, we lost a lot of football You know, we lost a lot of football games. You get back up and you just sort games. You get back up and you just sort games. You get back up and you just sort of keep fighting. Um but also um of keep fighting. Um but also um of keep fighting. Um but also um physical pain and um physical pain and um physical pain and um and challenges. You know, broken both my and challenges. You know, broken both my and challenges. You know, broken both my collarbones, broken both my hands collarbones, broken both my hands collarbones, broken both my hands um at different times. I mean, I um at different times. I mean, I um at different times. I mean, I remember that there were times when for remember that there were times when for remember that there were times when for punishment for the team, we did punishment for the team, we did punishment for the team, we did something called rolling. We're like something called rolling. We're like something called rolling. We're like literally like you just start rolling on literally like you just start rolling on literally like you just start rolling on your side on a football field until your side on a football field until your side on a football field until everyone like gets sick and then like everyone like gets sick and then like everyone like gets sick and then like and then you stop rolling. And like but and then you stop rolling. And like but and then you stop rolling. And like but that's like you're rolling for like many that's like you're rolling for like many that's like you're rolling for like many like for a long time until everyone gets like for a long time until everyone gets like for a long time until everyone gets sick. Um that's the kind of like sick. Um that's the kind of like sick. Um that's the kind of like physical like I don't know I wouldn't physical like I don't know I wouldn't physical like I don't know I wouldn't say use the word abuse, but it's a sort say use the word abuse, but it's a sort say use the word abuse, but it's a sort of physical like demands that get put on of physical like demands that get put on of physical like demands that get put on your body your body your body that enable you to then gain 100 lb of that enable you to then gain 100 lb of that enable you to then gain 100 lb of fluid in the hospital and be in the fluid in the hospital and be in the fluid in the hospital and be in the worst pain you could ever imagine. I worst pain you could ever imagine. I worst pain you could ever imagine. I mean, it was way worse pain than mean, it was way worse pain than mean, it was way worse pain than breaking my collarbones. But like I'd breaking my collarbones. But like I'd breaking my collarbones. But like I'd felt bad pain before. And so like I can felt bad pain before. And so like I can felt bad pain before. And so like I can feel some bad pain now. And I think that feel some bad pain now. And I think that feel some bad pain now. And I think that a lot of that came from football. I also a lot of that came from football. I also a lot of that came from football. I also think that think that think that when I was in the ICU for that when I was in the ICU for that when I was in the ICU for that first 6-month period, I learned a lot first 6-month period, I learned a lot first 6-month period, I learned a lot about myself and I learned a lot about myself and I learned a lot about myself and I learned a lot about how do you overcome challenging how do you overcome challenging how do you overcome challenging situations? And um situations? And um situations? And um I think there were three things that I think there were three things that I think there were three things that really helped me. So, the first was that really helped me. So, the first was that really helped me. So, the first was that the whole time I was in the ICU for that the whole time I was in the ICU for that the whole time I was in the ICU for that 6-month period, I had this clear vision 6-month period, I had this clear vision 6-month period, I had this clear vision for the future which was a family with for the future which was a family with for the future which was a family with Caitlin who I was dating at the time and Caitlin who I was dating at the time and Caitlin who I was dating at the time and a career discovering drugs for patients a career discovering drugs for patients a career discovering drugs for patients in memory of my mom. So, that like clear in memory of my mom. So, that like clear in memory of my mom. So, that like clear vision for the future helped to deal vision for the future helped to deal vision for the future helped to deal with what was just horrible excruciating with what was just horrible excruciating with what was just horrible excruciating pain cuz of the fluid that you gain pain cuz of the fluid that you gain pain cuz of the fluid that you gain around your organs, it felt like I was around your organs, it felt like I was around your organs, it felt like I was getting basically simultaneously stabbed getting basically simultaneously stabbed getting basically simultaneously stabbed for for, you know, months at a time. So, for for, you know, months at a time. So, for for, you know, months at a time. So, one is vision for the future. one is vision for the future. one is vision for the future. Two was that I got so much strength from Two was that I got so much strength from Two was that I got so much strength from my family around me. Like my dad, my family around me. Like my dad, my family around me. Like my dad, my sisters, Caitlin, like they were holding sisters, Caitlin, like they were holding sisters, Caitlin, like they were holding my hands and I could feel their strength my hands and I could feel their strength my hands and I could feel their strength in my hands and like I could they were in my hands and like I could they were in my hands and like I could they were like literally helping me to keep going. like literally helping me to keep going. like literally helping me to keep going. And I remember there was a moment um And I remember there was a moment um And I remember there was a moment um during the when I very first got in during the when I very first got in during the when I very first got in sick, so the first time I almost died sick, so the first time I almost died sick, so the first time I almost died from my disease and doctors came in, from my disease and doctors came in, from my disease and doctors came in, said I wasn't going to make it. We had said I wasn't going to make it. We had said I wasn't going to make it. We had no diagnosis at this time. Said goodbye no diagnosis at this time. Said goodbye no diagnosis at this time. Said goodbye to my family. to my family. to my family. You know, just heartbroken. And I You know, just heartbroken. And I You know, just heartbroken. And I remember with every breath I took just remember with every breath I took just remember with every breath I took just the horrible pain. And so, when just the horrible pain. And so, when just the horrible pain. And so, when you have that much pain with every when you have that much pain with every when you have that much pain with every breath, you start slowing your breathing breath, you start slowing your breathing breath, you start slowing your breathing and um I was starting to let go. I was I and um I was starting to let go. I was I and um I was starting to let go. I was I was just I was, you know, letting go was just I was, you know, letting go was just I was, you know, letting go and I thought that I was maybe going to and I thought that I was maybe going to and I thought that I was maybe going to miss out on a couple days of life, but miss out on a couple days of life, but miss out on a couple days of life, but you know, I'm in a lot of pain. I'm you know, I'm in a lot of pain. I'm you know, I'm in a lot of pain. I'm just going to slow down and let go. I'm just going to slow down and let go. I'm just going to slow down and let go. And I remember hearing my sister Gina And I remember hearing my sister Gina And I remember hearing my sister Gina was on my left side. She was holding was on my left side. She was holding was on my left side. She was holding my hand. I remember her looking at me my hand. I remember her looking at me my hand. I remember her looking at me and everyone else was crying and sort of and everyone else was crying and sort of and everyone else was crying and sort of like I think it was maybe um had an idea for what was going to had an idea for what was going to had an idea for what was going to happen, but Gina was holding my hand and happen, but Gina was holding my hand and happen, but Gina was holding my hand and she said "Just breathe, Dave. Just she said "Just breathe, Dave. Just she said "Just breathe, Dave. Just breathe." And I remember when I heard breathe." And I remember when I heard breathe." And I remember when I heard that, I was like, "All right, I'm going that, I was like, "All right, I'm going that, I was like, "All right, I'm going to do one more breath and it's going to do one more breath and it's going to do one more breath and it's going to be really painful, but I got this." And be really painful, but I got this." And be really painful, but I got this." And I did one more and I did another one. I did one more and I did another one. I did one more and I did another one. And fortunately, the medicines that I'd And fortunately, the medicines that I'd And fortunately, the medicines that I'd received helped me to make it a received helped me to make it a received helped me to make it a little bit longer. And so, the key little bit longer. And so, the key little bit longer. And so, the key takeaway for me was that like you can do takeaway for me was that like you can do takeaway for me was that like you can do anything for like 1 minute or 1 hour or anything for like 1 minute or 1 hour or anything for like 1 minute or 1 hour or 1 day. 1 day. 1 day. But you can't do like I If you told me But you can't do like I If you told me But you can't do like I If you told me at the beginning, "David, you're going at the beginning, "David, you're going at the beginning, "David, you're going to be in the worst pain of your life for to be in the worst pain of your life for to be in the worst pain of your life for 6 months. It's going to be horrible. 6 months. It's going to be horrible. 6 months. It's going to be horrible. You're going to suffer. Your organs will You're going to suffer. Your organs will You're going to suffer. Your organs will be failing." No way I would have the be failing." No way I would have the be failing." No way I would have the strength to survive that. But I could strength to survive that. But I could strength to survive that. But I could survive for 1 minute and 1 hour and 1 survive for 1 minute and 1 hour and 1 survive for 1 minute and 1 hour and 1 day. And I think that I think a lot of day. And I think that I think a lot of day. And I think that I think a lot of that you learn I think I learned some of that you learn I think I learned some of that you learn I think I learned some of that from playing football and I think that from playing football and I think that from playing football and I think that um just this sort of like putting that um just this sort of like putting that um just this sort of like putting your body um uh your body um uh your body um uh through a lot of challenges I think through a lot of challenges I think through a lot of challenges I think helped me a lot. helped me a lot. helped me a lot. Older sister or younger sister? Older sister or younger sister? Older sister or younger sister? &gt;&gt; Two older sisters, yeah. Allison and &gt;&gt; Two older sisters, yeah. Allison and &gt;&gt; Two older sisters, yeah. Allison and Gina are 7 and 5 years older than me. Gina are 7 and 5 years older than me. Gina are 7 and 5 years older than me. &gt;&gt; Awesome, man. As the younger brother of &gt;&gt; Awesome, man. As the younger brother of &gt;&gt; Awesome, man. As the younger brother of a older sister a older sister a older sister &gt;&gt; They're the best. &gt;&gt; They're the best. &gt;&gt; They're the best. &gt;&gt; They're the best. &gt;&gt; They're the best. &gt;&gt; They're the best. &gt;&gt; They're the &gt;&gt; They're the &gt;&gt; They're the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Big big shout out for the for &gt;&gt; Yeah. Big big shout out for the for &gt;&gt; Yeah. Big big shout out for the for the sisters, older and younger. Yes. The the sisters, older and younger. Yes. The the sisters, older and younger. Yes. The best. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year I became a Function member Last year I became a Function member Last year I became a Function member after searching for the most after searching for the most after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. limiting my tuna consumption. limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna. While I'd been eating a lot of tuna. While I'd been eating a lot of tuna. While also making an effort to eat more leafy also making an effort to eat more leafy also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC and greens and supplementing with NAC and greens and supplementing with NAC and N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. I should say, by taking detoxification. I should say, by taking detoxification. I should say, by taking a second Function test, a second Function test, a second Function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive that approach worked. Comprehensive that approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. blood testing is vitally important. blood testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your There's so many things related to your There's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only mental and physical health that can only mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem be detected in a blood test. The problem be detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very is blood testing has always been very is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost, it simplicity and at the level of cost, it simplicity and at the level of cost, it is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. You have an amazing team. So, in another You have an amazing team. So, in another You have an amazing team. So, in another parallel to football and um parallel to football and um parallel to football and um and another signal that for people um and another signal that for people um and another signal that for people um combating disease or just general health combating disease or just general health combating disease or just general health issues, that social support piece issues, that social support piece issues, that social support piece is so key. I mean we I mean there's so is so key. I mean we I mean there's so is so key. I mean we I mean there's so much data on this and I mean we've done much data on this and I mean we've done much data on this and I mean we've done podcasts about this and we could podcasts about this and we could podcasts about this and we could probably do a hundred more and the probably do a hundred more and the probably do a hundred more and the message is always the same, which is message is always the same, which is message is always the same, which is do the best that you can, surround do the best that you can, surround do the best that you can, surround yourself with at least one person you yourself with at least one person you yourself with at least one person you can rely on and be the best way to can rely on and be the best way to can rely on and be the best way to do that is to be that person to people. do that is to be that person to people. do that is to be that person to people. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, um should you stay healthy, &gt;&gt; You know, um should you stay healthy, &gt;&gt; You know, um should you stay healthy, you have that person. Should you not be you have that person. Should you not be you have that person. Should you not be healthy, you have that person. So, healthy, you have that person. So, healthy, you have that person. So, um yeah, and over and over. yeah, and over and over. yeah, and over and over. It's really um It's really um It's really um an incredible story because you an incredible story because you an incredible story because you emerge from it with 11 years of emerge from it with 11 years of emerge from it with 11 years of overtime. Do you still think about it as overtime. Do you still think about it as overtime. Do you still think about it as overtime? &gt;&gt; Fifth overtime, yep. Do you &gt;&gt; Fifth overtime, yep. Do you &gt;&gt; Fifth overtime, yep. Do you &gt;&gt; Although, I will admit, I think to &gt;&gt; Although, I will admit, I think to &gt;&gt; Although, I will admit, I think to your question, your question, your question, I don't have the same sort of cuz I don't have the same sort of cuz I don't have the same sort of cuz there's this In overtime, there's a there's this In overtime, there's a there's this In overtime, there's a there's both fear and clarity and there's both fear and clarity and there's both fear and clarity and the fear, I think, drives some the fear, I think, drives some the fear, I think, drives some clarity and I think you'd be able to clarity and I think you'd be able to clarity and I think you'd be able to talk to the science of a lot more than I talk to the science of a lot more than I talk to the science of a lot more than I would. Um I will say as 11 years and would. Um I will say as 11 years and would. Um I will say as 11 years and three quarters of a year go by, three quarters of a year go by, three quarters of a year go by, um there isn't maybe the same heightened um there isn't maybe the same heightened um there isn't maybe the same heightened sense of like I'm in overtime, but you sense of like I'm in overtime, but you sense of like I'm in overtime, but you know, every once in a while I have a know, every once in a while I have a know, every once in a while I have a port where I get my infusion every few port where I get my infusion every few port where I get my infusion every few um months on my chest. I've got scars on um months on my chest. I've got scars on um months on my chest. I've got scars on my neck from where lymph nodes got taken my neck from where lymph nodes got taken my neck from where lymph nodes got taken out. And every once in a while, I just out. And every once in a while, I just out. And every once in a while, I just sort of put my hand here and here and it sort of put my hand here and here and it sort of put my hand here and here and it reminds me, okay, like I'm in overtime. reminds me, okay, like I'm in overtime. reminds me, okay, like I'm in overtime. Like I got to be really thankful um Like I got to be really thankful um Like I got to be really thankful um because, you know, we don't know how because, you know, we don't know how because, you know, we don't know how much time we have. The brain is wild in much time we have. The brain is wild in much time we have. The brain is wild in this way. We had a guest on this way. We had a guest on this way. We had a guest on this podcast, uh Michael Easter. He wrote the podcast, uh Michael Easter. He wrote the podcast, uh Michael Easter. He wrote the book The Comfort Crisis. It's an book The Comfort Crisis. It's an book The Comfort Crisis. It's an incredible book really about how to incredible book really about how to incredible book really about how to navigate life generally and doing navigate life generally and doing navigate life generally and doing really hard things really hard things really hard things um voluntarily. And uh and he go do really voluntarily. And uh and he go do really voluntarily. And uh and he go do really hard expeditions and then come back from hard expeditions and then come back from hard expeditions and then come back from them with a renewed sense of gratitude them with a renewed sense of gratitude them with a renewed sense of gratitude for like the smallest things. The for like the smallest things. The for like the smallest things. The smallest things. And I asked him, you smallest things. And I asked him, you smallest things. And I asked him, you know, how long does that gratitude know, how long does that gratitude know, how long does that gratitude last? And I think he said about 2 last? And I think he said about 2 last? And I think he said about 2 months. You know, and then it resets. months. You know, and then it resets. months. You know, and then it resets. And of course, those weren't And of course, those weren't And of course, those weren't life or death circumstances of the sort life or death circumstances of the sort life or death circumstances of the sort that you're describing. So, he just goes that you're describing. So, he just goes that you're describing. So, he just goes on more of these things, right? on more of these things, right? on more of these things, right? And it's a wonderful book and an import And it's a wonderful book and an import And it's a wonderful book and an import dare I say an important book for people dare I say an important book for people dare I say an important book for people healthy and certainly healthy or sick. I healthy and certainly healthy or sick. I healthy and certainly healthy or sick. I think this notion that you're on think this notion that you're on think this notion that you're on borrowed time or overtime. It's hard to borrowed time or overtime. It's hard to borrowed time or overtime. It's hard to hold on to because you also have to just hold on to because you also have to just hold on to because you also have to just live your life. Clearly, you're making live your life. Clearly, you're making live your life. Clearly, you're making the most of that and as I mentioned the most of that and as I mentioned the most of that and as I mentioned earlier, you know, in service to others. you know, in service to others. you know, in service to others. So, your background as a as an athlete So, your background as a as an athlete So, your background as a as an athlete helped you helped you helped you navigate this health challenge. Then the navigate this health challenge. Then the navigate this health challenge. Then the health challenge dovetails with your health challenge dovetails with your health challenge dovetails with your work as a physician. And you're really a work as a physician. And you're really a work as a physician. And you're really a physician scientist cuz you hold physician scientist cuz you hold physician scientist cuz you hold both titles and formally and both titles and formally and both titles and formally and as a practitioner. So, and as a practitioner. So, and as a practitioner. So, nowadays, do you get contacted by people nowadays, do you get contacted by people nowadays, do you get contacted by people all the time whose kid or themselves are all the time whose kid or themselves are all the time whose kid or themselves are dealing with a with a challenging dealing with a with a challenging dealing with a with a challenging disease with the question, is there a disease with the question, is there a disease with the question, is there a drug that's approved that can help me? drug that's approved that can help me? drug that's approved that can help me? Or combination of drugs? We do. We get Or combination of drugs? We do. We get Or combination of drugs? We do. We get contacted a lot and contacted a lot and contacted a lot and to share sort of what the these last 11 to share sort of what the these last 11 to share sort of what the these last 11 and a half years have looked like. So, and a half years have looked like. So, and a half years have looked like. So, I after medical school, I actually I after medical school, I actually I after medical school, I actually enrolled in business school in part enrolled in business school in part enrolled in business school in part because I because I because I realized that the greatest barriers to realized that the greatest barriers to realized that the greatest barriers to progress did not appear to be scientific progress did not appear to be scientific progress did not appear to be scientific or medical. They had to do with things or medical. They had to do with things or medical. They had to do with things like getting people to collaborate with like getting people to collaborate with like getting people to collaborate with one another, efficient use of resources, one another, efficient use of resources, one another, efficient use of resources, coming up with a strategy to solve a coming up with a strategy to solve a coming up with a strategy to solve a disease. So, it was actually in business disease. So, it was actually in business disease. So, it was actually in business school that I discovered sirolimus has school that I discovered sirolimus has school that I discovered sirolimus has saved my life. And after business saved my life. And after business saved my life. And after business school, I joined the faculty at Penn and school, I joined the faculty at Penn and school, I joined the faculty at Penn and set up a lab and um set up a lab and um set up a lab and um we got started out first focused on we got started out first focused on we got started out first focused on Castleman's and you know, first it was Castleman's and you know, first it was Castleman's and you know, first it was about understanding how does mTOR play a about understanding how does mTOR play a about understanding how does mTOR play a role in Castleman disease. Started role in Castleman disease. Started role in Castleman disease. Started treating other patients with the drug treating other patients with the drug treating other patients with the drug that I'm on, sirolimus. And so, I'll that I'm on, sirolimus. And so, I'll that I'm on, sirolimus. And so, I'll never forget we treated a patient in never forget we treated a patient in never forget we treated a patient in Brazil and then treated patient in New Brazil and then treated patient in New Brazil and then treated patient in New Zealand. And then but I just heard about Zealand. And then but I just heard about Zealand. And then but I just heard about them. I wasn't physically with them. But them. I wasn't physically with them. But them. I wasn't physically with them. But then the fourth patient we treated was a then the fourth patient we treated was a then the fourth patient we treated was a patient named Joey who was a child um patient named Joey who was a child um patient named Joey who was a child um who was a 13-year-old boy at um who was a 13-year-old boy at um who was a 13-year-old boy at um Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. And Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. And Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. And um it completely turned his disease around. it completely turned his disease around. it completely turned his disease around. He was He was literally dying in the He was He was literally dying in the He was He was literally dying in the Children's Hospital. We used sirolimus Children's Hospital. We used sirolimus Children's Hospital. We used sirolimus and I would come in every day to see him and I would come in every day to see him and I would come in every day to see him and I'll never forget um you know, and I'll never forget um you know, and I'll never forget um you know, seeing the blood work, seeing him the seeing the blood work, seeing him the seeing the blood work, seeing him the couple days after we started sirolimus couple days after we started sirolimus couple days after we started sirolimus and it was just Andrew, it was so and it was just Andrew, it was so and it was just Andrew, it was so incredible to like see this boy who was incredible to like see this boy who was incredible to like see this boy who was on death's doorstep start to turn around on death's doorstep start to turn around on death's doorstep start to turn around because of the drug that saved me and because of the drug that saved me and because of the drug that saved me and now we're saving other people. And now we're saving other people. And now we're saving other people. And again, we'd use it in Brazil, use it in again, we'd use it in Brazil, use it in again, we'd use it in Brazil, use it in New Zealand, but I hadn't seen them. I New Zealand, but I hadn't seen them. I New Zealand, but I hadn't seen them. I hadn't like felt like what his family hadn't like felt like what his family hadn't like felt like what his family was feeling. I actually just saw Joey a was feeling. I actually just saw Joey a was feeling. I actually just saw Joey a couple days ago and his parents a couple days ago and his parents a couple days ago and his parents a couple days ago as well. Um he's a he's couple days ago as well. Um he's a he's couple days ago as well. Um he's a he's a college student at Temple University a college student at Temple University a college student at Temple University now, but now, but now, but so that for me was this huge moment. so that for me was this huge moment. so that for me was this huge moment. It's like, "Oh my gosh, like the drug It's like, "Oh my gosh, like the drug It's like, "Oh my gosh, like the drug I'm on is helping other people. It's not I'm on is helping other people. It's not I'm on is helping other people. It's not just this sort of one-off thing." And just this sort of one-off thing." And just this sort of one-off thing." And then we found a drug that's used for then we found a drug that's used for then we found a drug that's used for bone for bone marrow condition called bone for bone marrow condition called bone for bone marrow condition called myelofibrosis um that we thought could myelofibrosis um that we thought could myelofibrosis um that we thought could also treat Castleman's patients. So also treat Castleman's patients. So also treat Castleman's patients. So there's a young girl named Kayla in a there's a young girl named Kayla in a there's a young girl named Kayla in a hospital in Chicago wasn't responding to hospital in Chicago wasn't responding to hospital in Chicago wasn't responding to anything and she didn't respond to my anything and she didn't respond to my anything and she didn't respond to my drug either, sirolimus. And we drug either, sirolimus. And we drug either, sirolimus. And we recommended her doctor um try recommended her doctor um try recommended her doctor um try ruxolitinib first time ever for ruxolitinib first time ever for ruxolitinib first time ever for Castleman's disease and she responded Castleman's disease and she responded Castleman's disease and she responded incredibly well. She's in college now at incredibly well. She's in college now at incredibly well. She's in college now at Marquette University. She's going to be Marquette University. She's going to be Marquette University. She's going to be a nurse. And um that was amazing. I was a nurse. And um that was amazing. I was a nurse. And um that was amazing. I was like, "Okay, not only did we find this like, "Okay, not only did we find this like, "Okay, not only did we find this drug for me and give it to other people, drug for me and give it to other people, drug for me and give it to other people, but now we found another drug for but now we found another drug for but now we found another drug for Castleman's." Like, "Wow, maybe there's Castleman's." Like, "Wow, maybe there's Castleman's." Like, "Wow, maybe there's even more we can do." So our lab kept even more we can do." So our lab kept even more we can do." So our lab kept working and working and that's when working and working and that's when working and working and that's when Michael, the patient with angiosarcoma, Michael, the patient with angiosarcoma, Michael, the patient with angiosarcoma, came to us back in 2016 and we found out came to us back in 2016 and we found out came to us back in 2016 and we found out that this drug for melanoma could that this drug for melanoma could that this drug for melanoma could actually treat his angiosarcoma cancer. actually treat his angiosarcoma cancer. actually treat his angiosarcoma cancer. And then it's, "Oh my gosh, we can find And then it's, "Oh my gosh, we can find And then it's, "Oh my gosh, we can find for another disease." And this over the for another disease." And this over the for another disease." And this over the course of the last 11 years is course of the last 11 years is course of the last 11 years is totaled 14 drugs for diseases they totaled 14 drugs for diseases they totaled 14 drugs for diseases they weren't intended for. And with every one weren't intended for. And with every one weren't intended for. And with every one of them, we get so excited and then we of them, we get so excited and then we of them, we get so excited and then we also think to ourselves, "How many more also think to ourselves, "How many more also think to ourselves, "How many more drugs are there out there that are made drugs are there out there that are made drugs are there out there that are made for one disease that could actually for one disease that could actually for one disease that could actually treat more diseases?" And so treat more diseases?" And so treat more diseases?" And so that meant that 3 years ago, that meant that 3 years ago, that meant that 3 years ago, um as artificial intelligence was really um as artificial intelligence was really um as artificial intelligence was really continuing to move forward at an continuing to move forward at an continuing to move forward at an incredible pace, um my co-founders, incredible pace, um my co-founders, incredible pace, um my co-founders, Grant Mitchell and Tracy Zukerman, Grant Mitchell and Tracy Zukerman, Grant Mitchell and Tracy Zukerman, Grant um was utilizing um artificial um was utilizing um artificial um was utilizing um artificial intelligence uh to support drug intelligence uh to support drug intelligence uh to support drug companies with finding new uses for companies with finding new uses for companies with finding new uses for their medicines, to find sub-populations their medicines, to find sub-populations their medicines, to find sub-populations that might benefit from their medicines. that might benefit from their medicines. that might benefit from their medicines. But, we thought, what if instead of But, we thought, what if instead of But, we thought, what if instead of using AI one drug company at a time to using AI one drug company at a time to using AI one drug company at a time to find, you know, one new use for find, you know, one new use for find, you know, one new use for medicine, what if we could utilize medicine, what if we could utilize medicine, what if we could utilize artificial intelligence to scan across artificial intelligence to scan across artificial intelligence to scan across all drugs and all diseases to find the all drugs and all diseases to find the all drugs and all diseases to find the best opportunities? So, we started best opportunities? So, we started best opportunities? So, we started Everycure 3 years ago, and since Everycure 3 years ago, and since Everycure 3 years ago, and since starting Everycure, um you're absolutely starting Everycure, um you're absolutely starting Everycure, um you're absolutely right, we get contacted by lots of right, we get contacted by lots of right, we get contacted by lots of patients and families, and we try to patients and families, and we try to patients and families, and we try to help them any way that we can, and then help them any way that we can, and then help them any way that we can, and then I'll share a couple really exciting I'll share a couple really exciting I'll share a couple really exciting examples. And at the same time that examples. And at the same time that examples. And at the same time that we're having all these incomings about we're having all these incomings about we're having all these incomings about people that are on death's door, people that are on death's door, people that are on death's door, what we keep focusing on is can we find what we keep focusing on is can we find what we keep focusing on is can we find these matches, like lidocaine for breast these matches, like lidocaine for breast these matches, like lidocaine for breast cancer or DFMO for Castleman disease cancer or DFMO for Castleman disease cancer or DFMO for Castleman disease that syndrome I mentioned? Can we find that syndrome I mentioned? Can we find that syndrome I mentioned? Can we find these matches and do the work so that these matches and do the work so that these matches and do the work so that way people don't get to death's way people don't get to death's way people don't get to death's doorstep? Do the work to do the clinical doorstep? Do the work to do the clinical doorstep? Do the work to do the clinical studies, get the word out so doctors are studies, get the word out so doctors are studies, get the word out so doctors are prescribing them, so they're not coming prescribing them, so they're not coming prescribing them, so they're not coming to us for a Hail Mary, but we're to us for a Hail Mary, but we're to us for a Hail Mary, but we're actually getting the work done ahead of actually getting the work done ahead of actually getting the work done ahead of time. So, that way the drug is just time. So, that way the drug is just time. So, that way the drug is just being used. Can we match every drug to being used. Can we match every drug to being used. Can we match every drug to every disease that they can treat and do every disease that they can treat and do every disease that they can treat and do the work to get it to people? Um the work to get it to people? Um the work to get it to people? Um cuz that's really the I think the way cuz that's really the I think the way cuz that's really the I think the way that we really solve problems at scale that we really solve problems at scale that we really solve problems at scale as opposed to this sort of that one-off as opposed to this sort of that one-off as opposed to this sort of that one-off Hail Mary approach, but I'll share a Hail Mary approach, but I'll share a Hail Mary approach, but I'll share a couple um one-off approaches that I'm couple um one-off approaches that I'm couple um one-off approaches that I'm really, really proud of. One of them really, really proud of. One of them really, really proud of. One of them is a patient um named Al in Vancouver is a patient um named Al in Vancouver is a patient um named Al in Vancouver who wasn't responding to any medicines. who wasn't responding to any medicines. who wasn't responding to any medicines. He also has Castleman's and the subtype He also has Castleman's and the subtype He also has Castleman's and the subtype that I have, the really deadly one. And that I have, the really deadly one. And that I have, the really deadly one. And um the number one ranking uh number one the number one ranking uh number one the number one ranking uh number one ranked drug in our machine learning ranked drug in our machine learning ranked drug in our machine learning algorithm for Castleman disease, uh when algorithm for Castleman disease, uh when algorithm for Castleman disease, uh when we ran it for the first time 2 years we ran it for the first time 2 years we ran it for the first time 2 years ago, um was uh a TNF inhibitor, ago, um was uh a TNF inhibitor, ago, um was uh a TNF inhibitor, actually. Mentioned TNF earlier. And actually. Mentioned TNF earlier. And actually. Mentioned TNF earlier. And based on some other work in our lab, we based on some other work in our lab, we based on some other work in our lab, we thought that maybe we could try it for thought that maybe we could try it for thought that maybe we could try it for him. Um he received the drug, he him. Um he received the drug, he him. Um he received the drug, he responded really well. responded really well. responded really well. &gt;&gt; For Castleman's, yeah. Tumor necrosis &gt;&gt; For Castleman's, yeah. Tumor necrosis &gt;&gt; For Castleman's, yeah. Tumor necrosis Yeah, TNF inhibitor. Yeah, so sorry, not Yeah, TNF inhibitor. Yeah, so sorry, not Yeah, TNF inhibitor. Yeah, so sorry, not TNF directly, the inhibitor of TNF, TNF directly, the inhibitor of TNF, TNF directly, the inhibitor of TNF, exactly. So, we gave him adalimumab, and exactly. So, we gave him adalimumab, and exactly. So, we gave him adalimumab, and he responded incredibly well. He's been he responded incredibly well. He's been he responded incredibly well. He's been doing great now for 2 years, published doing great now for 2 years, published doing great now for 2 years, published in the New England Journal of Medicine in the New England Journal of Medicine in the New England Journal of Medicine earlier this year. Can I ask you, earlier this year. Can I ask you, earlier this year. Can I ask you, forgive me for interrupting. Okay, so forgive me for interrupting. Okay, so forgive me for interrupting. Okay, so an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor alpha. Mhm. alpha. Mhm. alpha. Mhm. TNF alpha is involved in an inflammatory TNF alpha is involved in an inflammatory TNF alpha is involved in an inflammatory response. Earlier you said that this response. Earlier you said that this response. Earlier you said that this inhibitor can help treat this condition inhibitor can help treat this condition inhibitor can help treat this condition of multiple strokes. Yes. of multiple strokes. Yes. of multiple strokes. Yes. &gt;&gt; In childhood. Okay, strokes are &gt;&gt; In childhood. Okay, strokes are &gt;&gt; In childhood. Okay, strokes are basically bleeding out in brain basically bleeding out in brain basically bleeding out in brain areas, essentially, right? Okay, uh I'm areas, essentially, right? Okay, uh I'm areas, essentially, right? Okay, uh I'm sure there's a mechanistic pathway that sure there's a mechanistic pathway that sure there's a mechanistic pathway that can be, you know, uh Connected, yeah. can be, you know, uh Connected, yeah. can be, you know, uh Connected, yeah. connected to that, all right? Um connected to that, all right? Um connected to that, all right? Um involving any number of things, uh involving any number of things, uh involving any number of things, uh and I'm sure there's a mechanistic and I'm sure there's a mechanistic and I'm sure there's a mechanistic pathway that can be linked to pathway that can be linked to pathway that can be linked to this other observation. this other observation. this other observation. Does it matter to you? Does it matter to you? Does it matter to you? Like, does it matter that uh like I Like, does it matter that uh like I Like, does it matter that uh like I think I actually have seen papers where, think I actually have seen papers where, think I actually have seen papers where, you know, TNF alpha's involved in like you know, TNF alpha's involved in like you know, TNF alpha's involved in like kind of like kind of like kind of like endothelial neural interface, and then endothelial neural interface, and then endothelial neural interface, and then you have inflammation, and then you have you have inflammation, and then you have you have inflammation, and then you have some shearing, and then you have some shearing, and then you have some shearing, and then you have bleeding, and okay, so like I can it's a bleeding, and okay, so like I can it's a bleeding, and okay, so like I can it's a just-so story in my mind um that works, just-so story in my mind um that works, just-so story in my mind um that works, right? Um does it matter, or is the goal right? Um does it matter, or is the goal right? Um does it matter, or is the goal to screen drugs in patients um as these to screen drugs in patients um as these to screen drugs in patients um as these Hail Mary passes and figure out things Hail Mary passes and figure out things Hail Mary passes and figure out things that work, and then worry about that work, and then worry about that work, and then worry about mechanism later? I mean, this isn't mechanism later? I mean, this isn't mechanism later? I mean, this isn't typically not the way science and typically not the way science and typically not the way science and medicine is done, especially in this medicine is done, especially in this medicine is done, especially in this country. People don't like the notion of country. People don't like the notion of country. People don't like the notion of eating a plant or eating a seed and then eating a plant or eating a seed and then eating a plant or eating a seed and then seeing benefits and not knowing what the seeing benefits and not knowing what the seeing benefits and not knowing what the molecules are. I mean, we like molecules are. I mean, we like molecules are. I mean, we like reductionist science in this country. reductionist science in this country. reductionist science in this country. This is changing somewhat, but that's This is changing somewhat, but that's This is changing somewhat, but that's been the pattern. been the pattern. been the pattern. To you, for a patient that's suffering, To you, for a patient that's suffering, To you, for a patient that's suffering, is all that matters that they get is all that matters that they get is all that matters that they get better? I could understand why that better? I could understand why that better? I could understand why that might be the case. Yes, 100%. All ever might be the case. Yes, 100%. All ever might be the case. Yes, 100%. All ever since I saw my mom die from brain since I saw my mom die from brain since I saw my mom die from brain cancer, all I've wanted to do is think cancer, all I've wanted to do is think cancer, all I've wanted to do is think about how can we help people with these about how can we help people with these about how can we help people with these horrible conditions, and then when I horrible conditions, and then when I horrible conditions, and then when I went through my own experience, I went through my own experience, I went through my own experience, I realized that oh my gosh, helping people realized that oh my gosh, helping people realized that oh my gosh, helping people with these horrible conditions may not with these horrible conditions may not with these horrible conditions may not be spending my whole career to develop be spending my whole career to develop be spending my whole career to develop one drug. It might actually be spending one drug. It might actually be spending one drug. It might actually be spending my whole career finding out all the uses my whole career finding out all the uses my whole career finding out all the uses for all these other drugs. And to use a for all these other drugs. And to use a for all these other drugs. And to use a football analogy, it's like we've got football analogy, it's like we've got football analogy, it's like we've got all these drugs that are on like, you all these drugs that are on like, you all these drugs that are on like, you know, the one yard line that could be know, the one yard line that could be know, the one yard line that could be useful for a new condition, but there's useful for a new condition, but there's useful for a new condition, but there's no incentive to do that. So, can we just no incentive to do that. So, can we just no incentive to do that. So, can we just push them in? So, yes, it's push them in? So, yes, it's push them in? So, yes, it's all about can we help patients? And I all about can we help patients? And I all about can we help patients? And I think it goes bidirectionally. So, when think it goes bidirectionally. So, when think it goes bidirectionally. So, when a drug helps a patient like that a drug helps a patient like that a drug helps a patient like that TNF inhibitor helped Al, we TNF inhibitor helped Al, we TNF inhibitor helped Al, we believe it's because believe it's because believe it's because T cells in Castleman's disease, CD4 T cells in Castleman's disease, CD4 T cells in Castleman's disease, CD4 positive T cells, are producing too much positive T cells, are producing too much positive T cells, are producing too much TNF when they become activated. And TNF when they become activated. And TNF when they become activated. And we've shown that in the lab. So, you can we've shown that in the lab. So, you can we've shown that in the lab. So, you can actually start working backwards. So, actually start working backwards. So, actually start working backwards. So, like when a TNF inhibitor helps a like when a TNF inhibitor helps a like when a TNF inhibitor helps a patient, so let's look at their blood patient, so let's look at their blood patient, so let's look at their blood and let's figure out why. And then maybe and let's figure out why. And then maybe and let's figure out why. And then maybe I can learn something for the we can I can learn something for the we can I can learn something for the we can learn something for the next patient. learn something for the next patient. learn something for the next patient. So, I think it should be bidirectional. So, I think it should be bidirectional. So, I think it should be bidirectional. Clinical observations and in the lab, Clinical observations and in the lab, Clinical observations and in the lab, and let's go in both directions. and let's go in both directions. and let's go in both directions. And then I also want to share about And then I also want to share about And then I also want to share about another patient named Joseph who another patient named Joseph who another patient named Joseph who has a rare cancer called POEMS syndrome. has a rare cancer called POEMS syndrome. has a rare cancer called POEMS syndrome. And so, his girlfriend Tara reached out And so, his girlfriend Tara reached out And so, his girlfriend Tara reached out to us in one of these sort of Hail Mary to us in one of these sort of Hail Mary to us in one of these sort of Hail Mary attempts because his doctors were attempts because his doctors were attempts because his doctors were getting ready to take him off life getting ready to take him off life getting ready to take him off life support because he was dying from his support because he was dying from his support because he was dying from his POEMS syndrome. And um POEMS syndrome. And um POEMS syndrome. And um we recommended three drugs that are we recommended three drugs that are we recommended three drugs that are typically used for multiple myeloma, and typically used for multiple myeloma, and typically used for multiple myeloma, and we mentioned myeloma earlier. Myeloma we mentioned myeloma earlier. Myeloma we mentioned myeloma earlier. Myeloma and POEMS are really similar. So, and POEMS are really similar. So, and POEMS are really similar. So, again, it wasn't rocket science to again, it wasn't rocket science to again, it wasn't rocket science to recommend three drugs that are used for recommend three drugs that are used for recommend three drugs that are used for a really similar form of cancer for a really similar form of cancer for a really similar form of cancer for his condition. his condition. his condition. Um but he was dying. His doctors were Um but he was dying. His doctors were Um but he was dying. His doctors were afraid to try chemotherapy. They were afraid to try chemotherapy. They were afraid to try chemotherapy. They were worried that it would kill him, the worried that it would kill him, the worried that it would kill him, the drugs themselves. But they were going to drugs themselves. But they were going to drugs themselves. But they were going to take him off life support, so they tried take him off life support, so they tried take him off life support, so they tried it, and he responded incredibly well. it, and he responded incredibly well. it, and he responded incredibly well. He's been doing great. It's been over a He's been doing great. It's been over a He's been doing great. It's been over a year and a half of remission. And I year and a half of remission. And I year and a half of remission. And I mention all of these examples because mention all of these examples because mention all of these examples because like each one of them sort of like each one of them sort of like each one of them sort of teaches us something else about this. teaches us something else about this. teaches us something else about this. And that's that like they're similar And that's that like they're similar And that's that like they're similar conditions, yet they weren't being, you conditions, yet they weren't being, you conditions, yet they weren't being, you know, but we weren't thinking know, but we weren't thinking know, but we weren't thinking creatively. Yes, there were no creatively. Yes, there were no creatively. Yes, there were no treatments for POEMS syndrome, but there treatments for POEMS syndrome, but there treatments for POEMS syndrome, but there were treatments for myeloma. And so, you were treatments for myeloma. And so, you were treatments for myeloma. And so, you know, and there's shared mechanisms know, and there's shared mechanisms know, and there's shared mechanisms between the two. So, I think that um between the two. So, I think that um between the two. So, I think that um some doctors are doing this, but we have some doctors are doing this, but we have some doctors are doing this, but we have to create a system where we uncover to create a system where we uncover to create a system where we uncover these and then we can get it out to the these and then we can get it out to the these and then we can get it out to the masses so they use them. masses so they use them. masses so they use them. The fear is that you try The fear is that you try The fear is that you try one of these novel drug applications. one of these novel drug applications. one of these novel drug applications. Drugs aren't Sorry, existing drug Drugs aren't Sorry, existing drug Drugs aren't Sorry, existing drug used in a novel way to be very specific used in a novel way to be very specific used in a novel way to be very specific with the language here. And a patient with the language here. And a patient with the language here. And a patient gets sick or dies. gets sick or dies. gets sick or dies. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. You know, it wasn't but gosh, maybe a You know, it wasn't but gosh, maybe a You know, it wasn't but gosh, maybe a decade and a half ago that this kid decade and a half ago that this kid decade and a half ago that this kid was given gene therapy and died. was given gene therapy and died. was given gene therapy and died. &gt;&gt; And that delayed, setback, however you &gt;&gt; And that delayed, setback, however you &gt;&gt; And that delayed, setback, however you want to view it, uh the whole field of want to view it, uh the whole field of want to view it, uh the whole field of gene therapy by a very long time. All it gene therapy by a very long time. All it gene therapy by a very long time. All it takes is one patient death. Yep. I mean, takes is one patient death. Yep. I mean, takes is one patient death. Yep. I mean, and then in the supplement realm, I and then in the supplement realm, I and then in the supplement realm, I don't know if you remember this, but don't know if you remember this, but don't know if you remember this, but like um cuz we're about 10 years apart. like um cuz we're about 10 years apart. like um cuz we're about 10 years apart. You're younger than I am. You're younger than I am. You're younger than I am. Is uh Is uh Is uh tryptophan the amino acid to induce sleep because the amino acid to induce sleep because the amino acid to induce sleep because it's a you know, it's in the serotonin it's a you know, it's in the serotonin it's a you know, it's in the serotonin synthesis pathway and um but the binders synthesis pathway and um but the binders synthesis pathway and um but the binders used in a particular batch of tryptophan used in a particular batch of tryptophan used in a particular batch of tryptophan that I think was sold out of Japan that I think was sold out of Japan that I think was sold out of Japan although um ended up being contaminated although um ended up being contaminated although um ended up being contaminated and somebody got very ill and died. and somebody got very ill and died. and somebody got very ill and died. You couldn't buy tryptophan for a long You couldn't buy tryptophan for a long You couldn't buy tryptophan for a long time. Now, tryptophan not as critical as time. Now, tryptophan not as critical as time. Now, tryptophan not as critical as life-saving drugs in my opinion except life-saving drugs in my opinion except life-saving drugs in my opinion except the naturally occurring tryptophan. But the naturally occurring tryptophan. But the naturally occurring tryptophan. But all it takes is one bad situation all it takes is one bad situation all it takes is one bad situation and the whole thing gets vaulted for a and the whole thing gets vaulted for a and the whole thing gets vaulted for a very long time. So, how do you mitigate very long time. So, how do you mitigate very long time. So, how do you mitigate that risk? Is it by only focusing on that risk? Is it by only focusing on that risk? Is it by only focusing on patients that are really it you know, patients that are really it you know, patients that are really it you know, kind of at the end of their rope in kind of at the end of their rope in kind of at the end of their rope in terms of possibilities? terms of possibilities? terms of possibilities? And it seems to me that the medical And it seems to me that the medical And it seems to me that the medical community has been pretty community has been pretty community has been pretty um open to what you're doing. open to what you're doing. open to what you're doing. Uh but I have a little bit of a like a Uh but I have a little bit of a like a Uh but I have a little bit of a like a kind of like traditionalist fear voice kind of like traditionalist fear voice kind of like traditionalist fear voice in the back of my head. Like like what in the back of my head. Like like what in the back of my head. Like like what if you start giving aspirin to kids with if you start giving aspirin to kids with if you start giving aspirin to kids with this other condition and kids start this other condition and kids start this other condition and kids start getting really, really sick and you getting really, really sick and you getting really, really sick and you can't pull those symptoms back. Cuz it's can't pull those symptoms back. Cuz it's can't pull those symptoms back. Cuz it's one thing to halt a drug and symptoms one thing to halt a drug and symptoms one thing to halt a drug and symptoms stop. It's another to halt a drug and It's another to halt a drug and It's another to halt a drug and those side effect symptoms, whatever you those side effect symptoms, whatever you those side effect symptoms, whatever you want to call them, persist. want to call them, persist. want to call them, persist. And and God forbid a kid dies. And and God forbid a kid dies. And and God forbid a kid dies. Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, so what you're doing is &gt;&gt; You know, so what you're doing is &gt;&gt; You know, so what you're doing is extremely exciting, but um extremely exciting, but um extremely exciting, but um it's also risky. Yeah, you're asking all it's also risky. Yeah, you're asking all it's also risky. Yeah, you're asking all the right questions. I mean, I think the right questions. I mean, I think the right questions. I mean, I think that there's a couple ways that we think there's a couple ways that we think there's a couple ways that we think about this. And one is that we really do about this. And one is that we really do about this. And one is that we really do try to avoid the Hail Mary's. As you try to avoid the Hail Mary's. As you try to avoid the Hail Mary's. As you mentioned and as you as you thought, mentioned and as you as you thought, mentioned and as you as you thought, lots of people are reaching out to us. lots of people are reaching out to us. lots of people are reaching out to us. And unless we have solid evidence about And unless we have solid evidence about And unless we have solid evidence about a drug for that disease, we are we don't a drug for that disease, we are we don't a drug for that disease, we are we don't want to just speculate. Because to your want to just speculate. Because to your want to just speculate. Because to your point, speculation can actually lead to point, speculation can actually lead to point, speculation can actually lead to harm. So, and if there's a you know, harm. So, and if there's a you know, harm. So, and if there's a you know, fine line between you know, speculation fine line between you know, speculation fine line between you know, speculation that could save a life and harm. And that could save a life and harm. And that could save a life and harm. And of course, of course, of course, we are only doing what we're doing to we are only doing what we're doing to we are only doing what we're doing to help people. It's a non-profit help people. It's a non-profit help people. It's a non-profit organization. We literally just exist organization. We literally just exist organization. We literally just exist just to help people. There's nothing just to help people. There's nothing just to help people. There's nothing else here to it. So, um we definitely else here to it. So, um we definitely else here to it. So, um we definitely don't want to cause harm. Um so, one don't want to cause harm. Um so, one don't want to cause harm. Um so, one part is that we focus on part is that we focus on part is that we focus on you know, we look across everything you know, we look across everything you know, we look across everything versus everything, every drug versus everything, every drug versus everything, every drug versus every disease to find the best every disease to find the best every disease to find the best opportunities, and then we move them opportunities, and then we move them opportunities, and then we move them forward in a really rigorous way. We do forward in a really rigorous way. We do forward in a really rigorous way. We do laboratory studies. We do clinical laboratory studies. We do clinical laboratory studies. We do clinical trials. We evaluate the results of those trials. We evaluate the results of those trials. We evaluate the results of those trials. We look in observational data. trials. We look in observational data. trials. We look in observational data. So, we can be really rigorous about the So, we can be really rigorous about the So, we can be really rigorous about the things that we do at the end of the day things that we do at the end of the day things that we do at the end of the day say we are advocating for this use. say we are advocating for this use. say we are advocating for this use. That's one way to do it. The other thing That's one way to do it. The other thing That's one way to do it. The other thing to consider is that to consider is that to consider is that there's always a physician that's there's always a physician that's there's always a physician that's prescribing the medicine to the patient. prescribing the medicine to the patient. prescribing the medicine to the patient. And so, the best thing we can do is to And so, the best thing we can do is to And so, the best thing we can do is to educate those physicians and those educate those physicians and those educate those physicians and those patients on what it is that maybe we patients on what it is that maybe we patients on what it is that maybe we found in a clinical trial or in the lab found in a clinical trial or in the lab found in a clinical trial or in the lab works, but it's still got to be decision works, but it's still got to be decision works, but it's still got to be decision between the patient and their between the patient and their between the patient and their physician. And what about outside the domain of And what about outside the domain of And what about outside the domain of disease in the domain of health? disease in the domain of health? disease in the domain of health? &gt;&gt; Mhm. Very brief anecdote, uh &gt;&gt; Mhm. Very brief anecdote, uh &gt;&gt; Mhm. Very brief anecdote, uh colleagues of mine colleagues of mine colleagues of mine some don't like it when I tell this some don't like it when I tell this some don't like it when I tell this story, but I'm going to tell it anyway story, but I'm going to tell it anyway story, but I'm going to tell it anyway cuz um cuz um cuz um many years ago I went to visit Columbia many years ago I went to visit Columbia many years ago I went to visit Columbia University School of Medicine. I was University School of Medicine. I was University School of Medicine. I was like, Columbia Med's fantastic place. like, Columbia Med's fantastic place. like, Columbia Med's fantastic place. And there's a Nobel Prize winning And there's a Nobel Prize winning And there's a Nobel Prize winning neuroscientist there. Met with him to neuroscientist there. Met with him to neuroscientist there. Met with him to discuss his work. discuss his work. discuss his work. He happens to be an MD, He happens to be an MD, He happens to be an MD, but he's a researcher. And I noticed he but he's a researcher. And I noticed he but he's a researcher. And I noticed he chewed six pieces of Nicorette inside of chewed six pieces of Nicorette inside of chewed six pieces of Nicorette inside of the 45 minutes we met. So, I asked him, the 45 minutes we met. So, I asked him, the 45 minutes we met. So, I asked him, like, "What are you doing?" Guy was in like, "What are you doing?" Guy was in like, "What are you doing?" Guy was in his late 60s then, now he's in his late his late 60s then, now he's in his late his late 60s then, now he's in his late 70s. Very, very sharp. Nobel Prize 70s. Very, very sharp. Nobel Prize 70s. Very, very sharp. Nobel Prize wasn't an accident. wasn't an accident. wasn't an accident. He looked at me like this and he said, He looked at me like this and he said, He looked at me like this and he said, "Nicotine is protective against "Nicotine is protective against "Nicotine is protective against Alzheimer's and Parkinson's." He said, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's." He said, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's." He said, "Smoking and the vape wasn't really vaping then, and the vape wasn't really vaping then, and the vape wasn't really vaping then, but smoking will kill you, but it but smoking will kill you, but it but smoking will kill you, but it nicotine isn't carcinogenic. Nicotine, nicotine isn't carcinogenic. Nicotine, nicotine isn't carcinogenic. Nicotine, despite raising blood pressure, despite raising blood pressure, despite raising blood pressure, protects dopaminergic neurons and protects dopaminergic neurons and protects dopaminergic neurons and cholinergic neurons. So, that's why I do cholinergic neurons. So, that's why I do cholinergic neurons. So, that's why I do it." And he said that he used to smoke it." And he said that he used to smoke it." And he said that he used to smoke and he was much sharper. Now he uses and he was much sharper. Now he uses and he was much sharper. Now he uses Nicorette. And I thought, "Should I use Nicorette. And I thought, "Should I use Nicorette. And I thought, "Should I use Nicorette?" So, I said, "Should I be Nicorette?" So, I said, "Should I be Nicorette?" So, I said, "Should I be doing this?" He said, "You're young, you doing this?" He said, "You're young, you doing this?" He said, "You're young, you probably want to wait until you're in probably want to wait until you're in probably want to wait until you're in your 60s or 70s." He said, "But it's your 60s or 70s." He said, "But it's your 60s or 70s." He said, "But it's protective against Parkinson's and protective against Parkinson's and protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's." And he also said, "Don't get your head And he also said, "Don't get your head And he also said, "Don't get your head hit. Don't play football." You know, hit. Don't play football." You know, hit. Don't play football." You know, that kind of thing. Okay, so I took that kind of thing. Okay, so I took that kind of thing. Okay, so I took that and I decided, "All right, someday I'll chew I decided, "All right, someday I'll chew I decided, "All right, someday I'll chew Nicorette." Now nicotine is all the Nicorette." Now nicotine is all the Nicorette." Now nicotine is all the rage. I actually don't suggest that most rage. I actually don't suggest that most rage. I actually don't suggest that most people take nicotine because of the people take nicotine because of the people take nicotine because of the blood pressure effects. Yeah. It's a blood pressure effects. Yeah. It's a blood pressure effects. Yeah. It's a constrictor. There could be other constrictor. There could be other constrictor. There could be other things. It's very, very popular, but things. It's very, very popular, but things. It's very, very popular, but very, very habit-forming {slash} very, very habit-forming {slash} very, very habit-forming {slash} addictive. So, I want to be very clear addictive. So, I want to be very clear addictive. So, I want to be very clear about that. about that. about that. But I realized there are really smart But I realized there are really smart But I realized there are really smart people inside of my profession who have people inside of my profession who have people inside of my profession who have medical degrees, who are doing things to medical degrees, who are doing things to medical degrees, who are doing things to promote their health, promote their health, promote their health, like take lithium, like take lithium, like take lithium, not continuously, but for 1 or 2 months not continuously, but for 1 or 2 months not continuously, but for 1 or 2 months per year. I know a colleague doing that. per year. I know a colleague doing that. per year. I know a colleague doing that. Colleague like taking nicotine who's now Colleague like taking nicotine who's now Colleague like taking nicotine who's now in his late 70s and still very, very in his late 70s and still very, very in his late 70s and still very, very sharp. Now, you can't run the other sharp. Now, you can't run the other sharp. Now, you can't run the other You can't be the control experiment for You can't be the control experiment for You can't be the control experiment for yourself, but what I want to know is yourself, but what I want to know is yourself, but what I want to know is do you think that there are things that do you think that there are things that do you think that there are things that are value are value are value that people can and should explore to that people can and should explore to that people can and should explore to maintain or promote their health, to maintain or promote their health, to maintain or promote their health, to avoid disease avoid disease avoid disease in the same kind of framework that in the same kind of framework that in the same kind of framework that you're approaching the treatment of you're approaching the treatment of you're approaching the treatment of disease? Absolutely. And I think we need disease? Absolutely. And I think we need disease? Absolutely. And I think we need to be to be to be as rigorous in this realm as in you know as rigorous in this realm as in you know as rigorous in this realm as in you know in the in the world of treating in the in the world of treating in the in the world of treating disease. I think that the challenge is disease. I think that the challenge is disease. I think that the challenge is that there's such limited data, right? that there's such limited data, right? that there's such limited data, right? Like you said you know Like you said you know Like you said you know your one friend is doing really well, your one friend is doing really well, your one friend is doing really well, but it's hard to know was it because of but it's hard to know was it because of but it's hard to know was it because of the Nicorette or is it you know that he the Nicorette or is it you know that he the Nicorette or is it you know that he was going to be fine either way. I just was going to be fine either way. I just was going to be fine either way. I just think we got to figure out ways and I think we got to figure out ways and I think we got to figure out ways and I think you've done such a great job of think you've done such a great job of think you've done such a great job of spotlighting these opportunities so that spotlighting these opportunities so that spotlighting these opportunities so that way people will think about it more and way people will think about it more and way people will think about it more and actually will do further investigation. actually will do further investigation. actually will do further investigation. Um And I was thinking in terms of this um And I was thinking in terms of this um And I was thinking in terms of this um prevention side of things of course prevention side of things of course prevention side of things of course about GLP-1s. And so of course there's about GLP-1s. And so of course there's about GLP-1s. And so of course there's interesting evidence emerging and you'll interesting evidence emerging and you'll interesting evidence emerging and you'll know better than I will. Um but around know better than I will. Um but around know better than I will. Um but around improvement in Parkinson's symptoms in improvement in Parkinson's symptoms in improvement in Parkinson's symptoms in patients that are on GLP-1s and have patients that are on GLP-1s and have patients that are on GLP-1s and have Parkinson's disease. Improvements or Parkinson's disease. Improvements or Parkinson's disease. Improvements or reduction in reduction in reduction in risk of Alzheimer's and also breast risk of Alzheimer's and also breast risk of Alzheimer's and also breast cancer people who are on GLP-1s. And so cancer people who are on GLP-1s. And so cancer people who are on GLP-1s. And so there's likely a very complex interplay there's likely a very complex interplay there's likely a very complex interplay between weight loss between weight loss between weight loss and maybe it's the GLP-1s are reducing and maybe it's the GLP-1s are reducing and maybe it's the GLP-1s are reducing risk of these things because metabolic risk of these things because metabolic risk of these things because metabolic effects maybe there's direct effects maybe there's direct effects maybe there's direct effects maybe it's anti-inflammatory. So these maybe it's anti-inflammatory. So these maybe it's anti-inflammatory. So these are you know preventative concepts with are you know preventative concepts with are you know preventative concepts with pharmaceutical products that pharmaceutical products that pharmaceutical products that I think we need to be thinking that I think we need to be thinking that I think we need to be thinking about and to your point about and to your point about and to your point you know there really isn't an actual you know there really isn't an actual you know there really isn't an actual line between natural and pharmaceutical. line between natural and pharmaceutical. line between natural and pharmaceutical. I mean think about the drug I'm on I mean think about the drug I'm on I mean think about the drug I'm on sirolimus. It's called rapamycin because sirolimus. It's called rapamycin because sirolimus. It's called rapamycin because it was found on the island of Rapa Nui it was found on the island of Rapa Nui it was found on the island of Rapa Nui in the soil of I don't know if you know in the soil of I don't know if you know in the soil of I don't know if you know that story it was found in So rapamycin that story it was found in So rapamycin that story it was found in So rapamycin or sirolimus the other name for it or sirolimus the other name for it or sirolimus the other name for it was found in the soil of the island of was found in the soil of the island of was found in the soil of the island of Rapa Nui and there was a researcher at Rapa Nui and there was a researcher at Rapa Nui and there was a researcher at Wyeth Pharmaceuticals who was going all Wyeth Pharmaceuticals who was going all Wyeth Pharmaceuticals who was going all around the Pacific Ocean to a bunch of around the Pacific Ocean to a bunch of around the Pacific Ocean to a bunch of different islands and picking up soil different islands and picking up soil different islands and picking up soil samples. And he thought that you know samples. And he thought that you know samples. And he thought that you know maybe I could find some drugs in the maybe I could find some drugs in the maybe I could find some drugs in the soil. And he eventually found this soil. And he eventually found this soil. And he eventually found this molecule now called rapamycin where they molecule now called rapamycin where they molecule now called rapamycin where they synthesized a bunch of it. It's synthesized a bunch of it. It's synthesized a bunch of it. It's completely naturally occurring from the completely naturally occurring from the completely naturally occurring from the from and the other name for Rapa Nui is from and the other name for Rapa Nui is from and the other name for Rapa Nui is Easter Island. It's from the island you Easter Island. It's from the island you Easter Island. It's from the island you know from Easter Island. So know from Easter Island. So know from Easter Island. So synthesized it and they initially synthesized it and they initially synthesized it and they initially thought that it might be a good drug for thought that it might be a good drug for thought that it might be a good drug for as an anti-fungal but it's a lousy as an anti-fungal but it's a lousy as an anti-fungal but it's a lousy anti-fungal. And so they were trying to anti-fungal. And so they were trying to anti-fungal. And so they were trying to figure out like what else could it do? figure out like what else could it do? figure out like what else could it do? And they found out that it's a really And they found out that it's a really And they found out that it's a really potent immunosuppressant. And um and in potent immunosuppressant. And um and in potent immunosuppressant. And um and in fact the research into the fact the research into the fact the research into the immunosuppressant role ended up you know immunosuppressant role ended up you know immunosuppressant role ended up you know really accelerating understanding of how really accelerating understanding of how really accelerating understanding of how the mTOR pathway works in the first the mTOR pathway works in the first the mTOR pathway works in the first place. And it actually is an amazing place. And it actually is an amazing place. And it actually is an amazing story um that was done on story um that was done on story um that was done on RadioLab about how um it eventually um RadioLab about how um it eventually um RadioLab about how um it eventually um or at one point it was shelved. Wyeth or at one point it was shelved. Wyeth or at one point it was shelved. Wyeth and Pfizer decided not to study it, and Pfizer decided not to study it, and Pfizer decided not to study it, and then it sort of got taken off the shelf, then it sort of got taken off the shelf, then it sort of got taken off the shelf, and it got approved for organ transplant and it got approved for organ transplant and it got approved for organ transplant rejection. But I just think about rejection. But I just think about rejection. But I just think about something like that. I mean, if that something like that. I mean, if that something like that. I mean, if that scientist hadn't picked up the soil scientist hadn't picked up the soil scientist hadn't picked up the soil sample in Rapa Nui, I'm not sitting here sample in Rapa Nui, I'm not sitting here sample in Rapa Nui, I'm not sitting here with you talking to you, right? Um and with you talking to you, right? Um and with you talking to you, right? Um and of course there's thousands of people of course there's thousands of people of course there's thousands of people all over the world who aren't sitting all over the world who aren't sitting all over the world who aren't sitting here talking to anyone because you know here talking to anyone because you know here talking to anyone because you know that drug wouldn't have been discovered. that drug wouldn't have been discovered. that drug wouldn't have been discovered. And and it was in the soil. And it it's And and it was in the soil. And it it's And and it was in the soil. And it it's not some you know pharmaceutical not some you know pharmaceutical not some you know pharmaceutical synthetic thing. You know, this is a synthetic thing. You know, this is a synthetic thing. You know, this is a totally naturally occurring compound. totally naturally occurring compound. totally naturally occurring compound. So, I think our the line that we put So, I think our the line that we put So, I think our the line that we put between creatine and you know, sirolimus between creatine and you know, sirolimus between creatine and you know, sirolimus and GLP-1s, there's a lot of overlap and GLP-1s, there's a lot of overlap and GLP-1s, there's a lot of overlap here. And yes, some of these molecules here. And yes, some of these molecules here. And yes, some of these molecules are very much synthesized. And you are very much synthesized. And you are very much synthesized. And you think about the chemos that I've gotten think about the chemos that I've gotten think about the chemos that I've gotten are like horrible compounds that like are like horrible compounds that like are like horrible compounds that like you probably don't want to put in your you probably don't want to put in your you probably don't want to put in your body. But it's a lot grayer than I think body. But it's a lot grayer than I think body. But it's a lot grayer than I think we like to think it is. we like to think it is. we like to think it is. I think the term is bioprospecting. I think the term is bioprospecting. I think the term is bioprospecting. Uh when people from pharmaceutical Uh when people from pharmaceutical Uh when people from pharmaceutical companies go out and look for things in companies go out and look for things in companies go out and look for things in nature and then develop drugs from them. nature and then develop drugs from them. nature and then develop drugs from them. We had a guy on here, very impressive We had a guy on here, very impressive We had a guy on here, very impressive guy, Chris McCurdy, guy, Chris McCurdy, guy, Chris McCurdy, who's down in Florida. He studies kratom who's down in Florida. He studies kratom who's down in Florida. He studies kratom and kratom leaf products. Okay. Um and kratom leaf products. Okay. Um and kratom leaf products. Okay. Um kratom is a kratom is a kratom is a is a it's being sold as a kind of is a it's being sold as a kind of is a it's being sold as a kind of natural opioid replacement. I just natural opioid replacement. I just natural opioid replacement. I just should anytime it comes up I have to be should anytime it comes up I have to be should anytime it comes up I have to be very careful cuz very careful cuz very careful cuz y'all cut clips and you take them out of y'all cut clips and you take them out of y'all cut clips and you take them out of context. So, I'm going to just go I've context. So, I'm going to just go I've context. So, I'm going to just go I've learned how to guard that against that. learned how to guard that against that. learned how to guard that against that. Forgive me, but Forgive me, but Forgive me, but um kratom products and the kratom leaf um kratom products and the kratom leaf um kratom products and the kratom leaf have been used by some former uh have been used by some former uh have been used by some former uh prescription opioid addicts to get off prescription opioid addicts to get off prescription opioid addicts to get off those prescription drugs. However, those prescription drugs. However, those prescription drugs. However, it's very clear that a lot of these it's very clear that a lot of these it's very clear that a lot of these products which are sold over the counter products which are sold over the counter products which are sold over the counter in convenience stores, um corner stores, in convenience stores, um corner stores, in convenience stores, um corner stores, 7-Eleven, etc., CVS, Wow. can also be 7-Eleven, etc., CVS, Wow. can also be 7-Eleven, etc., CVS, Wow. can also be highly addictive alone, and they're sold highly addictive alone, and they're sold highly addictive alone, and they're sold to kids. Um it's a serious, serious to kids. Um it's a serious, serious to kids. Um it's a serious, serious issue, but the kratom leaf, kratom I issue, but the kratom leaf, kratom I issue, but the kratom leaf, kratom I think is the way it's the traditional um think is the way it's the traditional um think is the way it's the traditional um uh pronunciation, uh pronunciation, uh pronunciation, uh contains a bunch of different plant uh contains a bunch of different plant uh contains a bunch of different plant alkaloids. Wow. And the synthesized, alkaloids. Wow. And the synthesized, alkaloids. Wow. And the synthesized, purified kratom is the one that has this purified kratom is the one that has this purified kratom is the one that has this uh pain relief aspect that's also uh pain relief aspect that's also uh pain relief aspect that's also can be very addictive. Um and he we can be very addictive. Um and he we can be very addictive. Um and he we discussed the coca plant and cocaine, discussed the coca plant and cocaine, discussed the coca plant and cocaine, but also other elements within the coca but also other elements within the coca but also other elements within the coca plant that his he runs a laboratory that plant that his he runs a laboratory that plant that his he runs a laboratory that are being isolated and being tested for are being isolated and being tested for are being isolated and being tested for different um pain relief and uh different um pain relief and uh different um pain relief and uh psychoactive properties that can be very psychoactive properties that can be very psychoactive properties that can be very beneficial to people. So, bioprospecting beneficial to people. So, bioprospecting beneficial to people. So, bioprospecting is something that drug companies don't is something that drug companies don't is something that drug companies don't really discuss a lot, but the way really discuss a lot, but the way really discuss a lot, but the way they're doing this is going into nature, they're doing this is going into nature, they're doing this is going into nature, looking at the kra- the kratom leaf, looking at the kra- the kratom leaf, looking at the kra- the kratom leaf, Yeah. the uh coca plant, um Yeah. the uh coca plant, um Yeah. the uh coca plant, um mucuna purines is this velvety bean Mhm. mucuna purines is this velvety bean Mhm. mucuna purines is this velvety bean Mhm. that um is 99% L-dopa. Oh, really? Wow. that um is 99% L-dopa. Oh, really? Wow. that um is 99% L-dopa. Oh, really? Wow. &gt;&gt; Yeah, which uh you can buy this over the &gt;&gt; Yeah, which uh you can buy this over the &gt;&gt; Yeah, which uh you can buy this over the counter. So, we think it So, the line counter. So, we think it So, the line counter. So, we think it So, the line between supplementation and prescription between supplementation and prescription between supplementation and prescription drug is very, very fine. It is. It's drug is very, very fine. It is. It's drug is very, very fine. It is. It's just that there's no control over the just that there's no control over the just that there's no control over the over-the-counter stuff. the over-the-counter stuff. the over-the-counter stuff. Right. And so, this where it runs into Right. And so, this where it runs into Right. And so, this where it runs into problems and gets a bad reputation, and problems and gets a bad reputation, and problems and gets a bad reputation, and understandably so. We don't want people understandably so. We don't want people understandably so. We don't want people harming themselves with this. harming themselves with this. harming themselves with this. I'm beginning to think that what's I'm beginning to think that what's I'm beginning to think that what's really needed, and people in the current really needed, and people in the current really needed, and people in the current administration do listen, um administration do listen, um administration do listen, um to the podcast. I don't know if they to the podcast. I don't know if they to the podcast. I don't know if they what they do with the information, but what they do with the information, but what they do with the information, but um I think we need more thoughtful, safe um I think we need more thoughtful, safe um I think we need more thoughtful, safe bioprospecting to develop drugs that bioprospecting to develop drugs that bioprospecting to develop drugs that they can be tested in preclinical they can be tested in preclinical they can be tested in preclinical models, animals. Preclinical means models, animals. Preclinical means models, animals. Preclinical means animals, folks. Um animals, folks. Um animals, folks. Um and then and then and then eventually clinical trials, eventually clinical trials, eventually clinical trials, but I don't know that we have the time but I don't know that we have the time but I don't know that we have the time for clinical trials on all these for clinical trials on all these for clinical trials on all these bioprospected molecules or even the molecules that molecules or even the molecules that molecules or even the molecules that you're talking about, which are already you're talking about, which are already you're talking about, which are already FDA approved. It sounds like a lot of it FDA approved. It sounds like a lot of it FDA approved. It sounds like a lot of it just has to be run in real time in just has to be run in real time in just has to be run in real time in people. Like the experiment in some people. Like the experiment in some people. Like the experiment in some sense has to be done sense has to be done sense has to be done in humans. I just don't see otherwise in humans. I just don't see otherwise in humans. I just don't see otherwise it's going to be, you know, another 50 it's going to be, you know, another 50 it's going to be, you know, another 50 years before we have a cure for years before we have a cure for years before we have a cure for Alzheimer's or we solve some of the Alzheimer's or we solve some of the Alzheimer's or we solve some of the most serious psychiatric illnesses. I most serious psychiatric illnesses. I most serious psychiatric illnesses. I agree. It the answer comes from actually It the answer comes from actually It the answer comes from actually testing these things in humans. There's testing these things in humans. There's testing these things in humans. There's so many things that cure mice and they so many things that cure mice and they so many things that cure mice and they don't ever translate to humans and don't ever translate to humans and don't ever translate to humans and vice versa. So, and vice versa. So, and vice versa. So, um I think that I'm really bullish on the I think that I'm really bullish on the I think that I'm really bullish on the idea of leveraging the world's idea of leveraging the world's idea of leveraging the world's biomedical knowledge and using biomedical knowledge and using biomedical knowledge and using artificial intelligence to help to artificial intelligence to help to artificial intelligence to help to prioritize among all of these different prioritize among all of these different prioritize among all of these different things. And so, at the end of the day, things. And so, at the end of the day, things. And so, at the end of the day, you know, we talk about the 4,000 drugs, you know, we talk about the 4,000 drugs, you know, we talk about the 4,000 drugs, 18,000 diseases. The reason we do the 18,000 diseases. The reason we do the 18,000 diseases. The reason we do the scoring on everything versus everything scoring on everything versus everything scoring on everything versus everything is so that we can just know where to is so that we can just know where to is so that we can just know where to start because, you know, I mean, we start because, you know, I mean, we start because, you know, I mean, we rank everything versus everything and rank everything versus everything and rank everything versus everything and maybe the fifth highest scoring and maybe the fifth highest scoring and maybe the fifth highest scoring thing is the thing to go after but thing is the thing to go after but thing is the thing to go after but maybe the 10,000th highest scoring thing maybe the 10,000th highest scoring thing maybe the 10,000th highest scoring thing is a Point being is that AI can at least is a Point being is that AI can at least is a Point being is that AI can at least help us to focus in on where do you help us to focus in on where do you help us to focus in on where do you start cuz to your point there's so many start cuz to your point there's so many start cuz to your point there's so many opportunities of the existing drugs that opportunities of the existing drugs that opportunities of the existing drugs that we have, of the molecules that are we have, of the molecules that are we have, of the molecules that are already available in nature, but you already available in nature, but you already available in nature, but you need you need somewhere to start and I need you need somewhere to start and I need you need somewhere to start and I think AI is really well positioned to think AI is really well positioned to think AI is really well positioned to direct us humans to where to start. direct us humans to where to start. direct us humans to where to start. Amen to that um because in theory with Amen to that um because in theory with Amen to that um because in theory with AI you could um develop, I guess they AI you could um develop, I guess they AI you could um develop, I guess they call it in silico, you could say uh call it in silico, you could say uh call it in silico, you could say uh let's run uh 10,000 cell cultures in let's run uh 10,000 cell cultures in let's run uh 10,000 cell cultures in parallel. The graduate student costs is parallel. The graduate student costs is parallel. The graduate student costs is nothing. They don't need to sleep. It's nothing. They don't need to sleep. It's nothing. They don't need to sleep. It's AI after all. And um with all the AI after all. And um with all the AI after all. And um with all the properties of of, you know, this immune properties of of, you know, this immune properties of of, you know, this immune cell type, different uh concentrations cell type, different uh concentrations cell type, different uh concentrations of drug, and while it's not a real-world of drug, and while it's not a real-world of drug, and while it's not a real-world experiment, you can get an indication of experiment, you can get an indication of experiment, you can get an indication of what the outcome might be and what might what the outcome might be and what might what the outcome might be and what might be worth taking a better look at. Is be worth taking a better look at. Is be worth taking a better look at. Is that Is that what you're imagining? that Is that what you're imagining? that Is that what you're imagining? &gt;&gt; That's right and also um that that's a &gt;&gt; That's right and also um that that's a &gt;&gt; That's right and also um that that's a true simulation where the work hasn't true simulation where the work hasn't true simulation where the work hasn't been done. What also is the case is been done. What also is the case is been done. What also is the case is that, as you know, there are labs all that, as you know, there are labs all that, as you know, there are labs all over the world running experiments all over the world running experiments all over the world running experiments all the time on various the time on various the time on various cell lines and animal models and in cell lines and animal models and in cell lines and animal models and in humans. All of that's happening and so humans. All of that's happening and so humans. All of that's happening and so what I've really emboldened on using AI what I've really emboldened on using AI what I've really emboldened on using AI for is not to simulate something that for is not to simulate something that for is not to simulate something that hasn't been done yet, but it's actually hasn't been done yet, but it's actually hasn't been done yet, but it's actually to find connections between what has to find connections between what has to find connections between what has been done. So we know you know the been done. So we know you know the been done. So we know you know the example earlier that one lab found example earlier that one lab found example earlier that one lab found increased PD-1 expression in this one increased PD-1 expression in this one increased PD-1 expression in this one form of cancer and this drug inhibits form of cancer and this drug inhibits form of cancer and this drug inhibits PD-1. So therefore let's make a PD-1. So therefore let's make a PD-1. So therefore let's make a connection that no one had made yet. So connection that no one had made yet. So connection that no one had made yet. So there are two truths that hadn't been there are two truths that hadn't been there are two truths that hadn't been connected, you know, A you know and B connected, you know, A you know and B connected, you know, A you know and B are connected, B and C are connected, are connected, B and C are connected, are connected, B and C are connected, let's connect A to C. And I think that let's connect A to C. And I think that let's connect A to C. And I think that AI is particularly well suited to AI is particularly well suited to AI is particularly well suited to find these patterns of things that we find these patterns of things that we find these patterns of things that we know. So it's not a total it's not know. So it's not a total it's not know. So it's not a total it's not a simulation, it's actually just a simulation, it's actually just a simulation, it's actually just connecting really like breadcrumbs into one story. really like breadcrumbs into one story. really like breadcrumbs into one story. You're a parent. I am. You're a parent. I am. You're a parent. I am. Uh how do you navigate health care for a how do you navigate health care for a how do you navigate health care for a kid knowing what you know about medicine kid knowing what you know about medicine kid knowing what you know about medicine and knowing what you know and knowing what you know and knowing what you know about what medicine doesn't know? about what medicine doesn't know? about what medicine doesn't know? I'm a very rigorous parent of two I'm a very rigorous parent of two I'm a very rigorous parent of two kids when it comes to health care. Yeah, kids when it comes to health care. Yeah, kids when it comes to health care. Yeah, I've got a 7-year-old and a 3-year-old I've got a 7-year-old and a 3-year-old I've got a 7-year-old and a 3-year-old which um it feels like a dream to be here talking it feels like a dream to be here talking it feels like a dream to be here talking to you 15 years after I went through all to you 15 years after I went through all to you 15 years after I went through all that I've gone through. Definitely feels that I've gone through. Definitely feels that I've gone through. Definitely feels like a dream that I'm able to tell you like a dream that I'm able to tell you like a dream that I'm able to tell you I've got a 7-year-old and a 3-year-old. I've got a 7-year-old and a 3-year-old. I've got a 7-year-old and a 3-year-old. I'm just I'm so lucky. But like you said I'm just I'm so lucky. But like you said I'm just I'm so lucky. But like you said um I'm really rigorous, you know, you know, I'm really rigorous, you know, you know, I'm really rigorous, you know, you know, one of my doctors suggest you know, try one of my doctors suggest you know, try one of my doctors suggest you know, try this for my daughter. I you know, this for my daughter. I you know, this for my daughter. I you know, ask a lot of questions. I'm I mean I try ask a lot of questions. I'm I mean I try ask a lot of questions. I'm I mean I try to really stay on top of things and it to really stay on top of things and it to really stay on top of things and it sort of gets me thinking about something sort of gets me thinking about something sort of gets me thinking about something I was hoping to ask you about and uh I was hoping to ask you about and uh I was hoping to ask you about and uh it's that over the course of my it's that over the course of my it's that over the course of my challenges and sort of ups and downs challenges and sort of ups and downs challenges and sort of ups and downs that I've had in my health and in that I've had in my health and in that I've had in my health and in the work that I've done to find the work that I've done to find the work that I've done to find treatments I've found that I think there's this I've found that I think there's this I've found that I think there's this circuit that I again I'd love to get circuit that I again I'd love to get circuit that I again I'd love to get your thoughts on. So your thoughts on. So your thoughts on. So I find that I find that I find that it starts with hope. So I'm hoping for it starts with hope. So I'm hoping for it starts with hope. So I'm hoping for some future. so maybe it's that my some future. so maybe it's that my some future. so maybe it's that my child's health condition will be child's health condition will be child's health condition will be improved or my health condition will be, improved or my health condition will be, improved or my health condition will be, but you know, you start with some sort but you know, you start with some sort but you know, you start with some sort of hope that you hope something will of hope that you hope something will of hope that you hope something will happen, and then that drives some amount happen, and then that drives some amount happen, and then that drives some amount of action. So, like maybe in my case, of action. So, like maybe in my case, of action. So, like maybe in my case, you know, I would run experiments on my you know, I would run experiments on my you know, I would run experiments on my own blood samples, and then that results own blood samples, and then that results own blood samples, and then that results in some impact that um you know, maybe I in some impact that um you know, maybe I in some impact that um you know, maybe I get learn something, and maybe that get learn something, and maybe that get learn something, and maybe that drug's going to work for me. And that drug's going to work for me. And that drug's going to work for me. And that impact gives me more hope, and then it impact gives me more hope, and then it impact gives me more hope, and then it creates this circuit. So, it's creates this circuit. So, it's creates this circuit. So, it's hope, action, impact, which gives you hope, action, impact, which gives you hope, action, impact, which gives you more hope, action, impact. And I haven't more hope, action, impact. And I haven't more hope, action, impact. And I haven't figured out exactly like if there's some figured out exactly like if there's some figured out exactly like if there's some neuroscience behind this, but some neuroscience behind this, but some neuroscience behind this, but I found that for me and just I found that for me and just I found that for me and just thinking about, you know, the your thinking about, you know, the your thinking about, you know, the your question around whether that's, you question around whether that's, you question around whether that's, you know, helping your child with a medical know, helping your child with a medical know, helping your child with a medical issue that they're facing or again, my issue that they're facing or again, my issue that they're facing or again, my own, that circuit has just been a own, that circuit has just been a own, that circuit has just been a game changer for me. I don't know if game changer for me. I don't know if game changer for me. I don't know if there's if there's some neuroscience there's if there's some neuroscience there's if there's some neuroscience behind that you could help me to behind that you could help me to behind that you could help me to understand this hope action impact. understand this hope action impact. understand this hope action impact. Uh there absolutely is, and uh the Uh there absolutely is, and uh the Uh there absolutely is, and uh the person who deserves credit for um person who deserves credit for um person who deserves credit for um revealing this circuit is my colleague revealing this circuit is my colleague revealing this circuit is my colleague Joe Parvizi at Stanford. He's a Joe Parvizi at Stanford. He's a Joe Parvizi at Stanford. He's a neurosurgeon. Wow. neurosurgeon. Wow. neurosurgeon. Wow. &gt;&gt; Who was in the brain of awake patients &gt;&gt; Who was in the brain of awake patients &gt;&gt; Who was in the brain of awake patients uh stimulating different brain areas uh stimulating different brain areas uh stimulating different brain areas uh in anticipation of a neurosurgery like in anticipation of a neurosurgery like in anticipation of a neurosurgery like you described earlier, and had you described earlier, and had you described earlier, and had electrodes in a structure called the uh electrodes in a structure called the uh electrodes in a structure called the uh midcingulate cortex. midcingulate cortex. midcingulate cortex. Um it's part of a larger network, of Um it's part of a larger network, of Um it's part of a larger network, of course, as is every brain structure. Uh course, as is every brain structure. Uh course, as is every brain structure. Uh and he noticed when he stimulated a and he noticed when he stimulated a and he noticed when he stimulated a subregion called the anterior subregion called the anterior subregion called the anterior midcingulate cortex midcingulate cortex midcingulate cortex that patients would report in real time that patients would report in real time that patients would report in real time that they felt like they were some that they felt like they were some that they felt like they were some challenge and a bearing down on them, challenge and a bearing down on them, challenge and a bearing down on them, like going into a storm. Each one like going into a storm. Each one like going into a storm. Each one described it differently. But that the described it differently. But that the described it differently. But that the stimulation also made them feel as if stimulation also made them feel as if stimulation also made them feel as if they wanted to lean into that challenge. they wanted to lean into that challenge. they wanted to lean into that challenge. Now, here's where it gets really Now, here's where it gets really Now, here's where it gets really interesting. If he marches the electrode interesting. If he marches the electrode interesting. If he marches the electrode back a millimeter or less, back a millimeter or less, back a millimeter or less, completely different set of effects. completely different set of effects. completely different set of effects. Laterally, completely different set of Laterally, completely different set of Laterally, completely different set of effects. So, the anterior midcingulate effects. So, the anterior midcingulate effects. So, the anterior midcingulate cortex seems to be the seat of some sort cortex seems to be the seat of some sort cortex seems to be the seat of some sort of sense of tenacity to lean into of sense of tenacity to lean into of sense of tenacity to lean into challenge. &gt;&gt; Wow. It gets really interesting when you &gt;&gt; Wow. It gets really interesting when you &gt;&gt; Wow. It gets really interesting when you start looking at the data of kind of start looking at the data of kind of start looking at the data of kind of volumetric imaging of the structure in volumetric imaging of the structure in volumetric imaging of the structure in people that for instance successfully people that for instance successfully people that for instance successfully overcome obesity through exercise and overcome obesity through exercise and overcome obesity through exercise and diet or people who decide to undertake diet or people who decide to undertake diet or people who decide to undertake some other challenge like a cognitive some other challenge like a cognitive some other challenge like a cognitive challenge or learning how to dance, challenge or learning how to dance, challenge or learning how to dance, something that's challenging. Yeah. And something that's challenging. Yeah. And something that's challenging. Yeah. And then you look at the literature on then you look at the literature on then you look at the literature on longevity and you look at this group of longevity and you look at this group of longevity and you look at this group of so-called super agers which is a so-called super agers which is a so-called super agers which is a misnomer because they actually age very misnomer because they actually age very misnomer because they actually age very slowly, Right. slowly, Right. slowly, Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh and what you find is that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh and what you find is that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh and what you find is that psychologically they report a very psychologically they report a very psychologically they report a very strong will to live. strong will to live. strong will to live. And their anterior midcingulate cortex And their anterior midcingulate cortex And their anterior midcingulate cortex is the one of just several areas that is the one of just several areas that is the one of just several areas that seems to maintain volume as they age seems to maintain volume as they age seems to maintain volume as they age &gt;&gt; Wow. relative to these age-matched &gt;&gt; Wow. relative to these age-matched &gt;&gt; Wow. relative to these age-matched cohorts. Now, none of these are perfect cohorts. Now, none of these are perfect cohorts. Now, none of these are perfect experiments on their own, but when you experiments on their own, but when you experiments on their own, but when you start to put these together as a start to put these together as a start to put these together as a collection of things, you realize that collection of things, you realize that collection of things, you realize that all the things that are the reverse of all the things that are the reverse of all the things that are the reverse of depression. So, what's major depression? depression. So, what's major depression? depression. So, what's major depression? A a lack of positive anticipation of the A a lack of positive anticipation of the A a lack of positive anticipation of the future. Um lack of understanding or belief rather, lack of understanding or belief rather, lack of understanding or belief rather, lack of belief that changing one's lack of belief that changing one's lack of belief that changing one's behavior could change circumstances like behavior could change circumstances like behavior could change circumstances like at a job or new relationship or overcome at a job or new relationship or overcome at a job or new relationship or overcome something. And you see the exact inverse of that in And you see the exact inverse of that in And you see the exact inverse of that in people with a kind of naturally large or people with a kind of naturally large or people with a kind of naturally large or perhaps um perhaps um perhaps um self-fertilized anterior midcingulate cortex. These anterior midcingulate cortex. These anterior midcingulate cortex. These people report a lot of positive people report a lot of positive people report a lot of positive anticipation about some hopeful future anticipation about some hopeful future anticipation about some hopeful future event. Wow. And it's not always a big event. Wow. And it's not always a big event. Wow. And it's not always a big monumental thing. Sometimes these are monumental thing. Sometimes these are monumental thing. Sometimes these are you know, closer milestones. Sometimes you know, closer milestones. Sometimes you know, closer milestones. Sometimes it's a bigger thing. And they live it's a bigger thing. And they live it's a bigger thing. And they live longer and they have this incredible longer and they have this incredible longer and they have this incredible will to live. So, it seems that you will to live. So, it seems that you will to live. So, it seems that you know, taking this to its kind of extreme know, taking this to its kind of extreme know, taking this to its kind of extreme conclusion that the will to live sits conclusion that the will to live sits conclusion that the will to live sits somewhere in the network of this somewhere in the network of this somewhere in the network of this structure. It's not just this structure structure. It's not just this structure structure. It's not just this structure and it's intimately con- related to and it's intimately con- related to and it's intimately con- related to dopamine networks. So, reward reinforcement and networks. So, reward reinforcement and networks. So, reward reinforcement and learning networks and all the rest. learning networks and all the rest. learning networks and all the rest. Yeah. Um but, you know, it's hard to Yeah. Um but, you know, it's hard to Yeah. Um but, you know, it's hard to pinpoint one structure, but if I had to, pinpoint one structure, but if I had to, pinpoint one structure, but if I had to, you know, put a pin in one structure, it you know, put a pin in one structure, it you know, put a pin in one structure, it would be Joe Parvizi's discovery of the would be Joe Parvizi's discovery of the would be Joe Parvizi's discovery of the anterior midcingulate cortex, and it has anterior midcingulate cortex, and it has anterior midcingulate cortex, and it has all the elements of you described hope, all the elements of you described hope, all the elements of you described hope, Yep. uh plan, Yep. and action. Yep. uh plan, Yep. and action. Yep. uh plan, Yep. and action. &gt;&gt; Repeat. Yes. And so, for people who are &gt;&gt; Repeat. Yes. And so, for people who are &gt;&gt; Repeat. Yes. And so, for people who are not ill or who are ill, having that um not ill or who are ill, having that um not ill or who are ill, having that um sequence, I had a good friend who was in sequence, I had a good friend who was in sequence, I had a good friend who was in uh Tier 1 Special Operations, uh Tier 1 Special Operations, uh Tier 1 Special Operations, uh in the SEAL Teams, he described uh in the SEAL Teams, he described uh in the SEAL Teams, he described this as um when there's a challenge, you this as um when there's a challenge, you this as um when there's a challenge, you have to shorten the horizon, Mhm. have to shorten the horizon, Mhm. have to shorten the horizon, Mhm. get a forward center of mass, but think get a forward center of mass, but think get a forward center of mass, but think duration, path, and outcome. path, and outcome. path, and outcome. What path, how long, outcome, iterate. What path, how long, outcome, iterate. What path, how long, outcome, iterate. And it's the same way you work down a And it's the same way you work down a And it's the same way you work down a football field is the way you work you, football field is the way you work you, football field is the way you work you, you know, how lay through these you know, how lay through these you know, how lay through these challenges. So, um again, I'm challenges. So, um again, I'm challenges. So, um again, I'm creating a tapestry from a bunch of creating a tapestry from a bunch of creating a tapestry from a bunch of disparate things here, but none of disparate things here, but none of disparate things here, but none of it is outside the realm of it is outside the realm of it is outside the realm of peer-reviewed science. It all sits peer-reviewed science. It all sits peer-reviewed science. It all sits there. Um so, uh we haven't scanned your there. Um so, uh we haven't scanned your there. Um so, uh we haven't scanned your brain. I don't think we need to know brain. I don't think we need to know brain. I don't think we need to know that your anterior midcingulate cortex that your anterior midcingulate cortex that your anterior midcingulate cortex is clearly um very robust, and I would is clearly um very robust, and I would is clearly um very robust, and I would wager the hypothesis that it was wager the hypothesis that it was wager the hypothesis that it was probably um probably um probably um built and reinforced through your built and reinforced through your built and reinforced through your postering up of athletic goals on the postering up of athletic goals on the postering up of athletic goals on the wall of your childhood bedroom. I think wall of your childhood bedroom. I think wall of your childhood bedroom. I think you're right. I think you're right. you're right. I think you're right. you're right. I think you're right. Yeah, the Yeah, the Yeah, the more you work, you know, the better the more you work, you know, the better the more you work, you know, the better your times get, the better those numbers your times get, the better those numbers your times get, the better those numbers get. And then, you know, as you said, it get. And then, you know, as you said, it get. And then, you know, as you said, it becomes a true circuit, you know, it becomes a true circuit, you know, it becomes a true circuit, you know, the thing you're hoping for, when you the thing you're hoping for, when you the thing you're hoping for, when you get closer to that thing you're hoping get closer to that thing you're hoping get closer to that thing you're hoping for, it drives you to take more action, for, it drives you to take more action, for, it drives you to take more action, and then and then you can you can keep and then and then you can you can keep and then and then you can you can keep going in that circuit. Well, clearly you going in that circuit. Well, clearly you going in that circuit. Well, clearly you are living in that circuit, and it lives are living in that circuit, and it lives are living in that circuit, and it lives in you. in you. in you. Could you tell us about ways that people Could you tell us about ways that people Could you tell us about ways that people can get involved with Everycure? can get involved with Everycure? can get involved with Everycure? Uh I have to imagine more information is I have to imagine more information is I have to imagine more information is better than less. Sure. better than less. Sure. better than less. Sure. &gt;&gt; So, what can people do? Sure. So, um &gt;&gt; So, what can people do? Sure. So, um &gt;&gt; So, what can people do? Sure. So, um anyone can go to everycure.org/ideas anyone can go to everycure.org/ideas anyone can go to everycure.org/ideas and tell us about maybe there's a drug and tell us about maybe there's a drug and tell us about maybe there's a drug that you were prescribed off-label by that you were prescribed off-label by that you were prescribed off-label by your doctor. Or maybe you're a your doctor. Or maybe you're a your doctor. Or maybe you're a researcher and you think that a drug researcher and you think that a drug researcher and you think that a drug could be used in a new way. So, you can could be used in a new way. So, you can could be used in a new way. So, you can go to everycure.org/ideas, go to everycure.org/ideas, go to everycure.org/ideas, tell us about that medicine, and tell us about that medicine, and tell us about that medicine, and we'll look into it. We'll compare it we'll look into it. We'll compare it we'll look into it. We'll compare it next to our AI predictions, and next to our AI predictions, and next to our AI predictions, and we'll determine whether maybe it can be we'll determine whether maybe it can be we'll determine whether maybe it can be moved forward. Um if you're an expert, moved forward. Um if you're an expert, moved forward. Um if you're an expert, say in neuroscience, or you name the say in neuroscience, or you name the say in neuroscience, or you name the area, you can go to area, you can go to area, you can go to everycure.org/experts, and you can sign up so that if we find and you can sign up so that if we find and you can sign up so that if we find uh a drug that might be useful for a uh a drug that might be useful for a uh a drug that might be useful for a condition that you're an expert in, you condition that you're an expert in, you condition that you're an expert in, you might be able to give us advice and might be able to give us advice and might be able to give us advice and guidance on, you know, maybe what the guidance on, you know, maybe what the guidance on, you know, maybe what the right development path is. And anyone right development path is. And anyone right development path is. And anyone who's watching can help us to raise who's watching can help us to raise who's watching can help us to raise awareness about the work that we're awareness about the work that we're awareness about the work that we're doing. So, you can follow us on social doing. So, you can follow us on social doing. So, you can follow us on social media at everycure.org and beyond. media at everycure.org and beyond. media at everycure.org and beyond. Um I had did a TED Talk recently. You Um I had did a TED Talk recently. You Um I had did a TED Talk recently. You can help spread the word and check that can help spread the word and check that can help spread the word and check that out. And finally, of course, people can out. And finally, of course, people can out. And finally, of course, people can support our work financially. We're a support our work financially. We're a support our work financially. We're a nonprofit organization. Clinical trials nonprofit organization. Clinical trials nonprofit organization. Clinical trials are expensive. You can go online are expensive. You can go online are expensive. You can go online everycure.org/donate and donate to our work. And we're just and donate to our work. And we're just and donate to our work. And we're just so excited for this opportunity we have so excited for this opportunity we have so excited for this opportunity we have to help people with the drugs that we to help people with the drugs that we to help people with the drugs that we have. But we realize that it we can't do have. But we realize that it we can't do have. But we realize that it we can't do it alone. We actually really need the it alone. We actually really need the it alone. We actually really need the whole community to get behind us. whole community to get behind us. whole community to get behind us. Where's funding currently derived from? Where's funding currently derived from? Where's funding currently derived from? Is it just public support? So, right Is it just public support? So, right Is it just public support? So, right now, um about half of our funding now, um about half of our funding now, um about half of our funding actually comes from the US government, actually comes from the US government, actually comes from the US government, from an agency called ARPA-H. Um they're from an agency called ARPA-H. Um they're from an agency called ARPA-H. Um they're one of our earliest supporters, and the one of our earliest supporters, and the one of our earliest supporters, and the other half um comes from individuals other half um comes from individuals other half um comes from individuals who've decided that this is important. who've decided that this is important. who've decided that this is important. Um it may be that they have a loved one Um it may be that they have a loved one Um it may be that they have a loved one that has a condition that they would that has a condition that they would that has a condition that they would love for us to work on, or maybe it's love for us to work on, or maybe it's love for us to work on, or maybe it's that they just want to see um you know, that they just want to see um you know, that they just want to see um you know, us be able to help patients with us be able to help patients with us be able to help patients with the drugs that we already have. And um the drugs that we already have. And um the drugs that we already have. And um we are just so excited of that we are just so excited of that we are just so excited of that opportunity to match the drugs that we opportunity to match the drugs that we opportunity to match the drugs that we have to the patients who need them. have to the patients who need them. have to the patients who need them. Fantastic. And I should ask, um if a Fantastic. And I should ask, um if a Fantastic. And I should ask, um if a drug application is discovered, is there drug application is discovered, is there drug application is discovered, is there a feedback mechanism for you guys to a feedback mechanism for you guys to a feedback mechanism for you guys to derive income from it, or this is a derive income from it, or this is a derive income from it, or this is a completely nonprofit? completely nonprofit? completely nonprofit? &gt;&gt; It's completely nonprofit. So, I think &gt;&gt; It's completely nonprofit. So, I think &gt;&gt; It's completely nonprofit. So, I think by the end of, you know, let's say the by the end of, you know, let's say the by the end of, you know, let's say the next few years, I will guess that nearly next few years, I will guess that nearly next few years, I will guess that nearly all of the opportunities that we advance all of the opportunities that we advance all of the opportunities that we advance forward are the same dose, the same forward are the same dose, the same forward are the same dose, the same formula. No one makes any money off of formula. No one makes any money off of formula. No one makes any money off of them whatsoever. I there'll be rare them whatsoever. I there'll be rare them whatsoever. I there'll be rare cases where, let's say the drug looks cases where, let's say the drug looks cases where, let's say the drug looks like it'll be effective, but it needs to like it'll be effective, but it needs to like it'll be effective, but it needs to get into the brain where a tweak will get into the brain where a tweak will get into the brain where a tweak will have to be made where a different dose have to be made where a different dose have to be made where a different dose or a formulation will be needed. I think or a formulation will be needed. I think or a formulation will be needed. I think they'll probably be rare cases where they'll probably be rare cases where they'll probably be rare cases where probably a company will be needed to be probably a company will be needed to be probably a company will be needed to be spun out to do it. But for the vast spun out to do it. But for the vast spun out to do it. But for the vast majority, we're nonprofit. We just want majority, we're nonprofit. We just want majority, we're nonprofit. We just want to take the drugs we already have to use to take the drugs we already have to use to take the drugs we already have to use them um for the diseases they could them um for the diseases they could them um for the diseases they could benefit from them. Terrific. We'll put a benefit from them. Terrific. We'll put a benefit from them. Terrific. We'll put a link to it in the show notes and link to it in the show notes and link to it in the show notes and caption. &gt;&gt; David, thank you so much for coming here &gt;&gt; David, thank you so much for coming here &gt;&gt; David, thank you so much for coming here today to share your story with us and a today to share your story with us and a today to share your story with us and a just a ton of actionable knowledge for just a ton of actionable knowledge for just a ton of actionable knowledge for people that are healthy people that are healthy people that are healthy continue to explore options safely. Yep. continue to explore options safely. Yep. continue to explore options safely. Yep. Think about what's possible, understand Think about what's possible, understand Think about what's possible, understand there are things that are known, there are things that are known, there are things that are known, there are a lot of unknowns, and again, are a lot of unknowns, and again, are a lot of unknowns, and again, explore safely. For people that are ill, explore safely. For people that are ill, explore safely. For people that are ill, find a disease-related group that really find a disease-related group that really find a disease-related group that really has um an eye on what's new, what's um an eye on what's new, what's um an eye on what's new, what's existing, who the best people are. existing, who the best people are. existing, who the best people are. Search for a few of those is kind of Search for a few of those is kind of Search for a few of those is kind of what I took away from that. And um what I took away from that. And um what I took away from that. And um thank you for doing the work you do. thank you for doing the work you do. thank you for doing the work you do. It's amazing. We need more people like It's amazing. We need more people like It's amazing. We need more people like you. Uh you're truly one of a kind. So, you. Uh you're truly one of a kind. So, you. Uh you're truly one of a kind. So, we're immensely grateful uh that you've we're immensely grateful uh that you've we're immensely grateful uh that you've taken hardship and transmuted it into so taken hardship and transmuted it into so taken hardship and transmuted it into so much good and love to have you back much good and love to have you back much good and love to have you back sometime to talk about all the sometime to talk about all the sometime to talk about all the millions of other things we didn't have millions of other things we didn't have millions of other things we didn't have time to talk about, but this has been time to talk about, but this has been time to talk about, but this has been incredibly enriching for me, and I'm incredibly enriching for me, and I'm incredibly enriching for me, and I'm certain it has for everyone else. Well, certain it has for everyone else. Well, certain it has for everyone else. Well, thanks so much for having me. Thanks for thanks so much for having me. Thanks for thanks so much for having me. Thanks for all that you do to advance the public all that you do to advance the public all that you do to advance the public health and also to get the word out health and also to get the word out health and also to get the word out about the work we're doing through about the work we're doing through about the work we're doing through EveryCure. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. David Fajgenbaum. To discussion with Dr. David Fajgenbaum. To discussion with Dr. David Fajgenbaum. To learn more about his laboratory's work learn more about his laboratory's work learn more about his laboratory's work and his nonprofit EveryCure, please see and his nonprofit EveryCure, please see and his nonprofit EveryCure, please see the show note captions. If you're the show note captions. If you're the show note captions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. David today's discussion with Dr. David today's discussion with Dr. David Faganbaum. And last, but certainly not Faganbaum. And last, but certainly not Faganbaum. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science.