Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. And now for Stamford School of Medicine. And now for Stamford School of Medicine. And now for my discussion with Dr. Eddie Chang. my discussion with Dr. Eddie Chang. my discussion with Dr. Eddie Chang. Eddie, welcome. Eddie, welcome. Eddie, welcome. &gt;&gt; Hi. Hi, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Hi. Hi, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Hi. Hi, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Great to be here with you. Your main &gt;&gt; Great to be here with you. Your main &gt;&gt; Great to be here with you. Your main focus these days is the neurobiology of focus these days is the neurobiology of focus these days is the neurobiology of speech and language. So for those that speech and language. So for those that speech and language. So for those that aren't familiar, could you please aren't familiar, could you please aren't familiar, could you please distinguish for us speech versus distinguish for us speech versus distinguish for us speech versus language in terms of whether or not language in terms of whether or not language in terms of whether or not different brain areas control them? When different brain areas control them? When different brain areas control them? When I think about language, I think about I think about language, I think about I think about language, I think about words and just talking. If I sit down to words and just talking. If I sit down to words and just talking. If I sit down to do a long podcast or I think about do a long podcast or I think about do a long podcast or I think about asking you a question, I don't even asking you a question, I don't even asking you a question, I don't even think about the words I want to say very think about the words I want to say very think about the words I want to say very much. I mean, I have to think about them much. I mean, I have to think about them much. I mean, I have to think about them a little bit. one would hope, but I a little bit. one would hope, but I a little bit. one would hope, but I don't think about individual syllables don't think about individual syllables don't think about individual syllables unless I'm trying to, you know, accent unless I'm trying to, you know, accent unless I'm trying to, you know, accent something or it's a word that I have a something or it's a word that I have a something or it's a word that I have a particular difficulty saying or I want particular difficulty saying or I want particular difficulty saying or I want to change the cadence, etc. So, what in to change the cadence, etc. So, what in to change the cadence, etc. So, what in the world is contained in these brain the world is contained in these brain the world is contained in these brain areas? What is represented? Um, to me is areas? What is represented? Um, to me is areas? What is represented? Um, to me is perhaps one of the most interesting is perhaps one of the most interesting is perhaps one of the most interesting questions and I know this lands square questions and I know this lands square questions and I know this lands square in your wheelhouse. in your wheelhouse. in your wheelhouse. &gt;&gt; Sure. Let's get into this uh Andrew &gt;&gt; Sure. Let's get into this uh Andrew &gt;&gt; Sure. Let's get into this uh Andrew because this is one of the most exciting because this is one of the most exciting because this is one of the most exciting stuff that's happening right now is stuff that's happening right now is stuff that's happening right now is understanding how the brain processes understanding how the brain processes understanding how the brain processes these exact questions. And speech these exact questions. And speech these exact questions. And speech corresponds to the communication signal. corresponds to the communication signal. corresponds to the communication signal. It corresponds to me moving my mouth and It corresponds to me moving my mouth and It corresponds to me moving my mouth and my vocal tract to generate words. And my vocal tract to generate words. And my vocal tract to generate words. And you're hearing these as an auditory you're hearing these as an auditory you're hearing these as an auditory signal. Language is something much signal. Language is something much signal. Language is something much broader. So it refers to what you're broader. So it refers to what you're broader. So it refers to what you're extracting from the words that I'm extracting from the words that I'm extracting from the words that I'm saying. We call that pragmatics and sort saying. We call that pragmatics and sort saying. We call that pragmatics and sort of are you getting the gist of what I'm of are you getting the gist of what I'm of are you getting the gist of what I'm saying? There's another aspect of it saying? There's another aspect of it saying? There's another aspect of it that we call semantics. Do you that we call semantics. Do you that we call semantics. Do you understand the meaning of these words understand the meaning of these words understand the meaning of these words and uh the sentences? There's another and uh the sentences? There's another and uh the sentences? There's another part that we call syntax which refers to part that we call syntax which refers to part that we call syntax which refers to how the words are assembled in a how the words are assembled in a how the words are assembled in a grammatical form. So those are all grammatical form. So those are all grammatical form. So those are all really critical parts of language and really critical parts of language and really critical parts of language and speech is just one form of language. speech is just one form of language. speech is just one form of language. There's many other forms like sign There's many other forms like sign There's many other forms like sign language, uh, reading. Those are all language, uh, reading. Those are all language, uh, reading. Those are all important modalities for reading. Our important modalities for reading. Our important modalities for reading. Our research really focuses on this area research really focuses on this area research really focuses on this area that we're calling speech. Again, the that we're calling speech. Again, the that we're calling speech. Again, the production of this audio signal, which production of this audio signal, which production of this audio signal, which you can't see, but your microphones are you can't see, but your microphones are you can't see, but your microphones are picking up. There are these vibrations picking up. There are these vibrations picking up. There are these vibrations in the air that are created by my vocal in the air that are created by my vocal in the air that are created by my vocal tract that are picked up by the tract that are picked up by the tract that are picked up by the microphone in the case of this microphone in the case of this microphone in the case of this recording, but also picked up by the recording, but also picked up by the recording, but also picked up by the sensors in your ear. The very tiny sensors in your ear. The very tiny sensors in your ear. The very tiny vibrations in your uh ear are picking vibrations in your uh ear are picking vibrations in your uh ear are picking that up and translating that into that up and translating that into that up and translating that into electrical activity. It's such a complex electrical activity. It's such a complex electrical activity. It's such a complex feat. Some people would say it's the feat. Some people would say it's the feat. Some people would say it's the most complex motor thing that we do as a most complex motor thing that we do as a most complex motor thing that we do as a species is just speaking. not you species is just speaking. not you species is just speaking. not you know the extreme feats of acrobatics or know the extreme feats of acrobatics or know the extreme feats of acrobatics or athleticism but speaking athleticism but speaking athleticism but speaking &gt;&gt; well and especially when uh one observes &gt;&gt; well and especially when uh one observes &gt;&gt; well and especially when uh one observes you know uh opera or um people who you know uh opera or um people who you know uh opera or um people who you know freestyle rappers you know and of know freestyle rappers you know and of know freestyle rappers you know and of course it's not just the lips it's the course it's not just the lips it's the course it's not just the lips it's the tongue &gt;&gt; and you've mentioned two other &gt;&gt; and you've mentioned two other &gt;&gt; and you've mentioned two other structures ferinx and larynx are the structures ferinx and larynx are the structures ferinx and larynx are the main ones that um can you tell us just main ones that um can you tell us just main ones that um can you tell us just educate us at a superficial level just educate us at a superficial level just educate us at a superficial level what this ferinx and larynx do what this ferinx and larynx do what this ferinx and larynx do differentially because I think most differentially because I think most differentially because I think most people aren't going to Okay, sure. I'll people aren't going to Okay, sure. I'll people aren't going to Okay, sure. I'll talk primarily about the larynx here for talk primarily about the larynx here for talk primarily about the larynx here for a second, which is that if you think a second, which is that if you think a second, which is that if you think about when we're speaking, really what about when we're speaking, really what about when we're speaking, really what we're doing is we're shaping the breath. we're doing is we're shaping the breath. we're doing is we're shaping the breath. So, even before you get to the larynx, So, even before you get to the larynx, So, even before you get to the larynx, you got to start with the expiration. We you got to start with the expiration. We you got to start with the expiration. We fill up our lungs and then we push the fill up our lungs and then we push the fill up our lungs and then we push the air out. That's a normal part of air out. That's a normal part of air out. That's a normal part of breathing. What is really amazing about breathing. What is really amazing about breathing. What is really amazing about speech and language is that we evolved speech and language is that we evolved speech and language is that we evolved to take advantage of that normal to take advantage of that normal to take advantage of that normal physiologic thing at a larynx. And what physiologic thing at a larynx. And what physiologic thing at a larynx. And what the larynx does is that when you're the larynx does is that when you're the larynx does is that when you're exhaling, it brings the vocal folds exhaling, it brings the vocal folds exhaling, it brings the vocal folds together. Some people call them vocal together. Some people call them vocal together. Some people call them vocal cords. They're not really cords. They're cords. They're not really cords. They're cords. They're not really cords. They're really vocal folds. They're two pieces really vocal folds. They're two pieces really vocal folds. They're two pieces of tissue that come together and a of tissue that come together and a of tissue that come together and a muscle brings them together. And then muscle brings them together. And then muscle brings them together. And then what happens is when the air comes what happens is when the air comes what happens is when the air comes through the vocal folds, when they're through the vocal folds, when they're through the vocal folds, when they're together, they vibrate at really high together, they vibrate at really high together, they vibrate at really high frequencies, like 100 to 200 hertz. And frequencies, like 100 to 200 hertz. And frequencies, like 100 to 200 hertz. And the reason why men and women generally the reason why men and women generally the reason why men and women generally have different voice qualities is it has have different voice qualities is it has have different voice qualities is it has to do with the size of the larynx and to do with the size of the larynx and to do with the size of the larynx and the shape of it. Okay? So in general men the shape of it. Okay? So in general men the shape of it. Okay? So in general men have a larger voice box or larynx and have a larger voice box or larynx and have a larger voice box or larynx and the vibrating frequency the resonance the vibrating frequency the resonance the vibrating frequency the resonance frequency of the vocal folds when the frequency of the vocal folds when the frequency of the vocal folds when the air comes through them is about 100 air comes through them is about 100 air comes through them is about 100 hertz for men and about 200 for women. hertz for men and about 200 for women. hertz for men and about 200 for women. So you take a breath in. As the air is So you take a breath in. As the air is So you take a breath in. As the air is coming out, the vocal folds come coming out, the vocal folds come coming out, the vocal folds come together. The air goes through. That together. The air goes through. That together. The air goes through. That creates the sound of the voice that we creates the sound of the voice that we creates the sound of the voice that we call voicing. It's not just your voice call voicing. It's not just your voice call voicing. It's not just your voice characteristic. It's the energy of your characteristic. It's the energy of your characteristic. It's the energy of your voice. It's coming from the larynx voice. It's coming from the larynx voice. It's coming from the larynx there. It's a noise. And then it's the there. It's a noise. And then it's the there. It's a noise. And then it's the source of the voice. And then what source of the voice. And then what source of the voice. And then what happens is that energy that sound goes happens is that energy that sound goes happens is that energy that sound goes up through the parts of the vocal tract up through the parts of the vocal tract up through the parts of the vocal tract like the fairings into the oral cavity like the fairings into the oral cavity like the fairings into the oral cavity which is your mouth and your tongue and which is your mouth and your tongue and which is your mouth and your tongue and your lips. And what those things are your lips. And what those things are your lips. And what those things are doing is that they're shaping this the doing is that they're shaping this the doing is that they're shaping this the air in particular ways that create air in particular ways that create air in particular ways that create consonants and vowels. That's what I consonants and vowels. That's what I consonants and vowels. That's what I mean by shaping the breath. It just mean by shaping the breath. It just mean by shaping the breath. It just starts with this exhalation. You starts with this exhalation. You starts with this exhalation. You generate the voice in the larynx and generate the voice in the larynx and generate the voice in the larynx and then everything above the larynx is then everything above the larynx is then everything above the larynx is moving around just like the way my mouth moving around just like the way my mouth moving around just like the way my mouth is doing right now to shape that air is doing right now to shape that air is doing right now to shape that air into particular patterns that you can into particular patterns that you can into particular patterns that you can hear is words immediately makes me hear is words immediately makes me hear is words immediately makes me wonder about more um primitive or wonder about more um primitive or wonder about more um primitive or non-learned vocalizations like crying or non-learned vocalizations like crying or non-learned vocalizations like crying or laughter. Are those produced by the laughter. Are those produced by the laughter. Are those produced by the language areas or do they have their own language areas or do they have their own language areas or do they have their own unique neural structures? unique neural structures? unique neural structures? &gt;&gt; We call those vocalizations. A &gt;&gt; We call those vocalizations. A &gt;&gt; We call those vocalizations. A vocalization is basically where someone vocalization is basically where someone vocalization is basically where someone can create a sound like a cry or a moan can create a sound like a cry or a moan can create a sound like a cry or a moan that kind of sound. And it also involves that kind of sound. And it also involves that kind of sound. And it also involves the exhalation of air. It also involves the exhalation of air. It also involves the exhalation of air. It also involves some phonation at the level of larynx some phonation at the level of larynx some phonation at the level of larynx where the vocal folds come together to where the vocal folds come together to where the vocal folds come together to create that audible sound. But it turns create that audible sound. But it turns create that audible sound. But it turns out that those are actually different out that those are actually different out that those are actually different areas. So people who have injuries in areas. So people who have injuries in areas. So people who have injuries in the speech and language areas oftentimes the speech and language areas oftentimes the speech and language areas oftentimes can still moan. They can still vocalize. can still moan. They can still vocalize. can still moan. They can still vocalize. And it is a different part of the brain. And it is a different part of the brain. And it is a different part of the brain. I would say an area that uh even I would say an area that uh even I would say an area that uh even non-human primates have that can be non-human primates have that can be non-human primates have that can be specialized, you know, for vocalization. specialized, you know, for vocalization. specialized, you know, for vocalization. It's a different form of communication It's a different form of communication It's a different form of communication than words, for example. Speaking than words, for example. Speaking than words, for example. Speaking of storage of and ability to speak, you of storage of and ability to speak, you of storage of and ability to speak, you are doing some amazing work and have are doing some amazing work and have are doing some amazing work and have achieved some um pretty incredible achieved some um pretty incredible achieved some um pretty incredible well-deserved recognition for your work well-deserved recognition for your work well-deserved recognition for your work in bringing language out of paralyzed in bringing language out of paralyzed in bringing language out of paralyzed people. essentially allowing people who people. essentially allowing people who people. essentially allowing people who are locked in to a paralyzed state or are locked in to a paralyzed state or are locked in to a paralyzed state or otherwise unable to articulate speech otherwise unable to articulate speech otherwise unable to articulate speech using brain machine interface using brain machine interface using brain machine interface essentially translating the neural essentially translating the neural essentially translating the neural activity of areas of the brain that w activity of areas of the brain that w activity of areas of the brain that w would produce speech into hardware would produce speech into hardware would produce speech into hardware artificial non-biological tools in order artificial non-biological tools in order artificial non-biological tools in order to allow paralyzed people to allow paralyzed people to allow paralyzed people to communicate. &gt;&gt; So there are a series of conditions um &gt;&gt; So there are a series of conditions um &gt;&gt; So there are a series of conditions um they include things like brain stem they include things like brain stem they include things like brain stem stroke. The brain stem is the part of stroke. The brain stem is the part of stroke. The brain stem is the part of the brain that connects the cerebrum the brain that connects the cerebrum the brain that connects the cerebrum which is the top part does our thinking which is the top part does our thinking which is the top part does our thinking and a lot of the motor control, speech, and a lot of the motor control, speech, and a lot of the motor control, speech, language, everything. And the brain stem language, everything. And the brain stem language, everything. And the brain stem is what connects that to the spinal cord is what connects that to the spinal cord is what connects that to the spinal cord and the nerves that go out to the face and the nerves that go out to the face and the nerves that go out to the face and vocal tract. So if you have a stroke and vocal tract. So if you have a stroke and vocal tract. So if you have a stroke there, you could be thinking all the there, you could be thinking all the there, you could be thinking all the wild creative intelligent thoughts you wild creative intelligent thoughts you wild creative intelligent thoughts you have in the mind and the cerebrum, but have in the mind and the cerebrum, but have in the mind and the cerebrum, but you can't get them out into words or you can't get them out into words or you can't get them out into words or you can't get them out to your hand to write can't get them out to your hand to write can't get them out to your hand to write them down. So that's a very severe form them down. So that's a very severe form them down. So that's a very severe form of paralysis called brain stem stroke. of paralysis called brain stem stroke. of paralysis called brain stem stroke. There's another kind of conditions that There's another kind of conditions that There's another kind of conditions that we call neurogenerative where the nerve we call neurogenerative where the nerve we call neurogenerative where the nerve cells die basically or atrophy and a cells die basically or atrophy and a cells die basically or atrophy and a condition called uh ALS. That's a very condition called uh ALS. That's a very condition called uh ALS. That's a very severe form of paralysis. In its extreme severe form of paralysis. In its extreme severe form of paralysis. In its extreme form, people essentially lose all form, people essentially lose all form, people essentially lose all voluntary movement. The muscles to their voluntary movement. The muscles to their voluntary movement. The muscles to their diaphragm and their lungs essentially diaphragm and their lungs essentially diaphragm and their lungs essentially give out as well. They get weakness give out as well. They get weakness give out as well. They get weakness there and then they can't breathe there and then they can't breathe there and then they can't breathe anymore. In our field, these are kind of anymore. In our field, these are kind of anymore. In our field, these are kind of like the most devastating things that like the most devastating things that like the most devastating things that can happen. This condition of what we can happen. This condition of what we can happen. This condition of what we call being locked in refers to this idea call being locked in refers to this idea call being locked in refers to this idea that you can have completely intact that you can have completely intact that you can have completely intact cognition and awareness but have no way cognition and awareness but have no way cognition and awareness but have no way to express that. No voluntary movement, to express that. No voluntary movement, to express that. No voluntary movement, no ability to speak and that is no ability to speak and that is no ability to speak and that is devastating because uh psychologically devastating because uh psychologically devastating because uh psychologically and socially you know you're completely and socially you know you're completely and socially you know you're completely isolated. That's what we call locked in isolated. That's what we call locked in isolated. That's what we call locked in syndrome and it's devastating. So we've syndrome and it's devastating. So we've syndrome and it's devastating. So we've been studying this patterning of been studying this patterning of been studying this patterning of electrical activity for consonants and electrical activity for consonants and electrical activity for consonants and vowels. And essentially once we figured vowels. And essentially once we figured vowels. And essentially once we figured out a lot of these codes for the out a lot of these codes for the out a lot of these codes for the individual phonetic elements, part of individual phonetic elements, part of individual phonetic elements, part of the lab started to focus on this very the lab started to focus on this very the lab started to focus on this very specific question for people who have specific question for people who have specific question for people who have these kind of paralysis. Could we these kind of paralysis. Could we these kind of paralysis. Could we intercept those signals from the brain, intercept those signals from the brain, intercept those signals from the brain, the cerebral cortex, as someone is the cerebral cortex, as someone is the cerebral cortex, as someone is trying to say those words? And then can trying to say those words? And then can trying to say those words? And then can we intercept them and then have them we intercept them and then have them we intercept them and then have them taken out of the brain through wires to taken out of the brain through wires to taken out of the brain through wires to a computer that are going to interpret a computer that are going to interpret a computer that are going to interpret those signals and translate them into those signals and translate them into those signals and translate them into words. So we started a clinical trial. words. So we started a clinical trial. words. So we started a clinical trial. It's called the Bravo trial. It's still It's called the Bravo trial. It's still It's called the Bravo trial. It's still underway. And the first participant in underway. And the first participant in underway. And the first participant in the Bravo trial was a man who had been the Bravo trial was a man who had been the Bravo trial was a man who had been paralyzed for 15 years. He was in a car paralyzed for 15 years. He was in a car paralyzed for 15 years. He was in a car accident. He actually walked out of the accident. He actually walked out of the accident. He actually walked out of the hospital the day after that car hospital the day after that car hospital the day after that car accident, but the next day had a accident, but the next day had a accident, but the next day had a complication related to it where he had complication related to it where he had complication related to it where he had a very large stroke in the brain stem a very large stroke in the brain stem a very large stroke in the brain stem and that turned out to be devastating. and that turned out to be devastating. and that turned out to be devastating. He didn't wake up from that stroke for He didn't wake up from that stroke for He didn't wake up from that stroke for about a week. He was in a coma for about a week. He was in a coma for about a week. He was in a coma for about a week and when he woke up from that a week and when he woke up from that a week and when he woke up from that coma, he realized that he couldn't speak coma, he realized that he couldn't speak coma, he realized that he couldn't speak or move his arms or legs. As he told me or move his arms or legs. As he told me or move his arms or legs. As he told me or communicated to us, that was or communicated to us, that was or communicated to us, that was absolutely devastating. He wanted really absolutely devastating. He wanted really absolutely devastating. He wanted really to die at that time. to die at that time. to die at that time. &gt;&gt; Could he blink his eyes or move his &gt;&gt; Could he blink his eyes or move his &gt;&gt; Could he blink his eyes or move his mouth in any way? mouth in any way? mouth in any way? &gt;&gt; He could blink his eyes. He had some &gt;&gt; He could blink his eyes. He had some &gt;&gt; He could blink his eyes. He had some limited mouth movements but couldn't limited mouth movements but couldn't limited mouth movements but couldn't produce any intelligible speech. It was produce any intelligible speech. It was produce any intelligible speech. It was like completely slurred and like completely slurred and like completely slurred and incomprehensible. He survived this incomprehensible. He survived this incomprehensible. He survived this injury. A lot of people who have that injury. A lot of people who have that injury. A lot of people who have that kind of stroke just don't survive. The kind of stroke just don't survive. The kind of stroke just don't survive. The way he actually communicates because he way he actually communicates because he way he actually communicates because he has a little bit of residual neck has a little bit of residual neck has a little bit of residual neck movements is that he improvised and had movements is that he improvised and had movements is that he improvised and had his friends basically put a stick his friends basically put a stick his friends basically put a stick attached to his baseball cap because he attached to his baseball cap because he attached to his baseball cap because he could move his neck. He would could move his neck. He would could move his neck. He would essentially type out letters on a essentially type out letters on a essentially type out letters on a keyboard screen to get out words. In keyboard screen to get out words. In keyboard screen to get out words. In fact, this is how he communicated was fact, this is how he communicated was fact, this is how he communicated was through a device that he would through a device that he would through a device that he would essentially peck out letters one by one essentially peck out letters one by one essentially peck out letters one by one by moving his neck to control this stick by moving his neck to control this stick by moving his neck to control this stick attached to his baseball cap. He hadn't attached to his baseball cap. He hadn't attached to his baseball cap. He hadn't really spoken for about 15 years. really spoken for about 15 years. really spoken for about 15 years. &gt;&gt; Oh, goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh, goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh, goodness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it was part of a clinical &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it was part of a clinical &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it was part of a clinical trial. It was, you know, something that trial. It was, you know, something that trial. It was, you know, something that our hospital and also the FDA, you know, our hospital and also the FDA, you know, our hospital and also the FDA, you know, had to approve and looked at very had to approve and looked at very had to approve and looked at very carefully. But given a lot of the work carefully. But given a lot of the work carefully. But given a lot of the work that we had done, there was some basis that we had done, there was some basis that we had done, there was some basis for why this might work. And so we for why this might work. And so we for why this might work. And so we did a surgery where we implanted did a surgery where we implanted did a surgery where we implanted electrodes onto these areas that control the vocal onto these areas that control the vocal onto these areas that control the vocal tract, the areas that control the tract, the areas that control the tract, the areas that control the larynx, the areas that control the lips larynx, the areas that control the lips larynx, the areas that control the lips and tongue and jaw movements when we and tongue and jaw movements when we and tongue and jaw movements when we normally speak. These are areas that normally speak. These are areas that normally speak. These are areas that presumably may be active. That was our presumably may be active. That was our presumably may be active. That was our hope. And he underwent a surgery, a hope. And he underwent a surgery, a hope. And he underwent a surgery, a brain surgery. We put an electrode array brain surgery. We put an electrode array brain surgery. We put an electrode array and we connected it to a port that was and we connected it to a port that was and we connected it to a port that was sculled to uh screwed to his skull. And sculled to uh screwed to his skull. And sculled to uh screwed to his skull. And the port actually goes through his the port actually goes through his the port actually goes through his scalp. And he's lived with this now for scalp. And he's lived with this now for scalp. And he's lived with this now for the last three years. So he has an the last three years. So he has an the last three years. So he has an electrode array that's implanted over electrode array that's implanted over electrode array that's implanted over the part of the brain that's important the part of the brain that's important the part of the brain that's important for speech. It's connected to a port. for speech. It's connected to a port. for speech. It's connected to a port. And then we connect a wire to that port And then we connect a wire to that port And then we connect a wire to that port that translates those uh what we call that translates those uh what we call that translates those uh what we call analog, you know, brain waves and analog, you know, brain waves and analog, you know, brain waves and converts them into digital signals. We converts them into digital signals. We converts them into digital signals. We put them through a machine learning or put them through a machine learning or put them through a machine learning or artificial intelligence algorithm that artificial intelligence algorithm that artificial intelligence algorithm that can pick up these very subtle can pick up these very subtle can pick up these very subtle patterns. You can't actually see them patterns. You can't actually see them patterns. You can't actually see them with your eye uh in the brain with your eye uh in the brain with your eye uh in the brain activity and translate those into words. activity and translate those into words. activity and translate those into words. And this is something that took weeks to And this is something that took weeks to And this is something that took weeks to train the algorithm to interpret it train the algorithm to interpret it train the algorithm to interpret it correctly. But what was incredible about correctly. But what was incredible about correctly. But what was incredible about it was to see how he reacted. He would it was to see how he reacted. He would it was to see how he reacted. He would be prompted to say a given word like you be prompted to say a given word like you be prompted to say a given word like you know outside for example and then he know outside for example and then he know outside for example and then he would think about it try to say it and would think about it try to say it and would think about it try to say it and finally those words would appear on the finally those words would appear on the finally those words would appear on the screen. And what was really amazing screen. And what was really amazing screen. And what was really amazing about it was you could really tell that about it was you could really tell that about it was you could really tell that he like got a kick out of that because he like got a kick out of that because he like got a kick out of that because you know his body would shake in a way you know his body would shake in a way you know his body would shake in a way and his head would shake in a way that and his head would shake in a way that and his head would shake in a way that he would start to giggle. That was cool he would start to giggle. That was cool he would start to giggle. That was cool to see, but then I also realized that to see, but then I also realized that to see, but then I also realized that when he was giggling, it kind of screwed when he was giggling, it kind of screwed when he was giggling, it kind of screwed up the next words. Decoding. up the next words. Decoding. up the next words. Decoding. &gt;&gt; Is that a bug you've since uh fixed? &gt;&gt; Is that a bug you've since uh fixed? &gt;&gt; Is that a bug you've since uh fixed? &gt;&gt; No, we haven't fixed that. It's easier &gt;&gt; No, we haven't fixed that. It's easier &gt;&gt; No, we haven't fixed that. It's easier just to tell him to stop giggling. The just to tell him to stop giggling. The just to tell him to stop giggling. The way this worked was we trained uh this way this worked was we trained uh this way this worked was we trained uh this computer to recognize 50 words. We computer to recognize 50 words. We computer to recognize 50 words. We started with a very small vocabulary started with a very small vocabulary started with a very small vocabulary that's expanding as we speak. I think that's expanding as we speak. I think that's expanding as we speak. I think that this is just a matter of time that this is just a matter of time that this is just a matter of time before these vocabularies become much before these vocabularies become much before these vocabularies become much larger. But we started with a 50 much larger. But we started with a 50 much larger. But we started with a 50 set of words. We created essentially all set of words. We created essentially all set of words. We created essentially all the possible sentences that you could the possible sentences that you could the possible sentences that you could generate from those 50 words. Why that generate from those 50 words. Why that generate from those 50 words. Why that was important was you can use those all was important was you can use those all was important was you can use those all those possible sentences to create a those possible sentences to create a those possible sentences to create a computational model computer model of computational model computer model of computational model computer model of all the different word combinations to all the different word combinations to all the different word combinations to give different sentences given those 50 give different sentences given those 50 give different sentences given those 50 words. And then you can essentially do words. And then you can essentially do words. And then you can essentially do what we call autocorrect. It's the same what we call autocorrect. It's the same what we call autocorrect. It's the same kind of thing that we do when you're kind of thing that we do when you're kind of thing that we do when you're texting, for example, you get the wrong texting, for example, you get the wrong texting, for example, you get the wrong letter in there. Your phone actually letter in there. Your phone actually letter in there. Your phone actually knows, you know, because it's context knows, you know, because it's context knows, you know, because it's context what to correct it. So because the what to correct it. So because the what to correct it. So because the decoding is not 100% correct all the decoding is not 100% correct all the decoding is not 100% correct all the time. In fact, it's far from that. It's time. In fact, it's far from that. It's time. In fact, it's far from that. It's really helpful to have these other really helpful to have these other really helpful to have these other features like autocorrect, the stuff features like autocorrect, the stuff features like autocorrect, the stuff that we use routinely now with texting that we use routinely now with texting that we use routinely now with texting that makes it correct and then updates that makes it correct and then updates that makes it correct and then updates it. So, it's a combination of a lot of it. So, it's a combination of a lot of it. So, it's a combination of a lot of things. It's the AI that is translating things. It's the AI that is translating things. It's the AI that is translating those brain activity patterns, but it's those brain activity patterns, but it's those brain activity patterns, but it's also things that we've learned from also things that we've learned from also things that we've learned from speech and speech technologies that, you speech and speech technologies that, you speech and speech technologies that, you know, you put all together and then all know, you put all together and then all know, you put all together and then all of a sudden it starts to work. That was of a sudden it starts to work. That was of a sudden it starts to work. That was the first time that someone was the first time that someone was the first time that someone was paralyzed and could create words and paralyzed and could create words and paralyzed and could create words and sentences uh that was just decoded from sentences uh that was just decoded from sentences uh that was just decoded from the brain activity. the brain activity. the brain activity. &gt;&gt; These days, we hear a lot about neural &gt;&gt; These days, we hear a lot about neural &gt;&gt; These days, we hear a lot about neural link, Elon Musk's company. While brain link, Elon Musk's company. While brain link, Elon Musk's company. While brain machine interface of the sort that you machine interface of the sort that you machine interface of the sort that you do and that other laboratories do has do and that other laboratories do has do and that other laboratories do has been going on for a long time, there's been going on for a long time, there's been going on for a long time, there's been some press around neural link about been some press around neural link about been some press around neural link about the promise of what brain machine the promise of what brain machine the promise of what brain machine interface could do. What are your interface could do. What are your interface could do. What are your thoughts about manipulating neural thoughts about manipulating neural thoughts about manipulating neural circuitry to achieve suprahuman or circuitry to achieve suprahuman or circuitry to achieve suprahuman or superhuman or super physiological superhuman or super physiological superhuman or super physiological functions? And here we don't even have functions? And here we don't even have functions? And here we don't even have to think about neural link in to think about neural link in to think about neural link in particular. It's just but one example of particular. It's just but one example of particular. It's just but one example of companies and people in laboratories companies and people in laboratories companies and people in laboratories that are quite understandably that are quite understandably that are quite understandably considering all this. considering all this. considering all this. &gt;&gt; It's a really interesting time right &gt;&gt; It's a really interesting time right &gt;&gt; It's a really interesting time right now. The science has been going on for now. The science has been going on for now. The science has been going on for decades. The work that we've done in decades. The work that we've done in decades. The work that we've done in this field that you call brain machine this field that you call brain machine this field that you call brain machine interface. It's been going on for a interface. It's been going on for a interface. It's been going on for a while and a lot of the early work was while and a lot of the early work was while and a lot of the early work was just trying to restore things like arm just trying to restore things like arm just trying to restore things like arm movement or having people or monkeys movement or having people or monkeys movement or having people or monkeys control a computer cursor for example on control a computer cursor for example on control a computer cursor for example on the screen. That's been going on for the screen. That's been going on for the screen. That's been going on for decades. What's been really new is that decades. What's been really new is that decades. What's been really new is that industry is now involved and some industry is now involved and some industry is now involved and some of this now becoming commercialized and of this now becoming commercialized and of this now becoming commercialized and we're starting to see us now cross over we're starting to see us now cross over we're starting to see us now cross over to this field where it's no longer just to this field where it's no longer just to this field where it's no longer just research that we're talking about research that we're talking about research that we're talking about medical products um that are designed to medical products um that are designed to medical products um that are designed to be you know surgically implanted in some be you know surgically implanted in some be you know surgically implanted in some cases you know there's people doing this cases you know there's people doing this cases you know there's people doing this kind of work non-invasively as well that kind of work non-invasively as well that kind of work non-invasively as well that don't require surgery. The specific don't require surgery. The specific don't require surgery. The specific question that you were asking about is question that you were asking about is question that you were asking about is an area that we call augmentation. So an area that we call augmentation. So an area that we call augmentation. So can you build a device um that can you build a device um that can you build a device um that essentially enhances someone's ability essentially enhances someone's ability essentially enhances someone's ability beyond superan normal, super memory, beyond superan normal, super memory, beyond superan normal, super memory, super communication speeds, beyond super communication speeds, beyond super communication speeds, beyond speech for example, superior speech for example, superior speech for example, superior uh precision athletic abilities. I think uh precision athletic abilities. I think uh precision athletic abilities. I think that these are very serious kind of that these are very serious kind of that these are very serious kind of questions to be asking now because as questions to be asking now because as questions to be asking now because as you mentioned the pathway so far is you mentioned the pathway so far is you mentioned the pathway so far is really to focus on these medical really to focus on these medical really to focus on these medical applications. I personally don't think that we've I personally don't think that we've I personally don't think that we've thought enough actually about what these thought enough actually about what these thought enough actually about what these kind of scenarios are going to look like kind of scenarios are going to look like kind of scenarios are going to look like and I don't think we've thought through and I don't think we've thought through and I don't think we've thought through all the ethical implications of what all the ethical implications of what all the ethical implications of what this means for augmentation in this means for augmentation in this means for augmentation in particular. There's part of this that is particular. There's part of this that is particular. There's part of this that is not new at all. Humans throughout not new at all. Humans throughout not new at all. Humans throughout history have been doing things to history have been doing things to history have been doing things to augment our function. Coffee, nicotine, augment our function. Coffee, nicotine, augment our function. Coffee, nicotine, all kinds of medications that cross over all kinds of medications that cross over all kinds of medications that cross over from medical to consumer that is from medical to consumer that is from medical to consumer that is everywhere. So the pursuit of everywhere. So the pursuit of everywhere. So the pursuit of augmentation or performance or augmentation or performance or augmentation or performance or enhancement is really not a new thing. enhancement is really not a new thing. enhancement is really not a new thing. The questions really as they relate to The questions really as they relate to The questions really as they relate to neurochnologies for example have to do neurochnologies for example have to do neurochnologies for example have to do with the invasive nature. For example, with the invasive nature. For example, with the invasive nature. For example, if these technologies require surgery, if these technologies require surgery, if these technologies require surgery, for example, to do something that is not for example, to do something that is not for example, to do something that is not for a medical application. Again, there for a medical application. Again, there for a medical application. Again, there that is not exactly new territory that is not exactly new territory that is not exactly new territory either. People do that routinely for either. People do that routinely for either. People do that routinely for cosmetic kind of procedures for physical cosmetic kind of procedures for physical cosmetic kind of procedures for physical appearance, not necessarily cognitive. appearance, not necessarily cognitive. appearance, not necessarily cognitive. So, I do think that provided the So, I do think that provided the So, I do think that provided the technology continues to emerge the way technology continues to emerge the way technology continues to emerge the way that it does, that it's going to be that it does, that it's going to be that it does, that it's going to be around the corner. And it probably is around the corner. And it probably is around the corner. And it probably is not going to be in ways that are super not going to be in ways that are super not going to be in ways that are super obvious. I don't think it's going to be obvious. I don't think it's going to be obvious. I don't think it's going to be like can we easily memorize every fact like can we easily memorize every fact like can we easily memorize every fact in the world, but in forms that are in the world, but in forms that are in the world, but in forms that are going to be much more incremental and going to be much more incremental and going to be much more incremental and maybe more subtle. In many ways, we maybe more subtle. In many ways, we maybe more subtle. In many ways, we already have that now. Like for example, already have that now. Like for example, already have that now. Like for example, you don't have to have a neural you don't have to have a neural you don't have to have a neural interface embedded in your brain to get interface embedded in your brain to get interface embedded in your brain to get information essentially access to all information essentially access to all information essentially access to all information in the world. You just have information in the world. You just have information in the world. You just have to have, you know, your iPhone. Whether to have, you know, your iPhone. Whether to have, you know, your iPhone. Whether you could do it faster through uh a you could do it faster through uh a you could do it faster through uh a brain interface, I definitely wouldn't brain interface, I definitely wouldn't brain interface, I definitely wouldn't rule that out. But think about this that rule that out. But think about this that rule that out. But think about this that the systems that we have already to the systems that we have already to the systems that we have already to speak and to communicate have evolved speak and to communicate have evolved speak and to communicate have evolved over, you know, thousands and millions over, you know, thousands and millions over, you know, thousands and millions of years and they're supported by neural of years and they're supported by neural of years and they're supported by neural structures that have bandwidth of structures that have bandwidth of structures that have bandwidth of millions of neurons. millions of neurons. millions of neurons. There's no technology that exists right There's no technology that exists right There's no technology that exists right now that people are thinking about that now that people are thinking about that now that people are thinking about that are in commercial form. sternly not even are in commercial form. sternly not even are in commercial form. sternly not even in research labs that come anywhere in research labs that come anywhere in research labs that come anywhere close to what has been evolved for those close to what has been evolved for those close to what has been evolved for those natural purposes. So I'm essentially natural purposes. So I'm essentially natural purposes. So I'm essentially saying two sides of this which is we're saying two sides of this which is we're saying two sides of this which is we're already getting into this now. This is already getting into this now. This is already getting into this now. This is not new territory. This topic of not new territory. This topic of not new territory. This topic of augmentation both physical and augmentation both physical and augmentation both physical and cognitive. We've already surpassed that. cognitive. We've already surpassed that. cognitive. We've already surpassed that. That's part of what humans do in That's part of what humans do in That's part of what humans do in general. But we are entering this area general. But we are entering this area general. But we are entering this area of like enhanced cognition. um these of like enhanced cognition. um these of like enhanced cognition. um these areas that I think the technology is areas that I think the technology is areas that I think the technology is going to be the rate limiting step and going to be the rate limiting step and going to be the rate limiting step and how far we can go and we have not had how far we can go and we have not had how far we can go and we have not had the full conversations about number one the full conversations about number one the full conversations about number one is this what we actually want is this is this what we actually want is this is this what we actually want is this going to be good for society who gets going to be good for society who gets going to be good for society who gets access to this technology these are all access to this technology these are all access to this technology these are all things that are going to become real things that are going to become real things that are going to become real world problems could you tell us what world problems could you tell us what world problems could you tell us what you're doing in terms of merging the you're doing in terms of merging the you're doing in terms of merging the brain machine interface with extraction brain machine interface with extraction brain machine interface with extraction of speech signals from people who are of speech signals from people who are of speech signals from people who are locked in like Poncho with facial locked in like Poncho with facial locked in like Poncho with facial expressions &gt;&gt; sure yeah I'm here with you in person. &gt;&gt; sure yeah I'm here with you in person. &gt;&gt; sure yeah I'm here with you in person. We could have done this virtually We could have done this virtually We could have done this virtually probably. It's pretty easy to do that. probably. It's pretty easy to do that. probably. It's pretty easy to do that. We could have recorded this really We could have recorded this really We could have recorded this really separate. But there is something about separate. But there is something about separate. But there is something about being able to actually see your being able to actually see your being able to actually see your expressions and to understand other expressions and to understand other expressions and to understand other forms of communication. So, another forms of communication. So, another forms of communication. So, another really important one is nonverbal the really important one is nonverbal the really important one is nonverbal the expressions that you're making. For expressions that you're making. For expressions that you're making. For example, if you have a quizzical look on example, if you have a quizzical look on example, if you have a quizzical look on your face, if I'm saying something not your face, if I'm saying something not your face, if I'm saying something not clear, that's a sign to me that I need clear, that's a sign to me that I need clear, that's a sign to me that I need to rephrase it or to say it in a to rephrase it or to say it in a to rephrase it or to say it in a different way or to slow down. Facial different way or to slow down. Facial different way or to slow down. Facial expressions actually are really expressions actually are really expressions actually are really important part of the way we speak. And important part of the way we speak. And important part of the way we speak. And there's two things. It's not just the there's two things. It's not just the there's two things. It's not just the expressions of like how you're feeling expressions of like how you're feeling expressions of like how you're feeling and perceiving what I'm saying. But it's and perceiving what I'm saying. But it's and perceiving what I'm saying. But it's also seeing my mouth move in your eyes. also seeing my mouth move in your eyes. also seeing my mouth move in your eyes. actually see my mouth move and my jaw actually see my mouth move and my jaw actually see my mouth move and my jaw move in a particular way that actually move in a particular way that actually move in a particular way that actually allows you to hear those sounds better. allows you to hear those sounds better. allows you to hear those sounds better. So having both the visual information So having both the visual information So having both the visual information but also the sounds go into your brain but also the sounds go into your brain but also the sounds go into your brain is going to improved intelligibilityly is going to improved intelligibilityly is going to improved intelligibilityly also make it more natural. And the also make it more natural. And the also make it more natural. And the reason why we're also very interested in reason why we're also very interested in reason why we're also very interested in this idea of not just having text on a this idea of not just having text on a this idea of not just having text on a screen, but essentially a fully computer screen, but essentially a fully computer screen, but essentially a fully computer animated face like an avatar of the animated face like an avatar of the animated face like an avatar of the person's speech movements and their person's speech movements and their person's speech movements and their facial expressions is going to be a more facial expressions is going to be a more facial expressions is going to be a more complete form of expression. Now you can complete form of expression. Now you can complete form of expression. Now you can imagine right now that might just be imagine right now that might just be imagine right now that might just be someone looking at a computer screen someone looking at a computer screen someone looking at a computer screen interpreting these signals. But I think interpreting these signals. But I think interpreting these signals. But I think the way things are going in the next the way things are going in the next the way things are going in the next couple of years a lot more of our social couple of years a lot more of our social couple of years a lot more of our social interactions more than even now are interactions more than even now are interactions more than even now are going to move into this digital virtual going to move into this digital virtual going to move into this digital virtual space. Of course most people are space. Of course most people are space. Of course most people are thinking about what that means for most thinking about what that means for most thinking about what that means for most consumers but it also has really consumers but it also has really consumers but it also has really important implications for people who important implications for people who important implications for people who are disabled right and whether how are disabled right and whether how are disabled right and whether how are they going to participate in that. are they going to participate in that. are they going to participate in that. And so we were thinking really about for And so we were thinking really about for And so we were thinking really about for people like Poncho and other people who people like Poncho and other people who people like Poncho and other people who are paralyzed, what other forms of BCI are paralyzed, what other forms of BCI are paralyzed, what other forms of BCI can we do in order to help improve their can we do in order to help improve their can we do in order to help improve their ability to communicate. So one is ability to communicate. So one is ability to communicate. So one is essentially building out more holistic essentially building out more holistic essentially building out more holistic avatars, you know, things that can avatars, you know, things that can avatars, you know, things that can essentially decode, you know, essentially decode, you know, essentially decode, you know, essentially their expressions or essentially their expressions or essentially their expressions or the movements associated with their the movements associated with their the movements associated with their mouth and jaw when they actually speak mouth and jaw when they actually speak mouth and jaw when they actually speak to improve that communication. So, do to improve that communication. So, do to improve that communication. So, do you envision a time not too long from you envision a time not too long from you envision a time not too long from now where instead of tweeting out now where instead of tweeting out now where instead of tweeting out something in text, my avatar will I'll something in text, my avatar will I'll something in text, my avatar will I'll type it out, but my avatar will I'll type it out, but my avatar will I'll type it out, but my avatar will just say it. It'll be an image of my just say it. It'll be an image of my just say it. It'll be an image of my avatar saying whatever it is I happen to avatar saying whatever it is I happen to avatar saying whatever it is I happen to be tweeting at that moment. be tweeting at that moment. be tweeting at that moment. &gt;&gt; That's what we're working on. That is &gt;&gt; That's what we're working on. That is &gt;&gt; That's what we're working on. That is going to happen and it's going to happen going to happen and it's going to happen going to happen and it's going to happen soon and there's a lot of progress in soon and there's a lot of progress in soon and there's a lot of progress in that. And again, we're just trying to that. And again, we're just trying to that. And again, we're just trying to enrich um the field of, you know, of um the field of, you know, of um the field of, you know, of communication, expression um to make it communication, expression um to make it communication, expression um to make it more normal. And we actually think that more normal. And we actually think that more normal. And we actually think that having that kind of avatar is a way of having that kind of avatar is a way of having that kind of avatar is a way of getting feedback to people learning how getting feedback to people learning how getting feedback to people learning how to speak through a speech to speak through a speech to speak through a speech neuroprothetic. That's the device that neuroprothetic. That's the device that neuroprothetic. That's the device that we call it. It's a speech we call it. It's a speech we call it. It's a speech neuroprothetic. That is going to be the neuroprothetic. That is going to be the neuroprothetic. That is going to be the way that can help people learn how to do way that can help people learn how to do way that can help people learn how to do it the quickest. Not necessarily like it the quickest. Not necessarily like it the quickest. Not necessarily like trying to say words and having it come trying to say words and having it come trying to say words and having it come on a screen, but actually have people on a screen, but actually have people on a screen, but actually have people embody feel like it's part of themselves embody feel like it's part of themselves embody feel like it's part of themselves or that they are directly controlling or that they are directly controlling or that they are directly controlling that &gt;&gt; that illustration or animation. I get a &gt;&gt; that illustration or animation. I get a &gt;&gt; that illustration or animation. I get a lot of questions about stutter. What can lot of questions about stutter. What can lot of questions about stutter. What can people with stutter do if they'd like to people with stutter do if they'd like to people with stutter do if they'd like to relieve their stutter? Stutter is a relieve their stutter? Stutter is a relieve their stutter? Stutter is a condition where the words can't come out condition where the words can't come out condition where the words can't come out fluently. So, you have all the ideas, fluently. So, you have all the ideas, fluently. So, you have all the ideas, you've got the language. In fact, you you've got the language. In fact, you you've got the language. In fact, you know, remember we talked about this know, remember we talked about this know, remember we talked about this distinction between language and speech. distinction between language and speech. distinction between language and speech. Stuttering is a problem of speech, Stuttering is a problem of speech, Stuttering is a problem of speech, right? So, the ideas, the meanings, the right? So, the ideas, the meanings, the right? So, the ideas, the meanings, the grammar, it's all there in people's grammar, it's all there in people's grammar, it's all there in people's stutter, but they can't get the words stutter, but they can't get the words stutter, but they can't get the words out fluently. So that's a speech out fluently. So that's a speech out fluently. So that's a speech condition and uh in particular it's a condition and uh in particular it's a condition and uh in particular it's a condition that affects articulation condition that affects articulation condition that affects articulation specifically about controlling the specifically about controlling the specifically about controlling the production of words in this really production of words in this really production of words in this really coordinated kind of movements that have coordinated kind of movements that have coordinated kind of movements that have to happen in the vocal tract to produce to happen in the vocal tract to produce to happen in the vocal tract to produce fluent speech fluent speech fluent speech and um stuttering is a condition where and um stuttering is a condition where and um stuttering is a condition where people have a predisposition to it. So people have a predisposition to it. So people have a predisposition to it. So there's an aspect of stuttering. You are there's an aspect of stuttering. You are there's an aspect of stuttering. You are a stutterer or you're not a stutterer. a stutterer or you're not a stutterer. a stutterer or you're not a stutterer. But people who stutter don't stutter all But people who stutter don't stutter all But people who stutter don't stutter all the time either. So you could be a the time either. So you could be a the time either. So you could be a stutterer who stutters at sometimes but stutterer who stutters at sometimes but stutterer who stutters at sometimes but not others. And really the main link not others. And really the main link not others. And really the main link between stuttering anxiety is that between stuttering anxiety is that between stuttering anxiety is that anxiety can provoke it and make it anxiety can provoke it and make it anxiety can provoke it and make it worse. That's certainly true, but it's worse. That's certainly true, but it's worse. That's certainly true, but it's not necessarily caused by anxiety. It not necessarily caused by anxiety. It not necessarily caused by anxiety. It can essentially trigger it or make it can essentially trigger it or make it can essentially trigger it or make it worse, but it's not the cause of it, per worse, but it's not the cause of it, per worse, but it's not the cause of it, per se. So the cause of it is still really se. So the cause of it is still really se. So the cause of it is still really not clear, but it does have to do with not clear, but it does have to do with not clear, but it does have to do with these kind of brain functions that we've these kind of brain functions that we've these kind of brain functions that we've been talking about earlier, which is been talking about earlier, which is been talking about earlier, which is that in order to produce normal fluent that in order to produce normal fluent that in order to produce normal fluent speech, we're not even conscious of what speech, we're not even conscious of what speech, we're not even conscious of what is going on in our mouths, in our is going on in our mouths, in our is going on in our mouths, in our larynx, we're not conscious. And if we larynx, we're not conscious. And if we larynx, we're not conscious. And if we were, we would not be able to speak were, we would not be able to speak were, we would not be able to speak because it's too complex. It's too because it's too complex. It's too because it's too complex. It's too precise. It's something that we have precise. It's something that we have precise. It's something that we have really uh developed the abilities to do really uh developed the abilities to do really uh developed the abilities to do and we do it naturally, right? It's part and we do it naturally, right? It's part and we do it naturally, right? It's part of our programming and part of what we of our programming and part of what we of our programming and part of what we learn inherently and you know it's just learn inherently and you know it's just learn inherently and you know it's just through exposure. through exposure. through exposure. So stuttering is a is essentially a stuttering is a is essentially a stuttering is a is essentially a breakdown at certain times breakdown at certain times breakdown at certain times in that machinery being able to work in that machinery being able to work in that machinery being able to work in a really coordinated way. a really coordinated way. a really coordinated way. You can think about, you know, the You can think about, you know, the You can think about, you know, the operations of these areas that are operations of these areas that are operations of these areas that are controlling the vocal tract. Let's say controlling the vocal tract. Let's say controlling the vocal tract. Let's say speech is like a symphony. In order for speech is like a symphony. In order for speech is like a symphony. In order for it to come out normally, you've got to it to come out normally, you've got to it to come out normally, you've got to have not just one part, the larynx, but have not just one part, the larynx, but have not just one part, the larynx, but the lips, the jaw, they can't be doing the lips, the jaw, they can't be doing the lips, the jaw, they can't be doing their own thing. They have to be very, their own thing. They have to be very, their own thing. They have to be very, very precisely very precisely very precisely activated and very, very precisely activated and very, very precisely activated and very, very precisely controlled in a way to actually create controlled in a way to actually create controlled in a way to actually create words. And so, in stuttering, there's a words. And so, in stuttering, there's a words. And so, in stuttering, there's a breakdown of that coordination. If breakdown of that coordination. If breakdown of that coordination. If somebody has a stutter, is it better to somebody has a stutter, is it better to somebody has a stutter, is it better to address that early in life when there's address that early in life when there's address that early in life when there's still neuroplasticity at is very robust? still neuroplasticity at is very robust? still neuroplasticity at is very robust? And if so, what's the typical route for And if so, what's the typical route for And if so, what's the typical route for treatment? I have to imagine it's not treatment? I have to imagine it's not treatment? I have to imagine it's not brain surgery typically. Um I'm guessing brain surgery typically. Um I'm guessing brain surgery typically. Um I'm guessing there are speech therapists that there are speech therapists that there are speech therapists that people can talk to and they can people can talk to and they can people can talk to and they can help them work out where they're getting help them work out where they're getting help them work out where they're getting stuck in the relationship to anxiety. stuck in the relationship to anxiety. stuck in the relationship to anxiety. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. I mean, part of it is &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. I mean, part of it is &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. I mean, part of it is about that anxiety, but a lot of it about that anxiety, but a lot of it about that anxiety, but a lot of it really has to do with um therapy to sort really has to do with um therapy to sort really has to do with um therapy to sort of like work through and think of tricks of like work through and think of tricks of like work through and think of tricks basically sometimes to create conditions basically sometimes to create conditions basically sometimes to create conditions where you can actually get the words to where you can actually get the words to where you can actually get the words to come out. A lot of some forms of come out. A lot of some forms of come out. A lot of some forms of stuttering are really initiation stuttering are really initiation stuttering are really initiation problems. Just getting started itself is problems. Just getting started itself is problems. Just getting started itself is very hard. You want to start with is very hard. You want to start with is very hard. You want to start with initial vowel or consonant, but it won't initial vowel or consonant, but it won't initial vowel or consonant, but it won't emit. So a lot of the therapy is really emit. So a lot of the therapy is really emit. So a lot of the therapy is really just focusing on like how do you create just focusing on like how do you create just focusing on like how do you create the conditions you know for that to the conditions you know for that to the conditions you know for that to happen. There's another aspect to it happen. There's another aspect to it happen. There's another aspect to it that I find very interesting is that um that I find very interesting is that um that I find very interesting is that um the feedback essentially what we hear the feedback essentially what we hear the feedback essentially what we hear ourselves say. For example, every time ourselves say. For example, every time ourselves say. For example, every time that I say a word I'm also hearing what that I say a word I'm also hearing what that I say a word I'm also hearing what I'm saying. So that's what we call I'm saying. So that's what we call I'm saying. So that's what we call auditory feedback. That turns out to be auditory feedback. That turns out to be auditory feedback. That turns out to be very important. And sometimes when you very important. And sometimes when you very important. And sometimes when you change that it can actually change the change that it can actually change the change that it can actually change the amount someone stutters for better or amount someone stutters for better or amount someone stutters for better or for worse. And it it's giving us a clue for worse. And it it's giving us a clue for worse. And it it's giving us a clue that the brain is not just focused on that the brain is not just focused on that the brain is not just focused on sending the commands out, but it's also sending the commands out, but it's also sending the commands out, but it's also possibly interacting with the part that possibly interacting with the part that possibly interacting with the part that is hearing the sounds. And there's is hearing the sounds. And there's is hearing the sounds. And there's something might be going on in that something might be going on in that something might be going on in that connection that breaks down when connection that breaks down when connection that breaks down when stuttering occurs. So there are stuttering occurs. So there are stuttering occurs. So there are individuals that are stutterers, but individuals that are stutterers, but individuals that are stutterers, but they don't stutter all the time. In they don't stutter all the time. In they don't stutter all the time. In those instances, there's something those instances, there's something those instances, there's something happening in those particular moments happening in those particular moments happening in those particular moments where this very, very precise where this very, very precise where this very, very precise coordination needs to happen in the coordination needs to happen in the coordination needs to happen in the brain in order to get the words out brain in order to get the words out brain in order to get the words out fluently. &gt;&gt; Eddie, I have to say from the first time &gt;&gt; Eddie, I have to say from the first time &gt;&gt; Eddie, I have to say from the first time we became friends, uh, 38 years ago, we became friends, uh, 38 years ago, we became friends, uh, 38 years ago, &gt;&gt; something like that. &gt;&gt; something like that. &gt;&gt; something like that. &gt;&gt; Something like that. To be sitting here &gt;&gt; Something like that. To be sitting here &gt;&gt; Something like that. To be sitting here with you today for me is a absolute with you today for me is a absolute with you today for me is a absolute thrill. Not just because we've been thrill. Not just because we've been thrill. Not just because we've been friends for that long or that we got friends for that long or that we got friends for that long or that we got reacquainted through the literally the reacquainted through the literally the reacquainted through the literally the halls of medicine and science, but halls of medicine and science, but halls of medicine and science, but because I really do see what you're because I really do see what you're because I really do see what you're doing as really representing that front doing as really representing that front doing as really representing that front absolute cutting edge of exploration absolute cutting edge of exploration absolute cutting edge of exploration and application. I mean, the story of and application. I mean, the story of and application. I mean, the story of Poncho is but one of your many patients Poncho is but one of your many patients Poncho is but one of your many patients that um has tremendous benefit from your that um has tremendous benefit from your that um has tremendous benefit from your work and now as a chair of a work and now as a chair of a work and now as a chair of a department, you of course work alongside department, you of course work alongside department, you of course work alongside individuals who are also doing individuals who are also doing individuals who are also doing incredible work in the spinal cord etc. incredible work in the spinal cord etc. incredible work in the spinal cord etc. So on behalf of myself and everyone So on behalf of myself and everyone So on behalf of myself and everyone listening, I just really want to thank listening, I just really want to thank listening, I just really want to thank you for joining us today to share this you for joining us today to share this you for joining us today to share this information, but also just for the work information, but also just for the work information, but also just for the work you do. It's truly spectacular. So thank you do. It's truly spectacular. So thank you do. It's truly spectacular. So thank you ever so much. you ever so much. you ever so much. &gt;&gt; Thanks.