Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are going to talk about the biology, are going to talk about the biology, are going to talk about the biology, psychology, and utility of play. psychology, and utility of play. psychology, and utility of play. Play is something that normally we Play is something that normally we Play is something that normally we associate with children's games and associate with children's games and associate with children's games and indeed with being a child. indeed with being a child. indeed with being a child. Much of our childhood development Much of our childhood development Much of our childhood development centers around play, whether or not it's centers around play, whether or not it's centers around play, whether or not it's organized play or spontaneous play. organized play or spontaneous play. organized play or spontaneous play. But as adults, we also need to play. And But as adults, we also need to play. And But as adults, we also need to play. And today I'm going to talk about what I today I'm going to talk about what I today I'm going to talk about what I like to refer to as the power of play. like to refer to as the power of play. like to refer to as the power of play. The power of play resides in play's The power of play resides in play's The power of play resides in play's ability to change our nervous system for ability to change our nervous system for ability to change our nervous system for the better so that we can perform many the better so that we can perform many the better so that we can perform many activities, not just play activities, not just play activities, not just play activities, better. Play can also function as a way to Play can also function as a way to Play can also function as a way to explore new ways of being in different explore new ways of being in different explore new ways of being in different scenarios, in work, in relationships, in scenarios, in work, in relationships, in scenarios, in work, in relationships, in settings of all kind, and indeed also in settings of all kind, and indeed also in settings of all kind, and indeed also in the relationship to oneself. In fact, we the relationship to oneself. In fact, we the relationship to oneself. In fact, we are going to explore how assuming are going to explore how assuming are going to explore how assuming different identities during the same different identities during the same different identities during the same game of play or the same forms of play game of play or the same forms of play game of play or the same forms of play has been shown to be immensely powerful has been shown to be immensely powerful has been shown to be immensely powerful for allowing people to engage in more for allowing people to engage in more for allowing people to engage in more creative thinking and dynamic thinking creative thinking and dynamic thinking creative thinking and dynamic thinking and indeed to become better leaders and indeed to become better leaders and indeed to become better leaders and more effective workers and students and more effective workers and students and more effective workers and students and learners and happier people. learners and happier people. learners and happier people. I'm also going to cover some data that I'm also going to cover some data that I'm also going to cover some data that shows that learning to play properly can shows that learning to play properly can shows that learning to play properly can enhance one's ability to focus and is an enhance one's ability to focus and is an enhance one's ability to focus and is an active area of research for treatment of active area of research for treatment of active area of research for treatment of things like ADHD, attention deficit things like ADHD, attention deficit things like ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Just as a little hyperactivity disorder. Just as a little hyperactivity disorder. Just as a little sneak preview of where that's headed, sneak preview of where that's headed, sneak preview of where that's headed, children who do not access enough play children who do not access enough play children who do not access enough play during certain stages of childhood are during certain stages of childhood are during certain stages of childhood are more prone to develop ADHD. The good more prone to develop ADHD. The good more prone to develop ADHD. The good news is all of us, regardless of whether news is all of us, regardless of whether news is all of us, regardless of whether or not we have ADHD or not, whether or not we have ADHD or not, whether or not we have ADHD or not, whether or not we had ample access to play during not we had ample access to play during not we had ample access to play during childhood or not, childhood or not, childhood or not, can engage and grow the neural circuits can engage and grow the neural circuits can engage and grow the neural circuits that allow for this incredible power of that allow for this incredible power of that allow for this incredible power of play. And this can be done again at any play. And this can be done again at any play. And this can be done again at any stage of life. Today we're going to talk stage of life. Today we're going to talk stage of life. Today we're going to talk about the protocols, the science. We about the protocols, the science. We about the protocols, the science. We review all of that and I promise you'll review all of that and I promise you'll review all of that and I promise you'll come away with a lot of knowledge, come away with a lot of knowledge, come away with a lot of knowledge, whether or not you're a parent, whether or not you're a parent, whether or not you're a parent, whether or not you're a child, whether or not or not you're a child, whether or not or not you're a child, whether or not you're a person of any age, you're going you're a person of any age, you're going you're a person of any age, you're going to have tools and knowledge that will to have tools and knowledge that will to have tools and knowledge that will benefit you. Before we begin, I want to benefit you. Before we begin, I want to benefit you. Before we begin, I want to share with you the results of what I share with you the results of what I share with you the results of what I think to be an extremely exciting and think to be an extremely exciting and think to be an extremely exciting and certainly an actionable study that was certainly an actionable study that was certainly an actionable study that was just published in the journal Scientific just published in the journal Scientific just published in the journal Scientific Reports. This is an excellent journal, Nature This is an excellent journal, Nature This is an excellent journal, Nature Press journal, peer-reviewed, etc. And Press journal, peer-reviewed, etc. And Press journal, peer-reviewed, etc. And the findings center around what sorts of the findings center around what sorts of the findings center around what sorts of devices we happen to be reading on and devices we happen to be reading on and devices we happen to be reading on and accessing information on and how that's accessing information on and how that's accessing information on and how that's impacting our physiology and our impacting our physiology and our impacting our physiology and our capacity to learn. One of the more capacity to learn. One of the more capacity to learn. One of the more frequent questions I get is frequent questions I get is frequent questions I get is what are all these devices, phones, what are all these devices, phones, what are all these devices, phones, tablets, computers, video games, etc. tablets, computers, video games, etc. tablets, computers, video games, etc. doing to our brains? And finally there's doing to our brains? And finally there's doing to our brains? And finally there's some good peer-reviewed data to look at some good peer-reviewed data to look at some good peer-reviewed data to look at that and to address it directly. that and to address it directly. that and to address it directly. This study, first author Honma, H O N M This study, first author Honma, H O N M This study, first author Honma, H O N M A, Honma et al. A, Honma et al. A, Honma et al. is entitled Reading on a smartphone is entitled Reading on a smartphone is entitled Reading on a smartphone affects sigh generation, that's S I G H, affects sigh generation, that's S I G H, affects sigh generation, that's S I G H, sigh generation, brain activity and sigh generation, brain activity and sigh generation, brain activity and comprehension. And to just summarize comprehension. And to just summarize comprehension. And to just summarize what they found, what they found, what they found, they ran a study on 34 healthy they ran a study on 34 healthy they ran a study on 34 healthy individuals and had them either read individuals and had them either read individuals and had them either read material on a smartphone or on regular material on a smartphone or on regular material on a smartphone or on regular printed paper or a book. printed paper or a book. printed paper or a book. And what they found is that And what they found is that And what they found is that comprehension on devices, in particular comprehension on devices, in particular comprehension on devices, in particular smartphones, is much poorer, smartphones, is much poorer, smartphones, is much poorer, much worse than it is when one reads on much worse than it is when one reads on much worse than it is when one reads on actual paper. actual paper. actual paper. Now, some of you may experience this Now, some of you may experience this Now, some of you may experience this yourselves. Now, they Now, they Now, they compared smartphones with paper and what compared smartphones with paper and what compared smartphones with paper and what they found was that when they looked at they found was that when they looked at they found was that when they looked at people's breathing, people's breathing, people's breathing, the normal patterns of breathing that the normal patterns of breathing that the normal patterns of breathing that people were engaging in did not differ people were engaging in did not differ people were engaging in did not differ between people reading on a smartphone between people reading on a smartphone between people reading on a smartphone or reading from paper. However, one or reading from paper. However, one or reading from paper. However, one particular feature of breathing did particular feature of breathing did particular feature of breathing did differ. And that particular feature is differ. And that particular feature is differ. And that particular feature is what we call physiological sigh. I've what we call physiological sigh. I've what we call physiological sigh. I've talked a lot about physiological sigh on talked a lot about physiological sigh on talked a lot about physiological sigh on this podcast and on social media. We had this podcast and on social media. We had this podcast and on social media. We had a terrific guest, Professor Jack Feldman a terrific guest, Professor Jack Feldman a terrific guest, Professor Jack Feldman from University of California, Los from University of California, Los from University of California, Los Angeles, who's a world expert in Angeles, who's a world expert in Angeles, who's a world expert in breathing and respiration and its breathing and respiration and its breathing and respiration and its impacts on the brain and how brain impacts on the brain and how brain impacts on the brain and how brain controls breathing and respiration. And controls breathing and respiration. And controls breathing and respiration. And what you can learn from that episode, or what you can learn from that episode, or what you can learn from that episode, or I'll just tell you again right now, is I'll just tell you again right now, is I'll just tell you again right now, is that every 5 minutes or so, whether or that every 5 minutes or so, whether or that every 5 minutes or so, whether or not we are asleep or awake, we do what's not we are asleep or awake, we do what's not we are asleep or awake, we do what's called a physiological sigh, which is a called a physiological sigh, which is a called a physiological sigh, which is a big deep inhale, often a double inhale, big deep inhale, often a double inhale, big deep inhale, often a double inhale, followed by a long exhale. followed by a long exhale. followed by a long exhale. It goes something like this. Now, you might think, "Oh, I never Now, you might think, "Oh, I never Now, you might think, "Oh, I never breathe like that." But you do. breathe like that." But you do. breathe like that." But you do. Unless there's something severely wrong Unless there's something severely wrong Unless there's something severely wrong with your brainstem, every 5 minutes or with your brainstem, every 5 minutes or with your brainstem, every 5 minutes or so, you do one of these physiological so, you do one of these physiological so, you do one of these physiological sighs, which reopens all the little sighs, which reopens all the little sighs, which reopens all the little hundreds of millions of sacs in your hundreds of millions of sacs in your hundreds of millions of sacs in your lungs called the alveoli that bring in lungs called the alveoli that bring in lungs called the alveoli that bring in more oxygen as a consequence of that big more oxygen as a consequence of that big more oxygen as a consequence of that big deep double inhale, and then you are deep double inhale, and then you are deep double inhale, and then you are able to exhale carbon dioxide, offload able to exhale carbon dioxide, offload able to exhale carbon dioxide, offload carbon dioxide, through that long carbon dioxide, through that long carbon dioxide, through that long exhale. I've also encouraged people to use the I've also encouraged people to use the I've also encouraged people to use the physiological sigh deliberately, not physiological sigh deliberately, not physiological sigh deliberately, not just spontaneously, as a way to reduce just spontaneously, as a way to reduce just spontaneously, as a way to reduce their stress quickly. And indeed, my lab their stress quickly. And indeed, my lab their stress quickly. And indeed, my lab works on physiological sighs and has works on physiological sighs and has works on physiological sighs and has been exploring this. And they're quite been exploring this. And they're quite been exploring this. And they're quite effective in reducing our stress very effective in reducing our stress very effective in reducing our stress very fast. Reading on a smartphone seems to fast. Reading on a smartphone seems to fast. Reading on a smartphone seems to suppress physiological sigh. People suppress physiological sigh. People suppress physiological sigh. People aren't aware of that it's happening, but aren't aware of that it's happening, but aren't aware of that it's happening, but it's happening. Some people have talked it's happening. Some people have talked it's happening. Some people have talked about so-called email apnea, which is about so-called email apnea, which is about so-called email apnea, which is the fact that people hold their breath the fact that people hold their breath the fact that people hold their breath while they email or while they while they email or while they while they email or while they text, and indeed many people do that. text, and indeed many people do that. text, and indeed many people do that. This is distinct from email or texting This is distinct from email or texting This is distinct from email or texting apnea. What's happening here is people apnea. What's happening here is people apnea. What's happening here is people are reading on the phone, and for are reading on the phone, and for are reading on the phone, and for whatever reason, whatever reason, whatever reason, and I'll talk about what the likely and I'll talk about what the likely and I'll talk about what the likely reason is, but for whatever reason, reason is, but for whatever reason, reason is, but for whatever reason, they're suppressing their sighing. and they're suppressing their sighing. and they're suppressing their sighing. and as a consequence, the brain is not as a consequence, the brain is not as a consequence, the brain is not getting enough oxygen and is not getting enough oxygen and is not getting enough oxygen and is not offloading enough carbon dioxide. And offloading enough carbon dioxide. And offloading enough carbon dioxide. And another finding in this study was that another finding in this study was that another finding in this study was that the prefrontal cortex, an area of the prefrontal cortex, an area of the prefrontal cortex, an area of the brain that's involved in focus and brain that's involved in focus and brain that's involved in focus and attention and learning, becomes attention and learning, becomes attention and learning, becomes hyperactive in a kind of desperate hyperactive in a kind of desperate hyperactive in a kind of desperate attempt to focus. attempt to focus. attempt to focus. All of this can be summarized by saying, All of this can be summarized by saying, All of this can be summarized by saying, if you happen to read on a device, if you happen to read on a device, if you happen to read on a device, whether or not it's a tablet, a standard whether or not it's a tablet, a standard whether or not it's a tablet, a standard computer screen of any kind, but in computer screen of any kind, but in computer screen of any kind, but in particular on a smartphone, regardless particular on a smartphone, regardless particular on a smartphone, regardless of how small or large that smartphone of how small or large that smartphone of how small or large that smartphone screen is, you want to remind yourself screen is, you want to remind yourself screen is, you want to remind yourself to engage in these physiological sighs to engage in these physiological sighs to engage in these physiological sighs fairly regularly. And it might even be fairly regularly. And it might even be fairly regularly. And it might even be better to just read the most or at least better to just read the most or at least better to just read the most or at least the key issues or and things that you're the key issues or and things that you're the key issues or and things that you're trying to learn about the key trying to learn about the key trying to learn about the key information from paper, either books or information from paper, either books or information from paper, either books or printed out material of some other printed out material of some other printed out material of some other sort. What's the underlying mechanism sort. What's the underlying mechanism sort. What's the underlying mechanism here? Well, here? Well, here? Well, one of the reasons I like this study so one of the reasons I like this study so one of the reasons I like this study so much is that it brings together two of much is that it brings together two of much is that it brings together two of my laboratories and my particular my laboratories and my particular my laboratories and my particular interests in neuro science, which is how interests in neuro science, which is how interests in neuro science, which is how does our visual system and the aperture, does our visual system and the aperture, does our visual system and the aperture, meaning the size of our visual window, meaning the size of our visual window, meaning the size of our visual window, relate to our so-called autonomic relate to our so-called autonomic relate to our so-called autonomic function or our internal state. And function or our internal state. And function or our internal state. And basically what's happening here is as basically what's happening here is as basically what's happening here is as any of us bring our visual window in any of us bring our visual window in any of us bring our visual window in more narrowly, as we contract our visual more narrowly, as we contract our visual more narrowly, as we contract our visual window, which is exactly what happens window, which is exactly what happens window, which is exactly what happens when we're looking at a little when we're looking at a little when we're looking at a little smartphone in front of us, it seems to smartphone in front of us, it seems to smartphone in front of us, it seems to suppress the breathing apparatus because suppress the breathing apparatus because suppress the breathing apparatus because we know that physiological sighs are we know that physiological sighs are we know that physiological sighs are controlled by a specific set of neurons controlled by a specific set of neurons controlled by a specific set of neurons in the brainstem called the parafacial in the brainstem called the parafacial in the brainstem called the parafacial nucleus, discovered by Dr. Jack Feldman. nucleus, discovered by Dr. Jack Feldman. nucleus, discovered by Dr. Jack Feldman. And so there must be a mechanism whereby And so there must be a mechanism whereby And so there must be a mechanism whereby when we tighten our visual window, we when we tighten our visual window, we when we tighten our visual window, we somehow, and we don't know yet how this somehow, and we don't know yet how this somehow, and we don't know yet how this happens, but somehow suppress the happens, but somehow suppress the happens, but somehow suppress the activity of these neurons in the activity of these neurons in the activity of these neurons in the parafacial nucleus that generate these parafacial nucleus that generate these parafacial nucleus that generate these physiological sighs. So again, you have physiological sighs. So again, you have physiological sighs. So again, you have two choices, or I suppose you have many two choices, or I suppose you have many two choices, or I suppose you have many choices, but two main choices to contend choices, but two main choices to contend choices, but two main choices to contend with this new information. One is that with this new information. One is that with this new information. One is that you remind yourself to engage in deep you remind yourself to engage in deep you remind yourself to engage in deep breathing and in particular breathing and in particular breathing and in particular physiological sighs every 5 minutes or physiological sighs every 5 minutes or physiological sighs every 5 minutes or so while reading anything or texting on so while reading anything or texting on so while reading anything or texting on your smartphone. The other would be, your smartphone. The other would be, your smartphone. The other would be, again, if there's material that you again, if there's material that you again, if there's material that you really need to learn for sake of really need to learn for sake of really need to learn for sake of regurgitation later or for it's regurgitation later or for it's regurgitation later or for it's something particularly important, try something particularly important, try something particularly important, try and read that from either a larger and read that from either a larger and read that from either a larger screen or even better would be from screen or even better would be from screen or even better would be from printed materials or books. Another printed materials or books. Another printed materials or books. Another reason I bring all that up is that it reason I bring all that up is that it reason I bring all that up is that it relates to a larger theme, which is that relates to a larger theme, which is that relates to a larger theme, which is that I get many, many questions about ADHD I get many, many questions about ADHD I get many, many questions about ADHD and about people's challenges with and about people's challenges with and about people's challenges with focus. And much of what we're told these focus. And much of what we're told these focus. And much of what we're told these days is that we are challenged with days is that we are challenged with days is that we are challenged with focus because of the hundreds of videos focus because of the hundreds of videos focus because of the hundreds of videos that we can see streaming by us in any that we can see streaming by us in any that we can see streaming by us in any moment on our phone, which probably is moment on our phone, which probably is moment on our phone, which probably is true. The fact that the information that true. The fact that the information that true. The fact that the information that we're reading on the internet and on our we're reading on the internet and on our we're reading on the internet and on our phones is emotionally disturbing or phones is emotionally disturbing or phones is emotionally disturbing or distressing in some way, and that distressing in some way, and that distressing in some way, and that probably is true as well in many cases. probably is true as well in many cases. probably is true as well in many cases. This study really points to the fact This study really points to the fact This study really points to the fact that independent of the information that independent of the information that independent of the information that we are looking at or consuming, we are looking at or consuming, we are looking at or consuming, independent whether or not it's movies independent whether or not it's movies independent whether or not it's movies or texts or anything of that sort, the or texts or anything of that sort, the or texts or anything of that sort, the mere size of the window, the aperture, mere size of the window, the aperture, mere size of the window, the aperture, the screen that we are looking at is the screen that we are looking at is the screen that we are looking at is also strongly impacting our ability to also strongly impacting our ability to also strongly impacting our ability to learn and remember information. So, learn and remember information. So, learn and remember information. So, broaden that visual window, broaden that visual window, broaden that visual window, print things out, look at a book. print things out, look at a book. print things out, look at a book. I didn't design the system. I always I didn't design the system. I always I didn't design the system. I always say, you know, however our visual system say, you know, however our visual system say, you know, however our visual system and respiratory system and respiratory system and respiratory system happened to evolve, I wasn't consulted happened to evolve, I wasn't consulted happened to evolve, I wasn't consulted at the design phase. This is just simply at the design phase. This is just simply at the design phase. This is just simply how your brain circuits work. So, if you how your brain circuits work. So, if you how your brain circuits work. So, if you want to learn things, widen that visual want to learn things, widen that visual want to learn things, widen that visual window, and even better, print things window, and even better, print things window, and even better, print things out, pick up a book, or read on a tablet out, pick up a book, or read on a tablet out, pick up a book, or read on a tablet even, but try and make that tablet even, but try and make that tablet even, but try and make that tablet larger than a smartphone screen size. larger than a smartphone screen size. larger than a smartphone screen size. Before we begin our discussion about the Before we begin our discussion about the Before we begin our discussion about the power of play, power of play, power of play, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast I'd like to emphasize that this podcast I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and is separate from my teaching and is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens, also now sponsor is Athletic Greens, also now sponsor is Athletic Greens, also now called AG1. called AG1. called AG1. I started drinking Athletic Greens way I started drinking Athletic Greens way I started drinking Athletic Greens way back in 2012 and so I'm delighted that back in 2012 and so I'm delighted that back in 2012 and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. Athletic they're sponsoring the podcast. Athletic they're sponsoring the podcast. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. The reason I mineral, probiotic drink. The reason I mineral, probiotic drink. The reason I started drinking it in 2012 and the started drinking it in 2012 and the started drinking it in 2012 and the reason that I still drink it once or reason that I still drink it once or reason that I still drink it once or twice a day is that with Athletic Greens twice a day is that with Athletic Greens twice a day is that with Athletic Greens I cover all of my basic foundational I cover all of my basic foundational I cover all of my basic foundational vitamin, mineral, probiotic needs. vitamin, mineral, probiotic needs. vitamin, mineral, probiotic needs. It's filled with adaptogens for It's filled with adaptogens for It's filled with adaptogens for recovery. The probiotics are recovery. The probiotics are recovery. The probiotics are particularly important because they particularly important because they particularly important because they encourage health of the so-called gut encourage health of the so-called gut encourage health of the so-called gut microbiome. We're going to be talking a microbiome. We're going to be talking a microbiome. We're going to be talking a lot about the gut microbiome on this lot about the gut microbiome on this lot about the gut microbiome on this podcast in the weeks and months to come, podcast in the weeks and months to come, podcast in the weeks and months to come, but to make a long story short, we have but to make a long story short, we have but to make a long story short, we have a lot of bacteria living in our gut that a lot of bacteria living in our gut that a lot of bacteria living in our gut that are healthy bacteria that support things are healthy bacteria that support things are healthy bacteria that support things like digestion, immune system, metabolic like digestion, immune system, metabolic like digestion, immune system, metabolic function, hormone systems, and perhaps function, hormone systems, and perhaps function, hormone systems, and perhaps most interestingly to me, most interestingly to me, most interestingly to me, the gut microbiome supports brain the gut microbiome supports brain the gut microbiome supports brain function including mood, cognition, and function including mood, cognition, and function including mood, cognition, and so forth. so forth. so forth. The probiotics in Athletic Greens The probiotics in Athletic Greens The probiotics in Athletic Greens strongly support the gut microbiome and strongly support the gut microbiome and strongly support the gut microbiome and thereby the other systems of the body thereby the other systems of the body thereby the other systems of the body including the gut-brain axis which I including the gut-brain axis which I including the gut-brain axis which I just referred to. If you'd like to try just referred to. If you'd like to try just referred to. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, again also called AG1, Athletic Greens, again also called AG1, Athletic Greens, again also called AG1, you can go to you can go to you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They're giving to claim a special offer. They're giving to claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs and a year away five free travel packs and a year away five free travel packs and a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Vitamin D3 is supply of vitamin D3K2. Vitamin D3 is supply of vitamin D3K2. Vitamin D3 is extremely important for many biological extremely important for many biological extremely important for many biological functions. We are told that we can get functions. We are told that we can get functions. We are told that we can get enough D3 from sun exposure, but many of enough D3 from sun exposure, but many of enough D3 from sun exposure, but many of us who are getting sun exposure and many us who are getting sun exposure and many us who are getting sun exposure and many of us who are not getting enough sun of us who are not getting enough sun of us who are not getting enough sun exposure still don't have ample levels exposure still don't have ample levels exposure still don't have ample levels of vitamin D3. So, supplementing with of vitamin D3. So, supplementing with of vitamin D3. So, supplementing with vitamin D3 is necessary for many, many vitamin D3 is necessary for many, many vitamin D3 is necessary for many, many people and K2 is important for people and K2 is important for people and K2 is important for cardiovascular function, for cardiovascular function, for cardiovascular function, for proper calcium balance, et cetera. So, proper calcium balance, et cetera. So, proper calcium balance, et cetera. So, again, if you go to again, if you go to again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman you can get the five free travel packs, you can get the five free travel packs, you can get the five free travel packs, the year supply of vitamin D3K2, and of the year supply of vitamin D3K2, and of the year supply of vitamin D3K2, and of course, your Athletic Greens. Today's course, your Athletic Greens. Today's course, your Athletic Greens. Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka. episode is also brought to us by Roka. episode is also brought to us by Roka. Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute highest that are of the absolute highest that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working quality. I've spent a lifetime working quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system and one of the many on the visual system and one of the many on the visual system and one of the many challenges that your visual system has challenges that your visual system has challenges that your visual system has to deal with is, for instance, when you to deal with is, for instance, when you to deal with is, for instance, when you move from a bright environment to a move from a bright environment to a move from a bright environment to a dimmer environment, you have to adapt. dimmer environment, you have to adapt. dimmer environment, you have to adapt. You have to be able to see things You have to be able to see things You have to be able to see things clearly. Many sunglasses and eyeglasses clearly. Many sunglasses and eyeglasses clearly. Many sunglasses and eyeglasses don't allow that adaptation to occur don't allow that adaptation to occur don't allow that adaptation to occur seamlessly. Roka sunglasses and seamlessly. Roka sunglasses and seamlessly. Roka sunglasses and eyeglasses allow that to occur in eyeglasses allow that to occur in eyeglasses allow that to occur in concert with your biology and in a way concert with your biology and in a way concert with your biology and in a way that makes it very seamless. You just that makes it very seamless. You just that makes it very seamless. You just don't notice the transition at all, don't notice the transition at all, don't notice the transition at all, which is wonderful. I love it because I which is wonderful. I love it because I which is wonderful. I love it because I don't have to constantly be taking off don't have to constantly be taking off don't have to constantly be taking off and putting on my sunglasses when I'm and putting on my sunglasses when I'm and putting on my sunglasses when I'm outside. I have to wear readers at outside. I have to wear readers at outside. I have to wear readers at night, eyeglass readers. It's also night, eyeglass readers. It's also night, eyeglass readers. It's also terrific as the luminance in your terrific as the luminance in your terrific as the luminance in your environment changes. So, they work under environment changes. So, they work under environment changes. So, they work under low luminance, high luminance, etc. low luminance, high luminance, etc. low luminance, high luminance, etc. They're very lightweight. In fact, you They're very lightweight. In fact, you They're very lightweight. In fact, you can wear them when running, when can wear them when running, when can wear them when running, when cycling. They were designed by two cycling. They were designed by two cycling. They were designed by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and All-American swimmers from Stanford, and All-American swimmers from Stanford, and so originally they were designed for the so originally they were designed for the so originally they were designed for the purpose of being worn during exercise, purpose of being worn during exercise, purpose of being worn during exercise, but you can wear them anywhere. They but you can wear them anywhere. They but you can wear them anywhere. They have a great aesthetic, so you can wear have a great aesthetic, so you can wear have a great aesthetic, so you can wear them to dinner, to work, etc. And while them to dinner, to work, etc. And while them to dinner, to work, etc. And while a lot of performance eyeglasses out a lot of performance eyeglasses out a lot of performance eyeglasses out there, in my opinion, make people look there, in my opinion, make people look there, in my opinion, make people look like cyborgs, Roka sunglasses and like cyborgs, Roka sunglasses and like cyborgs, Roka sunglasses and eyeglasses have just a terrific eyeglasses have just a terrific eyeglasses have just a terrific aesthetic that you can wear truly aesthetic that you can wear truly aesthetic that you can wear truly anywhere. If you'd like to try Roka anywhere. If you'd like to try Roka anywhere. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can go to roka.com. That's glasses, you can go to roka.com. That's glasses, you can go to roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to get 20% and enter the code Huberman to get 20% and enter the code Huberman to get 20% off your first order. Again, that's off your first order. Again, that's off your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are second mattresses and pillows that are second mattresses and pillows that are second to none. I started sleeping on a Helix to none. I started sleeping on a Helix to none. I started sleeping on a Helix mattress about a year ago now, and it's mattress about a year ago now, and it's mattress about a year ago now, and it's the best sleep that I've ever had. the best sleep that I've ever had. the best sleep that I've ever had. What's unique about Helix mattresses is What's unique about Helix mattresses is What's unique about Helix mattresses is that they tailor their mattresses to that they tailor their mattresses to that they tailor their mattresses to your sleep needs. So, if you go to their your sleep needs. So, if you go to their your sleep needs. So, if you go to their website, you can take a brief 2-minute website, you can take a brief 2-minute website, you can take a brief 2-minute quiz that asks questions like, do you quiz that asks questions like, do you quiz that asks questions like, do you sleep on your stomach or your back or on sleep on your stomach or your back or on sleep on your stomach or your back or on your side? Maybe you don't know. Do you your side? Maybe you don't know. Do you your side? Maybe you don't know. Do you tend to run hot or cold throughout the tend to run hot or cold throughout the tend to run hot or cold throughout the night? Or maybe you don't know. And it night? Or maybe you don't know. And it night? Or maybe you don't know. And it matches you to the mattress that's matches you to the mattress that's matches you to the mattress that's perfect for your sleep needs. I matched perfect for your sleep needs. I matched perfect for your sleep needs. I matched to the so-called Dusk mattress, d u s k, to the so-called Dusk mattress, d u s k, to the so-called Dusk mattress, d u s k, because I wanted a mattress that wasn't because I wanted a mattress that wasn't because I wanted a mattress that wasn't too firm too soft, and so I sleep on a too firm too soft, and so I sleep on a too firm too soft, and so I sleep on a Dusk mattress. You should figure out Dusk mattress. You should figure out Dusk mattress. You should figure out what mattress would be ideal for you. If what mattress would be ideal for you. If what mattress would be ideal for you. If you're interested in upgrading your you're interested in upgrading your you're interested in upgrading your mattress, you can go to mattress, you can go to mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. Take their 2-minute sleep quiz and Take their 2-minute sleep quiz and Take their 2-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $200 off mattress and you'll get up to $200 off mattress and you'll get up to $200 off any of your mattress orders and two free any of your mattress orders and two free any of your mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, that's $200 off and two pillows. Again, that's $200 off and two pillows. Again, that's $200 off and two free pillows. The pillows are excellent. free pillows. The pillows are excellent. free pillows. The pillows are excellent. I also use Helix pillows. They have a I also use Helix pillows. They have a I also use Helix pillows. They have a 10-year warranty. You get to try out the 10-year warranty. You get to try out the 10-year warranty. You get to try out the mattress for up to 100 nights risk-free. mattress for up to 100 nights risk-free. mattress for up to 100 nights risk-free. If you don't like it, they'll come pick If you don't like it, they'll come pick If you don't like it, they'll come pick it up, take it away, but I think you'll it up, take it away, but I think you'll it up, take it away, but I think you'll love it. Again, if interested, you can love it. Again, if interested, you can love it. Again, if interested, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. go to helixsleep.com/huberman. go to helixsleep.com/huberman. There you can get up to $200 off and the There you can get up to $200 off and the There you can get up to $200 off and the two free pillows. Let's talk about play. two free pillows. Let's talk about play. two free pillows. Let's talk about play. Now, in researching this episode, I Now, in researching this episode, I Now, in researching this episode, I thought that I was going to come across thought that I was going to come across thought that I was going to come across a bunch of papers that say this brain a bunch of papers that say this brain a bunch of papers that say this brain area connects to that brain area, which area connects to that brain area, which area connects to that brain area, which controls play in animals and there's controls play in animals and there's controls play in animals and there's similar areas in babies and in adults. similar areas in babies and in adults. similar areas in babies and in adults. And indeed, that's true and we will talk And indeed, that's true and we will talk And indeed, that's true and we will talk about brain circuitry. about brain circuitry. about brain circuitry. But, I think more importantly is to But, I think more importantly is to But, I think more importantly is to understand what is the utility of play. understand what is the utility of play. understand what is the utility of play. You know, why do we play when we're You know, why do we play when we're You know, why do we play when we're younger? Why do we tend to play less as younger? Why do we tend to play less as younger? Why do we tend to play less as we get older? And what in the world is we get older? And what in the world is we get older? And what in the world is play for? Some of us would be play for? Some of us would be play for? Some of us would be categorized as more playful. categorized as more playful. categorized as more playful. I'm sure that you know people like this. I'm sure that you know people like this. I'm sure that you know people like this. Maybe you are like this. People that can Maybe you are like this. People that can Maybe you are like this. People that can walk into a room, a social setting of walk into a room, a social setting of walk into a room, a social setting of any kind, and they seem to already kind any kind, and they seem to already kind any kind, and they seem to already kind of have a playful, maybe even a of have a playful, maybe even a of have a playful, maybe even a mischievous quality about them. We'll mischievous quality about them. We'll mischievous quality about them. We'll talk about mischief a little bit later. talk about mischief a little bit later. talk about mischief a little bit later. But, they sort of look at an environment But, they sort of look at an environment But, they sort of look at an environment or a social setting as an opportunity or a social setting as an opportunity or a social setting as an opportunity for different kinds of novel for different kinds of novel for different kinds of novel interactions. Other people, and I'd interactions. Other people, and I'd interactions. Other people, and I'd probably put myself into this category, probably put myself into this category, probably put myself into this category, if I walk into a novel environment, I if I walk into a novel environment, I if I walk into a novel environment, I tend to be more in the mode of kind of tend to be more in the mode of kind of tend to be more in the mode of kind of just assessing what that environment is just assessing what that environment is just assessing what that environment is like. I'm not a particularly like. I'm not a particularly like. I'm not a particularly spontaneously playful person, although spontaneously playful person, although spontaneously playful person, although around certain individuals, I might be around certain individuals, I might be around certain individuals, I might be more spontaneously playful. We are all more spontaneously playful. We are all more spontaneously playful. We are all on a continuum of this kind of on a continuum of this kind of on a continuum of this kind of seriousness to playful nature. seriousness to playful nature. seriousness to playful nature. Turns out that all young animals, Turns out that all young animals, Turns out that all young animals, including humans, have more playfulness including humans, have more playfulness including humans, have more playfulness and tend to engage in more spontaneous and tend to engage in more spontaneous and tend to engage in more spontaneous play in their earlier years than in play in their earlier years than in play in their earlier years than in their later years. their later years. their later years. And therein lies a very portal to And therein lies a very portal to And therein lies a very portal to understanding what the utility, what the understanding what the utility, what the understanding what the utility, what the purpose of play is. First of all, I want purpose of play is. First of all, I want purpose of play is. First of all, I want to lay down a couple of key facts about to lay down a couple of key facts about to lay down a couple of key facts about play that point to the fact that play is play that point to the fact that play is play that point to the fact that play is not just about games. Play is about not just about games. Play is about not just about games. Play is about much, much more. And play, and in much, much more. And play, and in much, much more. And play, and in particular how we played as a child, and particular how we played as a child, and particular how we played as a child, and still how we can play as adults, is still how we can play as adults, is still how we can play as adults, is really how we test and expand our really how we test and expand our really how we test and expand our potential roles in all kinds of potential roles in all kinds of potential roles in all kinds of interactions. One of the most important, interesting, One of the most important, interesting, One of the most important, interesting, and surprising features of play that I'd and surprising features of play that I'd and surprising features of play that I'd like everyone to know about is that it like everyone to know about is that it like everyone to know about is that it is homeostatically regulated. Some of is homeostatically regulated. Some of is homeostatically regulated. Some of you are familiar with the term you are familiar with the term you are familiar with the term homeostasis. Homeostasis is just this homeostasis. Homeostasis is just this homeostasis. Homeostasis is just this aspect of biological systems to try and aspect of biological systems to try and aspect of biological systems to try and remain in balance. You know, if you stay remain in balance. You know, if you stay remain in balance. You know, if you stay awake for a long period of time, you awake for a long period of time, you awake for a long period of time, you tend to want to sleep for a long period tend to want to sleep for a long period tend to want to sleep for a long period of time. If you slept for a long period of time. If you slept for a long period of time. If you slept for a long period of time and you're very rested, then you of time and you're very rested, then you of time and you're very rested, then you tend to be very energetic the next day. tend to be very energetic the next day. tend to be very energetic the next day. And of course, I know people out there And of course, I know people out there And of course, I know people out there will immediately say, "Oh, well, if I will immediately say, "Oh, well, if I will immediately say, "Oh, well, if I sleep too long, then I'm groggy the next sleep too long, then I'm groggy the next sleep too long, then I'm groggy the next day." Of course, there are exceptions, day." Of course, there are exceptions, day." Of course, there are exceptions, but in general, but in general, but in general, sleep and wakefulness are in homeostatic sleep and wakefulness are in homeostatic sleep and wakefulness are in homeostatic balance. Thirst and water consumption are in Thirst and water consumption are in Thirst and water consumption are in homeostatic balance. If you don't drink homeostatic balance. If you don't drink homeostatic balance. If you don't drink any fluids for a while, you tend to get any fluids for a while, you tend to get any fluids for a while, you tend to get more thirsty. You drink fluids, and your more thirsty. You drink fluids, and your more thirsty. You drink fluids, and your thirst tends to diminish. Likewise with thirst tends to diminish. Likewise with thirst tends to diminish. Likewise with food, likewise with most all motivated food, likewise with most all motivated food, likewise with most all motivated behaviors. Well, one of the most behaviors. Well, one of the most behaviors. Well, one of the most important discoveries of the last important discoveries of the last important discoveries of the last century was largely the work of a guy named Jaak was largely the work of a guy named Jaak was largely the work of a guy named Jaak Panksepp. No, it's not Jack, it's Jaak Panksepp. No, it's not Jack, it's Jaak Panksepp. No, it's not Jack, it's Jaak Panksepp, who really pioneered this Panksepp, who really pioneered this Panksepp, who really pioneered this understanding of the biology of play and understanding of the biology of play and understanding of the biology of play and relating that to the psychology of play relating that to the psychology of play relating that to the psychology of play in animals and humans. He's considered a in animals and humans. He's considered a in animals and humans. He's considered a kind of luminary in the field of play. kind of luminary in the field of play. kind of luminary in the field of play. And what a great title to have, right? And what a great title to have, right? And what a great title to have, right? If you could have a title and be a If you could have a title and be a If you could have a title and be a scientific luminary, you might as well scientific luminary, you might as well scientific luminary, you might as well be the be the be the play guy. In fact, he was known, and the play guy. In fact, he was known, and the play guy. In fact, he was known, and I'll get into this later as to why, but I'll get into this later as to why, but I'll get into this later as to why, but he was known as the rat tickler he was known as the rat tickler he was known as the rat tickler uh because he tickled rats, and he uh because he tickled rats, and he uh because he tickled rats, and he actually found that rodents and animals actually found that rodents and animals actually found that rodents and animals of many kind generate laughter in of many kind generate laughter in of many kind generate laughter in response to tickling. And in fact, they response to tickling. And in fact, they response to tickling. And in fact, they don't have the capacity to tickle don't have the capacity to tickle don't have the capacity to tickle themselves, something we'll also talk themselves, something we'll also talk themselves, something we'll also talk about why that is. And he was called the about why that is. And he was called the about why that is. And he was called the rat tickler, but then he discovered that rat tickler, but then he discovered that rat tickler, but then he discovered that many species of animals engage in many species of animals engage in many species of animals engage in laughter in response to tickling and laughter in response to tickling and laughter in response to tickling and that they tickle each other. And the that they tickle each other. And the that they tickle each other. And the reason you don't hear them laughing, no, reason you don't hear them laughing, no, reason you don't hear them laughing, no, you can't hear your dog laughing, that you can't hear your dog laughing, that you can't hear your dog laughing, that isn't laughing, it's something else, is isn't laughing, it's something else, is isn't laughing, it's something else, is that most animals besides humans laugh that most animals besides humans laugh that most animals besides humans laugh at kind of ultrasonic levels of at kind of ultrasonic levels of at kind of ultrasonic levels of auditory output, meaning the frequencies auditory output, meaning the frequencies auditory output, meaning the frequencies of sound are just too high for you to of sound are just too high for you to of sound are just too high for you to hear, but with the appropriate devices, hear, but with the appropriate devices, hear, but with the appropriate devices, he was able with his colleagues to he was able with his colleagues to he was able with his colleagues to isolate the so-called isolate the so-called isolate the so-called the rat laughter. And then turns out the rat laughter. And then turns out the rat laughter. And then turns out there's kitten laughter, and there's kitten laughter, and there's kitten laughter, and there's puppy laughter, and of course there's puppy laughter, and of course there's puppy laughter, and of course there's human laughter. So Jaak Panksepp was a human laughter. So Jaak Panksepp was a human laughter. So Jaak Panksepp was a very interesting and pioneering person very interesting and pioneering person very interesting and pioneering person in this field. And he also discovered in this field. And he also discovered in this field. And he also discovered that play is homeostatically regulated, that play is homeostatically regulated, that play is homeostatically regulated, meaning if animals, including children, meaning if animals, including children, meaning if animals, including children, are restricted from playing for a are restricted from playing for a are restricted from playing for a certain amount of time, they will play certain amount of time, they will play certain amount of time, they will play more when given the opportunity. In the more when given the opportunity. In the more when given the opportunity. In the same way that if I food restrict you for same way that if I food restrict you for same way that if I food restrict you for a long period of time, you will eat more a long period of time, you will eat more a long period of time, you will eat more when you are finally allowed to eat. when you are finally allowed to eat. when you are finally allowed to eat. Now, this is important because it moves Now, this is important because it moves Now, this is important because it moves this thing that we call play from the this thing that we call play from the this thing that we call play from the dimension of higher-order functions or dimension of higher-order functions or dimension of higher-order functions or things that evolved recently, things that evolved recently, things that evolved recently, uh you know, that are really kind of at uh you know, that are really kind of at uh you know, that are really kind of at the front edge of human evolution, front edge of human evolution, front edge of human evolution, deeper into the circuitry of the brain, deeper into the circuitry of the brain, deeper into the circuitry of the brain, whereby we say the brainstem, the kind whereby we say the brainstem, the kind whereby we say the brainstem, the kind of ancient parts of the brain, are going of ancient parts of the brain, are going of ancient parts of the brain, are going to be involved. And if in fact, that's to be involved. And if in fact, that's to be involved. And if in fact, that's the case. As we're going to learn later the case. As we're going to learn later the case. As we're going to learn later in the podcast, in the podcast, in the podcast, play is generated through the play is generated through the play is generated through the connectivity of many brain areas, but connectivity of many brain areas, but connectivity of many brain areas, but one of the key brain areas is an area one of the key brain areas is an area one of the key brain areas is an area called PAG, called PAG, called PAG, periaqueductal gray. The periaqueductal gray. The periaqueductal gray. The periaqueductal gray is a gray is a gray is a brainstem area, so it's pretty far back brainstem area, so it's pretty far back brainstem area, so it's pretty far back as the brain kind of transitions into as the brain kind of transitions into as the brain kind of transitions into the spinal cord, and it's rich with the spinal cord, and it's rich with the spinal cord, and it's rich with neurons that make endogenous opioids. So neurons that make endogenous opioids. So neurons that make endogenous opioids. So these are not the kinds of opioids that these are not the kinds of opioids that these are not the kinds of opioids that are causing the opioid crisis. These are causing the opioid crisis. These are causing the opioid crisis. These are neurons that you and I all have that neurons that you and I all have that neurons that you and I all have that release endogenous, meaning self-made or release endogenous, meaning self-made or release endogenous, meaning self-made or biologically made, opioids. biologically made, opioids. biologically made, opioids. They go by names like enkephalin and They go by names like enkephalin and They go by names like enkephalin and things of that sort. things of that sort. things of that sort. Play evokes small amounts of opioid Play evokes small amounts of opioid Play evokes small amounts of opioid release into the system. They kind of release into the system. They kind of release into the system. They kind of dope you up a little bit. Not so much um dope you up a little bit. Not so much um dope you up a little bit. Not so much um as one would see if one were to take as one would see if one were to take as one would see if one were to take exogenous opioids. In fact, exogenous opioids. In fact, exogenous opioids. In fact, exogenous opioids, as we now know, are opioids, as we now know, are opioids, as we now know, are potentially very hazardous, highly high potentially very hazardous, highly high potentially very hazardous, highly high addiction potential, high overdose addiction potential, high overdose addiction potential, high overdose potential. They cause all sorts of potential. They cause all sorts of potential. They cause all sorts of problems. Yes, there are clinical uses problems. Yes, there are clinical uses problems. Yes, there are clinical uses for them, but they're causing a lot of for them, but they're causing a lot of for them, but they're causing a lot of problems nowadays. But, these endogenous problems nowadays. But, these endogenous problems nowadays. But, these endogenous opioids are released in children and opioids are released in children and opioids are released in children and adults anytime adults anytime adults anytime we engage in play. And that turns out to we engage in play. And that turns out to we engage in play. And that turns out to be a very important chemical state be a very important chemical state be a very important chemical state because there's something about having because there's something about having because there's something about having an abundance of these endogenous opioids an abundance of these endogenous opioids an abundance of these endogenous opioids released into the brain released into the brain released into the brain that allows other areas of the brain, that allows other areas of the brain, that allows other areas of the brain, like the prefrontal cortex, the area of like the prefrontal cortex, the area of like the prefrontal cortex, the area of the front that's responsible for what we the front that's responsible for what we the front that's responsible for what we call executive function. Executive call executive function. Executive call executive function. Executive function is the ability to make function is the ability to make function is the ability to make predictions, to assess contingencies. predictions, to assess contingencies. predictions, to assess contingencies. Like, if I do this, then that happens. Like, if I do this, then that happens. Like, if I do this, then that happens. If I do that, then that happens. Well, If I do that, then that happens. Well, If I do that, then that happens. Well, prefrontal cortex is often seen as a prefrontal cortex is often seen as a prefrontal cortex is often seen as a kind of rigid executive of the whole kind of rigid executive of the whole kind of rigid executive of the whole brain. That's one way to view it, but brain. That's one way to view it, but brain. That's one way to view it, but probably a better way to view it is that probably a better way to view it is that probably a better way to view it is that the prefrontal cortex works in concert the prefrontal cortex works in concert the prefrontal cortex works in concert with these other more primitive with these other more primitive with these other more primitive circuitries. And when the periaqueductal circuitries. And when the periaqueductal circuitries. And when the periaqueductal gray releases these endogenous opioids gray releases these endogenous opioids gray releases these endogenous opioids during play, during play, during play, the prefrontal cortex doesn't get the prefrontal cortex doesn't get the prefrontal cortex doesn't get stupid. It actually gets smarter. It stupid. It actually gets smarter. It stupid. It actually gets smarter. It develops the ability to take on develops the ability to take on develops the ability to take on different roles and explore different roles and explore different roles and explore different contingencies. And we're going to talk contingencies. And we're going to talk contingencies. And we're going to talk about role play later in different about role play later in different about role play later in different contexts. And what we will find is that contexts. And what we will find is that contexts. And what we will find is that so much of play is really about so much of play is really about so much of play is really about exploring things in a way that feels exploring things in a way that feels exploring things in a way that feels safe enough to explore, right? This is safe enough to explore, right? This is safe enough to explore, right? This is not what happens when we drive down the not what happens when we drive down the not what happens when we drive down the street or when we bike down the street. street or when we bike down the street. street or when we bike down the street. When we are headed to work, commuting on When we are headed to work, commuting on When we are headed to work, commuting on our bicycle, or walking, or driving, we our bicycle, or walking, or driving, we our bicycle, or walking, or driving, we tend to be very linear, and we tend to tend to be very linear, and we tend to tend to be very linear, and we tend to be very goal-directed. We're not going be very goal-directed. We're not going be very goal-directed. We're not going to just take a new street just because. to just take a new street just because. to just take a new street just because. We're not going to be spontaneously We're not going to be spontaneously We're not going to be spontaneously riding in the middle of the road, and riding in the middle of the road, and riding in the middle of the road, and then on the sidewalk, and then back and then on the sidewalk, and then back and then on the sidewalk, and then back and forth. Although, I can remember as a forth. Although, I can remember as a forth. Although, I can remember as a kid, I was doing some of that. I like to kid, I was doing some of that. I like to kid, I was doing some of that. I like to jump off curb cuts when I was a kid, and jump off curb cuts when I was a kid, and jump off curb cuts when I was a kid, and then eventually I graduated, sorry to then eventually I graduated, sorry to then eventually I graduated, sorry to the cyclist, but I graduated to the cyclist, but I graduated to the cyclist, but I graduated to skateboarding, and then I look down skateboarding, and then I look down skateboarding, and then I look down skateboarding, you're always kind of skateboarding, you're always kind of skateboarding, you're always kind of exploring terrain. But, you know, as I exploring terrain. But, you know, as I exploring terrain. But, you know, as I got older, actually, I find myself got older, actually, I find myself got older, actually, I find myself becoming much more linear. I just don't becoming much more linear. I just don't becoming much more linear. I just don't play with my commute very much. It's play with my commute very much. It's play with my commute very much. It's really just about getting to work, and really just about getting to work, and really just about getting to work, and then working. then working. then working. When endogenous opioids are in our When endogenous opioids are in our When endogenous opioids are in our system, when we're in this mode of play, system, when we're in this mode of play, system, when we're in this mode of play, the prefrontal cortex starts seeing and the prefrontal cortex starts seeing and the prefrontal cortex starts seeing and exploring many more possibilities of how exploring many more possibilities of how exploring many more possibilities of how we interact with our environment, with we interact with our environment, with we interact with our environment, with others, and the roles that we can assume others, and the roles that we can assume others, and the roles that we can assume for ourselves. And so, we're going to for ourselves. And so, we're going to for ourselves. And so, we're going to dissect one by one the different aspects dissect one by one the different aspects dissect one by one the different aspects of play, role play, social play, of play, role play, social play, of play, role play, social play, individual play, imaginary play, individual play, imaginary play, individual play, imaginary play, competitive play. There are numerous competitive play. There are numerous competitive play. There are numerous number of dimensions of play, and by the number of dimensions of play, and by the number of dimensions of play, and by the end of this episode, end of this episode, end of this episode, we're going to arrive at a very key we're going to arrive at a very key we're going to arrive at a very key feature. The key feature is one that's feature. The key feature is one that's feature. The key feature is one that's called your personal play identity. All called your personal play identity. All called your personal play identity. All of us have what we call a personal play of us have what we call a personal play of us have what we call a personal play identity. This personal play identity identity. This personal play identity identity. This personal play identity was laid down during development, and it was laid down during development, and it was laid down during development, and it is the identity that you assume in is the identity that you assume in is the identity that you assume in playful scenarios, and it is the playful scenarios, and it is the playful scenarios, and it is the identity that you adopt in non-playful identity that you adopt in non-playful identity that you adopt in non-playful scenarios. The great news is that your personal The great news is that your personal The great news is that your personal play identity is plastic throughout your play identity is plastic throughout your play identity is plastic throughout your entire lifespan. You can adjust your entire lifespan. You can adjust your entire lifespan. You can adjust your personal play identity in ways that will personal play identity in ways that will personal play identity in ways that will benefit you in work, in relationships, benefit you in work, in relationships, benefit you in work, in relationships, and your overall level of happiness. We and your overall level of happiness. We and your overall level of happiness. We will discuss protocols and ways to do will discuss protocols and ways to do will discuss protocols and ways to do that. But, I do want to give a nod to that. But, I do want to give a nod to that. But, I do want to give a nod to the late Jack Jaak, excuse me, Jaak the late Jack Jaak, excuse me, Jaak the late Jack Jaak, excuse me, Jaak Panksepp, the rat tickler. And I also want to just the rat tickler. And I also want to just the rat tickler. And I also want to just give a nod to play generally. As we move give a nod to play generally. As we move give a nod to play generally. As we move forward in the discussion, what I'd love forward in the discussion, what I'd love forward in the discussion, what I'd love for everyone to do is to stop thinking for everyone to do is to stop thinking for everyone to do is to stop thinking about play as just a child activity, about play as just a child activity, about play as just a child activity, not just a sport-related activity, but not just a sport-related activity, but not just a sport-related activity, but really as an exploration in really as an exploration in really as an exploration in contingencies. Again, contingencies. Again, contingencies. Again, it's an exploration of if I do A, what it's an exploration of if I do A, what it's an exploration of if I do A, what happens? If I do B, what happens? If happens? If I do B, what happens? If happens? If I do B, what happens? If someone else takes on behavior or um someone else takes on behavior or um someone else takes on behavior or um attitude C, what am I going to do? And attitude C, what am I going to do? And attitude C, what am I going to do? And play is really where we can expand our play is really where we can expand our play is really where we can expand our catalog of potential outcomes, and it catalog of potential outcomes, and it catalog of potential outcomes, and it can be enormously enriching. And indeed, can be enormously enriching. And indeed, can be enormously enriching. And indeed, as we'll talk about, as we'll talk about, as we'll talk about, the tinkers of the world, the true the tinkers of the world, the true the tinkers of the world, the true creatives, the people that build creatives, the people that build creatives, the people that build incredible technologies and art, and incredible technologies and art, and incredible technologies and art, and also that just have incredibly rich also that just have incredibly rich also that just have incredibly rich emotional and intellectual and social emotional and intellectual and social emotional and intellectual and social lives, all have a strong element of lives, all have a strong element of lives, all have a strong element of play. And so today I hope to convince play. And so today I hope to convince play. And so today I hope to convince you of some protocols that will allow you of some protocols that will allow you of some protocols that will allow you to expand your various roles in life you to expand your various roles in life you to expand your various roles in life through the portal of play. So we through the portal of play. So we through the portal of play. So we establish that play is homeostatic, establish that play is homeostatic, establish that play is homeostatic, meaning we all need to do it. Many of meaning we all need to do it. Many of meaning we all need to do it. Many of us, including myself, haven't played us, including myself, haven't played us, including myself, haven't played that much as adults. We're all pretty that much as adults. We're all pretty that much as adults. We're all pretty busy. Number of us are stressed. We got busy. Number of us are stressed. We got busy. Number of us are stressed. We got a lot to do in life. a lot to do in life. a lot to do in life. But as children, most all of us engage But as children, most all of us engage But as children, most all of us engage in a lot of play. in a lot of play. in a lot of play. And in looking at the way that very And in looking at the way that very And in looking at the way that very young children, and especially toddlers, young children, and especially toddlers, young children, and especially toddlers, play, we can learn a lot because it play, we can learn a lot because it play, we can learn a lot because it reveals the fundamental rules by which reveals the fundamental rules by which reveals the fundamental rules by which the toddler brain interacts with the toddler brain interacts with the toddler brain interacts with the world. Now, world. Now, world. Now, one of the key things about the baby one of the key things about the baby one of the key things about the baby brain is that the baby brain somehow brain is that the baby brain somehow brain is that the baby brain somehow knows that it can't do everything in the knows that it can't do everything in the knows that it can't do everything in the world. Right? If a baby needs something, world. Right? If a baby needs something, world. Right? If a baby needs something, it generally will cry or make some sort it generally will cry or make some sort it generally will cry or make some sort of vocalization or some sort of facial of vocalization or some sort of facial of vocalization or some sort of facial expression or combination of those, and expression or combination of those, and expression or combination of those, and the caretaker, whoever that may be, will the caretaker, whoever that may be, will the caretaker, whoever that may be, will provide it. This is an ancient hardwired provide it. This is an ancient hardwired provide it. This is an ancient hardwired mechanism whereby the so-called mechanism whereby the so-called mechanism whereby the so-called autonomic nervous system that generates autonomic nervous system that generates autonomic nervous system that generates stress will create this kind of whining stress will create this kind of whining stress will create this kind of whining and discomfort, maybe a writhing, maybe and discomfort, maybe a writhing, maybe and discomfort, maybe a writhing, maybe the baby gets kind of red in the face, the baby gets kind of red in the face, the baby gets kind of red in the face, and the caretaker delivers something and the caretaker delivers something and the caretaker delivers something based on a good guess of what that baby based on a good guess of what that baby based on a good guess of what that baby needs. So, maybe it's breast milk, maybe it's So, maybe it's breast milk, maybe it's So, maybe it's breast milk, maybe it's bottle milk, maybe it's a diaper change, bottle milk, maybe it's a diaper change, bottle milk, maybe it's a diaper change, maybe it's to be warmed up if the baby maybe it's to be warmed up if the baby maybe it's to be warmed up if the baby is cold, maybe it's to be cooled down if is cold, maybe it's to be cooled down if is cold, maybe it's to be cooled down if the baby's too warm, maybe if the baby's the baby's too warm, maybe if the baby's the baby's too warm, maybe if the baby's in its little onesie thing, it's feeling in its little onesie thing, it's feeling in its little onesie thing, it's feeling restricted and it just wants to move and restricted and it just wants to move and restricted and it just wants to move and they'll get taken out of their they'll get taken out of their they'll get taken out of their crib or their stroller or whatever their crib or their stroller or whatever their crib or their stroller or whatever it is and allowed to stretch out on the it is and allowed to stretch out on the it is and allowed to stretch out on the floor. Remember, the baby doesn't know floor. Remember, the baby doesn't know floor. Remember, the baby doesn't know exactly what it needs, it only knows the exactly what it needs, it only knows the exactly what it needs, it only knows the state of discomfort. And of course, we state of discomfort. And of course, we state of discomfort. And of course, we don't know exactly what babies and don't know exactly what babies and don't know exactly what babies and toddlers are thinking because they can't toddlers are thinking because they can't toddlers are thinking because they can't express themselves with language yet. express themselves with language yet. express themselves with language yet. But, what's key to understand is the But, what's key to understand is the But, what's key to understand is the rule or the contingency that is set up rule or the contingency that is set up rule or the contingency that is set up in that scenario. In that scenario, the in that scenario. In that scenario, the in that scenario. In that scenario, the child it feels some discomfort, child it feels some discomfort, child it feels some discomfort, expresses that discomfort verbally or expresses that discomfort verbally or expresses that discomfort verbally or through a facial expression or both, and through a facial expression or both, and through a facial expression or both, and then some force, some person from the then some force, some person from the then some force, some person from the outside world resolves it. outside world resolves it. outside world resolves it. And so, the very young baby, and indeed And so, the very young baby, and indeed And so, the very young baby, and indeed many children up to certain ages, and many children up to certain ages, and many children up to certain ages, and let's confess, many adults, are not able let's confess, many adults, are not able let's confess, many adults, are not able to meet or adjust their internal states to meet or adjust their internal states to meet or adjust their internal states of stress, and so they look to things of stress, and so they look to things of stress, and so they look to things outside of them. That's the first rule, outside of them. That's the first rule, outside of them. That's the first rule, the fundamental rule that we all learn the fundamental rule that we all learn the fundamental rule that we all learn when we come into life. That when in a when we come into life. That when in a when we come into life. That when in a state of discomfort, to look outside our state of discomfort, to look outside our state of discomfort, to look outside our immediate biology, beyond the confines immediate biology, beyond the confines immediate biology, beyond the confines of our skin, and find a solution. of our skin, and find a solution. of our skin, and find a solution. A sip of water. For adults, it might be A sip of water. For adults, it might be A sip of water. For adults, it might be a sip of alcohol, right? Probably not a sip of alcohol, right? Probably not a sip of alcohol, right? Probably not the best tool to relieve stress, but the best tool to relieve stress, but the best tool to relieve stress, but that's one that many people do in fact that's one that many people do in fact that's one that many people do in fact engage in. For the baby that's hungry, engage in. For the baby that's hungry, engage in. For the baby that's hungry, the bottle milk comes from the outside. the bottle milk comes from the outside. the bottle milk comes from the outside. As we gain more proficiency in moving As we gain more proficiency in moving As we gain more proficiency in moving through life and we can get things for through life and we can get things for through life and we can get things for ourselves, we still often bring things ourselves, we still often bring things ourselves, we still often bring things from the external world in to resolve from the external world in to resolve from the external world in to resolve this what I'm calling autonomic dis this what I'm calling autonomic dis this what I'm calling autonomic dis discomfort or autonomic discomfort or autonomic discomfort or autonomic dysregulation. That's not a game, but that's a rule. That's not a game, but that's a rule. That's not a game, but that's a rule. As we advance from infant to toddler, As we advance from infant to toddler, As we advance from infant to toddler, we start to think more in terms of where we start to think more in terms of where we start to think more in terms of where we are and what we own relative to we are and what we own relative to we are and what we own relative to what's out there in the world. And now, what's out there in the world. And now, what's out there in the world. And now, in the world of child psychology, in the world of child psychology, in the world of child psychology, there's a somewhat famous poem that was there's a somewhat famous poem that was there's a somewhat famous poem that was written by a research child written by a research child written by a research child psychologist. His name was Burton White, psychologist. His name was Burton White, psychologist. His name was Burton White, and he wrote a poem called The Toddler's and he wrote a poem called The Toddler's and he wrote a poem called The Toddler's Creed. The Toddler's Creed defines well Creed. The Toddler's Creed defines well Creed. The Toddler's Creed defines well what the rules and contingencies of play what the rules and contingencies of play what the rules and contingencies of play are in very young children, and it are in very young children, and it are in very young children, and it reveals to us just how narrow reveals to us just how narrow reveals to us just how narrow and limited their worldview is and how and limited their worldview is and how and limited their worldview is and how self-centered their world is. So, the self-centered their world is. So, the self-centered their world is. So, the Toddler's Creed, read quickly cuz I Toddler's Creed, read quickly cuz I Toddler's Creed, read quickly cuz I don't want to take up too much time with don't want to take up too much time with don't want to take up too much time with this, is if I want it, it's mine. If I this, is if I want it, it's mine. If I this, is if I want it, it's mine. If I give it to you and change my mind later, give it to you and change my mind later, give it to you and change my mind later, it's mine. For anyone that's played with it's mine. For anyone that's played with it's mine. For anyone that's played with a toddler, you can imagine this in your a toddler, you can imagine this in your a toddler, you can imagine this in your mind. If I can take it away from you, mind. If I can take it away from you, mind. If I can take it away from you, it's mine. If I had a little while ago, it's mine. If I had a little while ago, it's mine. If I had a little while ago, it's mine. If we are building something it's mine. If we are building something it's mine. If we are building something together, all the pieces are mine. If it together, all the pieces are mine. If it together, all the pieces are mine. If it looks just like mine, it's mine. If it's looks just like mine, it's mine. If it's looks just like mine, it's mine. If it's mine, it will never belong to anyone mine, it will never belong to anyone mine, it will never belong to anyone else, no matter what. else, no matter what. else, no matter what. And, of course, as we hear this, it And, of course, as we hear this, it And, of course, as we hear this, it sounds quite awful, right? And yet, this sounds quite awful, right? And yet, this sounds quite awful, right? And yet, this is actually a reflection of what a is actually a reflection of what a is actually a reflection of what a healthy toddler would think about the healthy toddler would think about the healthy toddler would think about the world. That the objects and things and world. That the objects and things and world. That the objects and things and even the people in the world are theirs, even the people in the world are theirs, even the people in the world are theirs, that they are actually possessions that they are actually possessions that they are actually possessions that belong to them. And of course, some belong to them. And of course, some belong to them. And of course, some people never actually transition beyond people never actually transition beyond people never actually transition beyond this stage of this stage of this stage of moral and social development, and there moral and social development, and there moral and social development, and there are indeed some adults that fit the are indeed some adults that fit the are indeed some adults that fit the Toddler's Creed, and you're welcome to Toddler's Creed, and you're welcome to Toddler's Creed, and you're welcome to share this with them share this with them share this with them if ever you think that it might be of if ever you think that it might be of if ever you think that it might be of benefit to their self-reflection. But, benefit to their self-reflection. But, benefit to their self-reflection. But, in all seriousness, in all seriousness, in all seriousness, Burton White's Toddler's Creed is really Burton White's Toddler's Creed is really Burton White's Toddler's Creed is really grounded in this transition from when we grounded in this transition from when we grounded in this transition from when we are infants and we have to have things are infants and we have to have things are infants and we have to have things delivered to us to the point where we delivered to us to the point where we delivered to us to the point where we are toddlers and we can access things in are toddlers and we can access things in are toddlers and we can access things in the world, but we tend to assume that the world, but we tend to assume that the world, but we tend to assume that they are all ours. And then the next they are all ours. And then the next they are all ours. And then the next stage is the really key stage as it stage is the really key stage as it stage is the really key stage as it relates to play, because is the next relates to play, because is the next relates to play, because is the next stage of development is where young stage of development is where young stage of development is where young children start to interact with other children start to interact with other children start to interact with other children and there's an exchange and a children and there's an exchange and a children and there's an exchange and a possession and then a letting go of possession and then a letting go of possession and then a letting go of certain things. Learning that not certain things. Learning that not certain things. Learning that not everything is yours and that the entire everything is yours and that the entire everything is yours and that the entire world is not about you is one of the key world is not about you is one of the key world is not about you is one of the key contingencies that is established during contingencies that is established during contingencies that is established during play. It's one of the key ways in which It's one of the key ways in which It's one of the key ways in which children go from being very children go from being very children go from being very self-centered and basically unable to self-centered and basically unable to self-centered and basically unable to engage with other kids for very long engage with other kids for very long engage with other kids for very long without some sort of eruption of crying without some sort of eruption of crying without some sort of eruption of crying and some sort of battle of you know kind of some sort of battle of you know kind of some sort of battle of you know kind of push-pull over an object to things like push-pull over an object to things like push-pull over an object to things like sharing and things like cooperative sharing and things like cooperative sharing and things like cooperative play. So as we transition from forms of play. So as we transition from forms of play. So as we transition from forms of play that are all about the self, that play that are all about the self, that play that are all about the self, that are all me me, the toddler's are all me me, the toddler's are all me me, the toddler's creed, to forms of play that involve creed, to forms of play that involve creed, to forms of play that involve some discomfort in assuming roles that some discomfort in assuming roles that some discomfort in assuming roles that maybe we don't want and not getting what maybe we don't want and not getting what maybe we don't want and not getting what we want. we want. we want. It's really an opportunity for the brain It's really an opportunity for the brain It's really an opportunity for the brain to start to explore different roles that to start to explore different roles that to start to explore different roles that people take, how they work as people take, how they work as people take, how they work as individuals and as pairs and in larger individuals and as pairs and in larger individuals and as pairs and in larger groups, and to do that in a low-stakes groups, and to do that in a low-stakes groups, and to do that in a low-stakes environment. Right? You wouldn't want environment. Right? You wouldn't want environment. Right? You wouldn't want this to be worked out on the battlefield this to be worked out on the battlefield this to be worked out on the battlefield or when searching for food or in some or when searching for food or in some or when searching for food or in some high-stakes environment where the high-stakes environment where the high-stakes environment where the survival of the species survival of the species survival of the species was important. It appears that these was important. It appears that these was important. It appears that these circuitries for play evolved so that circuitries for play evolved so that circuitries for play evolved so that rules and contingencies around rules and contingencies around rules and contingencies around who's most important, whether or not the who's most important, whether or not the who's most important, whether or not the group is important, whether or not group is important, whether or not group is important, whether or not individuals are going to be leaders or individuals are going to be leaders or individuals are going to be leaders or followers, etc., that can be explored in followers, etc., that can be explored in followers, etc., that can be explored in a low-stakes environment. Now, there are a low-stakes environment. Now, there are a low-stakes environment. Now, there are hundreds of different types of play and hundreds of different types of play and hundreds of different types of play and hundreds of different types of hundreds of different types of hundreds of different types of contingency testing, but the key theme contingency testing, but the key theme contingency testing, but the key theme here is that play allows children here is that play allows children here is that play allows children and adults, for that matter, to explore and adults, for that matter, to explore and adults, for that matter, to explore different outcomes in a kind of different outcomes in a kind of different outcomes in a kind of low-stakes environment. If you're low-stakes environment. If you're low-stakes environment. If you're playing a board game or a card game, you playing a board game or a card game, you playing a board game or a card game, you might get really into that game, but might get really into that game, but might get really into that game, but unless there's a lot of money on the unless there's a lot of money on the unless there's a lot of money on the table, so to speak, or you're really table, so to speak, or you're really table, so to speak, or you're really playing for something important, or playing for something important, or playing for something important, or unless your ego is swollen way out of unless your ego is swollen way out of unless your ego is swollen way out of proportion to reality, if you lose, you proportion to reality, if you lose, you proportion to reality, if you lose, you might not feel good about it, but it's might not feel good about it, but it's might not feel good about it, but it's truly not the end of the world. And if truly not the end of the world. And if truly not the end of the world. And if you win, you might feel really good you win, you might feel really good you win, you might feel really good about it, but you're not really about it, but you're not really about it, but you're not really incredible. You were just incredible in incredible. You were just incredible in incredible. You were just incredible in that particular situation, for that particular situation, for that particular situation, for that particular moment. It doesn't really particular moment. It doesn't really particular moment. It doesn't really transform the rest of your life, unless transform the rest of your life, unless transform the rest of your life, unless that game is of a particular type, like that game is of a particular type, like that game is of a particular type, like for sport, for instance. We'll talk for sport, for instance. We'll talk for sport, for instance. We'll talk about sport later. So, the key theme about sport later. So, the key theme about sport later. So, the key theme here is that play is contingency here is that play is contingency here is that play is contingency testing. Play is contingency testing under Play is contingency testing under Play is contingency testing under conditions where the stakes are conditions where the stakes are conditions where the stakes are sufficiently low that individuals should sufficiently low that individuals should sufficiently low that individuals should feel comfortable assuming different feel comfortable assuming different feel comfortable assuming different roles, even roles that they're not roles, even roles that they're not roles, even roles that they're not entirely comfortable with in their entirely comfortable with in their entirely comfortable with in their outside life. And that all relates, outside life. And that all relates, outside life. And that all relates, again, to the release of these again, to the release of these again, to the release of these endogenous opioids in this brain center, endogenous opioids in this brain center, endogenous opioids in this brain center, periaqueductal gray, and the way that it periaqueductal gray, and the way that it periaqueductal gray, and the way that it allows the prefrontal cortex, in a very allows the prefrontal cortex, in a very allows the prefrontal cortex, in a very direct way, I mean, truly, it allows it direct way, I mean, truly, it allows it direct way, I mean, truly, it allows it in a biological way, to expand the in a biological way, to expand the in a biological way, to expand the number of operations that it can run, number of operations that it can run, number of operations that it can run, and start thinking about, oh, well, and start thinking about, oh, well, and start thinking about, oh, well, okay, normally I'm kind of a loner, and okay, normally I'm kind of a loner, and okay, normally I'm kind of a loner, and I like to read and work, and and, you I like to read and work, and and, you I like to read and work, and and, you know, hang out alone, maybe even play know, hang out alone, maybe even play know, hang out alone, maybe even play alone, but, you know, okay, I'll play a alone, but, you know, okay, I'll play a alone, but, you know, okay, I'll play a board game, or a game of tennis where I board game, or a game of tennis where I board game, or a game of tennis where I have a partner, and we're going to play have a partner, and we're going to play have a partner, and we're going to play as partners against two other people. as partners against two other people. as partners against two other people. Okay, that's a little uncomfortable, uh, Okay, that's a little uncomfortable, uh, Okay, that's a little uncomfortable, uh, but I'll do it. And in doing that, you but I'll do it. And in doing that, you but I'll do it. And in doing that, you discover certain ways in which you are discover certain ways in which you are discover certain ways in which you are proficient, and certain ways in which proficient, and certain ways in which proficient, and certain ways in which you are less proficient. You discover you are less proficient. You discover you are less proficient. You discover that the other person actually, uh, that the other person actually, uh, that the other person actually, uh, tends to cheat a little bit, or the tends to cheat a little bit, or the tends to cheat a little bit, or the other person is extremely rigid about other person is extremely rigid about other person is extremely rigid about the rules, or maybe he's extremely rigid the rules, or maybe he's extremely rigid the rules, or maybe he's extremely rigid about the way they organize their pieces about the way they organize their pieces about the way they organize their pieces on the board, or they're crossing the on the board, or they're crossing the on the board, or they're crossing the line into your side of the tennis court. line into your side of the tennis court. line into your side of the tennis court. There are all sorts of things that we There are all sorts of things that we There are all sorts of things that we learn in these rather low-stakes learn in these rather low-stakes learn in these rather low-stakes scenarios. That's the key theme here. scenarios. That's the key theme here. scenarios. That's the key theme here. So, before I continue, I just want to So, before I continue, I just want to So, before I continue, I just want to point to a tool that anyone can use, but point to a tool that anyone can use, but point to a tool that anyone can use, but in particular, the less playful of the in particular, the less playful of the in particular, the less playful of the group. And I would put myself into this group. And I would put myself into this group. And I would put myself into this category. Again, I'm not somebody who category. Again, I'm not somebody who category. Again, I'm not somebody who really engages in spontaneous play. really engages in spontaneous play. really engages in spontaneous play. Uh, I enjoy sports, I enjoy exercise, Uh, I enjoy sports, I enjoy exercise, Uh, I enjoy sports, I enjoy exercise, but that is distinct from play, because but that is distinct from play, because but that is distinct from play, because the sports and exercise that I engage the sports and exercise that I engage the sports and exercise that I engage in, I take pretty seriously. They're not in, I take pretty seriously. They're not in, I take pretty seriously. They're not low stakes for me. I put Actually, I put low stakes for me. I put Actually, I put low stakes for me. I put Actually, I put a lot of importance on them. As I'm a lot of importance on them. As I'm a lot of importance on them. As I'm saying all this, I probably should put a saying all this, I probably should put a saying all this, I probably should put a little less importance on them and have little less importance on them and have little less importance on them and have a little more fun with those. And yet, a little more fun with those. And yet, a little more fun with those. And yet, what I'm about to tell you is that what I'm about to tell you is that what I'm about to tell you is that anyone and everyone can benefit from engaging and everyone can benefit from engaging and everyone can benefit from engaging in a bit more of this playful mindset. in a bit more of this playful mindset. in a bit more of this playful mindset. The playful mindset is not necessarily The playful mindset is not necessarily The playful mindset is not necessarily about smiling and jumping around or about smiling and jumping around or about smiling and jumping around or being silly. being silly. being silly. That's not it at all. It's not the That's not it at all. It's not the That's not it at all. It's not the Tigger character Tigger character Tigger character uh from Winnie the Pooh necessarily. It uh from Winnie the Pooh necessarily. It uh from Winnie the Pooh necessarily. It could be, but could be, but could be, but it's really about allowing yourself to it's really about allowing yourself to it's really about allowing yourself to expand the number of expand the number of expand the number of outcomes that you're willing to outcomes that you're willing to outcomes that you're willing to entertain and to think about how you entertain and to think about how you entertain and to think about how you relate to those different outcomes. So, relate to those different outcomes. So, relate to those different outcomes. So, what this means is putting yourself into what this means is putting yourself into what this means is putting yourself into scenarios where you might not be the top scenarios where you might not be the top scenarios where you might not be the top performer, right? Playing a game that performer, right? Playing a game that performer, right? Playing a game that you're not really that good at. I had you're not really that good at. I had you're not really that good at. I had this experience recently. I friends that this experience recently. I friends that this experience recently. I friends that like to play cards. They like to do some like to play cards. They like to do some like to play cards. They like to do some low stakes gambling. This is not an low stakes gambling. This is not an low stakes gambling. This is not an illegal gambling ring. They play for illegal gambling ring. They play for illegal gambling ring. They play for trivial things. And trivial things. And trivial things. And I generally don't buy into the game. I generally don't buy into the game. I generally don't buy into the game. I generally don't play. Mostly because generally don't play. Mostly because generally don't play. Mostly because they end up winning and taking whatever they end up winning and taking whatever they end up winning and taking whatever it is that I have. But, in the mode of it is that I have. But, in the mode of it is that I have. But, in the mode of assuming a more playful spirit, the idea assuming a more playful spirit, the idea assuming a more playful spirit, the idea would be, well, if the stakes are low would be, well, if the stakes are low would be, well, if the stakes are low enough, then to play simply for the sake enough, then to play simply for the sake enough, then to play simply for the sake of playing because there's something to of playing because there's something to of playing because there's something to learn there about the other people in learn there about the other people in learn there about the other people in the group and about oneself and how one the group and about oneself and how one the group and about oneself and how one reacts to things like someone who's reacts to things like someone who's reacts to things like someone who's clearly trying to take everybody's money clearly trying to take everybody's money clearly trying to take everybody's money or somebody who is or somebody who is or somebody who is uh clearly trying to um cheat or uh clearly trying to um cheat or uh clearly trying to um cheat or somebody who's clearly very, very rigid somebody who's clearly very, very rigid somebody who's clearly very, very rigid about every last detail including how about every last detail including how about every last detail including how the cards are dealt and shuffled, right? the cards are dealt and shuffled, right? the cards are dealt and shuffled, right? There is learning in this exploration There is learning in this exploration There is learning in this exploration and that is at a biological level, the and that is at a biological level, the and that is at a biological level, the prefrontal cortex starting to entertain prefrontal cortex starting to entertain prefrontal cortex starting to entertain different possibilities, starting to different possibilities, starting to different possibilities, starting to entertain different outcomes in this low entertain different outcomes in this low entertain different outcomes in this low stakes way. And if you think about it, stakes way. And if you think about it, stakes way. And if you think about it, that's not something that we allow that's not something that we allow that's not something that we allow ourselves to do very often. ourselves to do very often. ourselves to do very often. Even if we listen to new forms of music Even if we listen to new forms of music Even if we listen to new forms of music or uh we go see new art or new movies, or uh we go see new art or new movies, or uh we go see new art or new movies, those are new experiences, but that's those are new experiences, but that's those are new experiences, but that's not us making new predictions about not us making new predictions about not us making new predictions about what's going to happen next. It's not what's going to happen next. It's not what's going to happen next. It's not the brain working to figure out new the brain working to figure out new the brain working to figure out new possibilities. And so you can possibilities. And so you can possibilities. And so you can immediately see how just a small immediately see how just a small immediately see how just a small increase in your willingness to put increase in your willingness to put increase in your willingness to put yourself into conditions where you don't yourself into conditions where you don't yourself into conditions where you don't understand all the rules perhaps or understand all the rules perhaps or understand all the rules perhaps or you're not super proficient at you're not super proficient at you're not super proficient at something. But you enter it because it something. But you enter it because it something. But you enter it because it is low stakes and because there is low stakes and because there is low stakes and because there is information to learn about yourself and information to learn about yourself and information to learn about yourself and others could start to open up these others could start to open up these others could start to open up these prefrontal cortex circuits. And when I prefrontal cortex circuits. And when I prefrontal cortex circuits. And when I say open up, I don't mean that literally say open up, I don't mean that literally say open up, I don't mean that literally there's an opening in your skull. What I there's an opening in your skull. What I there's an opening in your skull. What I mean is that your prefrontal cortex can mean is that your prefrontal cortex can mean is that your prefrontal cortex can work in very rigid ways, meaning if A work in very rigid ways, meaning if A work in very rigid ways, meaning if A then B. If I go down this street, turn then B. If I go down this street, turn then B. If I go down this street, turn left and go that way to work, it is left and go that way to work, it is left and go that way to work, it is fast. If I go down the other street, fast. If I go down the other street, fast. If I go down the other street, it's slow. If there's a traffic jam it's slow. If there's a traffic jam it's slow. If there's a traffic jam there, I'm going to go there. But it's there, I'm going to go there. But it's there, I'm going to go there. But it's starting to explore different starting to explore different starting to explore different possibilities and there are very possibilities and there are very possibilities and there are very few opportunities in life to explore few opportunities in life to explore few opportunities in life to explore contingencies in this low stakes way contingencies in this low stakes way contingencies in this low stakes way such that it engages neuroplasticity of such that it engages neuroplasticity of such that it engages neuroplasticity of the prefrontal cortex. So play is the prefrontal cortex. So play is the prefrontal cortex. So play is powerful at powerful at powerful at making your prefrontal cortex more making your prefrontal cortex more making your prefrontal cortex more plastic, more able to change in response plastic, more able to change in response plastic, more able to change in response to experience, but not just during the to experience, but not just during the to experience, but not just during the period of play, but in all scenarios period of play, but in all scenarios period of play, but in all scenarios because you get one prefrontal cortex. because you get one prefrontal cortex. because you get one prefrontal cortex. You don't get a prefrontal cortex just You don't get a prefrontal cortex just You don't get a prefrontal cortex just for play. You get a prefrontal cortex for play. You get a prefrontal cortex for play. You get a prefrontal cortex that engages in everything. So going that engages in everything. So going that engages in everything. So going forward, I will layer on some more forward, I will layer on some more forward, I will layer on some more concrete aspects of tools. But for now, concrete aspects of tools. But for now, concrete aspects of tools. But for now, if you're somebody that doesn't consider if you're somebody that doesn't consider if you're somebody that doesn't consider yourself particularly playful, consider yourself particularly playful, consider yourself particularly playful, consider and maybe even engage in just a little and maybe even engage in just a little and maybe even engage in just a little bit of play bit of play bit of play in some way that is of discomfort to you in some way that is of discomfort to you in some way that is of discomfort to you with the understanding that is with the understanding that is with the understanding that is increasing your prefrontal cortical increasing your prefrontal cortical increasing your prefrontal cortical plasticity. Another really interesting plasticity. Another really interesting plasticity. Another really interesting and important aspect of play and important aspect of play and important aspect of play is so-called play postures. These are is so-called play postures. These are is so-called play postures. These are seen in animals and these are seen in seen in animals and these are seen in seen in animals and these are seen in humans. And for those of you that are watching And for those of you that are watching And for those of you that are watching this podcast on YouTube, I'll do my best this podcast on YouTube, I'll do my best this podcast on YouTube, I'll do my best to adopt them here. For those of you to adopt them here. For those of you to adopt them here. For those of you that are listening, you'll just have to that are listening, you'll just have to that are listening, you'll just have to imagine them in your mind's eye. imagine them in your mind's eye. imagine them in your mind's eye. But, Yak Pang Sep, and indeed Darwin But, Yak Pang Sep, and indeed Darwin But, Yak Pang Sep, and indeed Darwin himself, studied these play postures himself, studied these play postures himself, studied these play postures that all animals engage in. that all animals engage in. that all animals engage in. Perhaps the most familiar one Perhaps the most familiar one Perhaps the most familiar one is seen in dogs and in wolves, where is seen in dogs and in wolves, where is seen in dogs and in wolves, where they will lower their head to the they will lower their head to the they will lower their head to the ground, and they'll put their paws out ground, and they'll put their paws out ground, and they'll put their paws out in front of them, and they will make eye in front of them, and they will make eye in front of them, and they will make eye contact with another, typically dog or contact with another, typically dog or contact with another, typically dog or wolf, to so-called call the play. to so-called call the play. to so-called call the play. Now, when they do this posture, it's Now, when they do this posture, it's Now, when they do this posture, it's obvious that they're lowering obvious that they're lowering obvious that they're lowering themselves. They're not in an aggressive themselves. They're not in an aggressive themselves. They're not in an aggressive stance because they're lowering their head, and because they're lowering their head, and because they're lowering their head, and this is universally known among canines this is universally known among canines this is universally known among canines as play posture. as play posture. as play posture. There are some famous videos online. You There are some famous videos online. You There are some famous videos online. You can look these up of dogs actually doing can look these up of dogs actually doing can look these up of dogs actually doing this with bears that they are confronted this with bears that they are confronted this with bears that they are confronted with, and the bears, with, and the bears, with, and the bears, at least in these videos, at least in these videos, at least in these videos, in exchange, also lowering their head, in exchange, also lowering their head, in exchange, also lowering their head, and there you see bear-dog playful and there you see bear-dog playful and there you see bear-dog playful interactions. Now, you always have to be cautious with Now, you always have to be cautious with Now, you always have to be cautious with bears in general. I would say you have bears in general. I would say you have bears in general. I would say you have to be cautious with bears. But, this to be cautious with bears. But, this to be cautious with bears. But, this speaks to the universality of this speaks to the universality of this speaks to the universality of this bowing, this sort of the what some bowing, this sort of the what some bowing, this sort of the what some people call the puppy bow or the play people call the puppy bow or the play people call the puppy bow or the play bow that dogs do. Turns out that humans bow that dogs do. Turns out that humans bow that dogs do. Turns out that humans do this as well, although in a different do this as well, although in a different do this as well, although in a different form. I'm sure there are some that go form. I'm sure there are some that go form. I'm sure there are some that go into the down dog play posture, but more into the down dog play posture, but more into the down dog play posture, but more typically, when humans want to play, typically, when humans want to play, typically, when humans want to play, they will do a subtle or not so subtle they will do a subtle or not so subtle they will do a subtle or not so subtle head tilt. The head tilt with eyes open head tilt. The head tilt with eyes open head tilt. The head tilt with eyes open is considered the universal head and is considered the universal head and is considered the universal head and facial expression posture of play in facial expression posture of play in facial expression posture of play in humans. So, when two people see one humans. So, when two people see one humans. So, when two people see one another, if another, if another, if they are aggressive towards one another, they are aggressive towards one another, they are aggressive towards one another, they will assume certain facial they will assume certain facial they will assume certain facial expressions and postures. But, if expressions and postures. But, if expressions and postures. But, if they're feeling playful towards one they're feeling playful towards one they're feeling playful towards one another, often times they'll tip their another, often times they'll tip their another, often times they'll tip their head to the side just a little bit, and head to the side just a little bit, and head to the side just a little bit, and they'll open their eyes. They might even they'll open their eyes. They might even they'll open their eyes. They might even raise their eyebrows briefly. This has raise their eyebrows briefly. This has raise their eyebrows briefly. This has been seen again and again and again. been seen again and again and again. been seen again and again and again. Another hardwired feature of so-called Another hardwired feature of so-called Another hardwired feature of so-called play postures is what's called soft play postures is what's called soft play postures is what's called soft eyes. When animals are aggressive, or eyes. When animals are aggressive, or eyes. When animals are aggressive, or when they're sad, they tend to reduce when they're sad, they tend to reduce when they're sad, they tend to reduce the size of their eye openings by the size of their eye openings by the size of their eye openings by um basically making their eyelids closer um basically making their eyelids closer um basically making their eyelids closer together, somewhat, but keeping their together, somewhat, but keeping their together, somewhat, but keeping their eyes together. In particular for eyes together. In particular for eyes together. In particular for aggression, they'll bring their eyes aggression, they'll bring their eyes aggression, they'll bring their eyes towards what we call a vergence eye towards what we call a vergence eye towards what we call a vergence eye movement, bring it towards the center. movement, bring it towards the center. movement, bring it towards the center. That actually narrows the aperture That actually narrows the aperture That actually narrows the aperture of the visual field. of the visual field. of the visual field. When people or animals want to engage in When people or animals want to engage in When people or animals want to engage in play, they tend to open their eyelids play, they tend to open their eyelids play, they tend to open their eyelids somewhat. And they tend to purse their somewhat. And they tend to purse their somewhat. And they tend to purse their lips just a little bit. So, it's not lips just a little bit. So, it's not lips just a little bit. So, it's not like they're going to purse in their like they're going to purse in their like they're going to purse in their lips like this. It's pursing their lips. lips like this. It's pursing their lips. lips like this. It's pursing their lips. They'll open their eyes a little bit and They'll open their eyes a little bit and They'll open their eyes a little bit and they'll often do the head tilt as well. they'll often do the head tilt as well. they'll often do the head tilt as well. Sometimes with a little bit of a smile. Sometimes with a little bit of a smile. Sometimes with a little bit of a smile. These are reflexive. These are not These are reflexive. These are not These are reflexive. These are not trained up. Children do this, adults do trained up. Children do this, adults do trained up. Children do this, adults do this, dogs, wolves do this. Even certain this, dogs, wolves do this. Even certain this, dogs, wolves do this. Even certain birds will do this. Most birds have eyes birds will do this. Most birds have eyes birds will do this. Most birds have eyes on the side of their heads, but they do on the side of their heads, but they do on the side of their heads, but they do a sort of form of this soft eyes a sort of form of this soft eyes a sort of form of this soft eyes approach. And certainly in raptors, you approach. And certainly in raptors, you approach. And certainly in raptors, you see a softening of the eyes. And indeed, see a softening of the eyes. And indeed, see a softening of the eyes. And indeed, raptors like hawks and eagles, they raptors like hawks and eagles, they raptors like hawks and eagles, they actually do have a certain form of play, actually do have a certain form of play, actually do have a certain form of play, but only early in life. but only early in life. but only early in life. The other thing that we see during play The other thing that we see during play The other thing that we see during play are what are called partial postures. are what are called partial postures. are what are called partial postures. Partial postures are a kind of play Partial postures are a kind of play Partial postures are a kind of play enactment of postures that would enactment of postures that would enactment of postures that would otherwise be threatening. So, otherwise be threatening. So, otherwise be threatening. So, a partial posture that we see during a partial posture that we see during a partial posture that we see during play in animals and humans that relates play in animals and humans that relates play in animals and humans that relates to aggressive play, so things like to aggressive play, so things like to aggressive play, so things like wrestling or things like rough and wrestling or things like rough and wrestling or things like rough and tumble play, which is very common in tumble play, which is very common in tumble play, which is very common in animals and kids and some adults, animals and kids and some adults, animals and kids and some adults, is that because there's going to be a is that because there's going to be a is that because there's going to be a physical interaction, physical interaction, physical interaction, in animals what will happen is they will in animals what will happen is they will in animals what will happen is they will march toward one another, often very march toward one another, often very march toward one another, often very slowly, but rather than having their slowly, but rather than having their slowly, but rather than having their hair up, which is we call piloerection, hair up, which is we call piloerection, hair up, which is we call piloerection, which is when the hair goes up. Animals which is when the hair goes up. Animals which is when the hair goes up. Animals do this to make themselves look bigger. do this to make themselves look bigger. do this to make themselves look bigger. Think about the cat that's trying to Think about the cat that's trying to Think about the cat that's trying to look bigger or an animal that's being look bigger or an animal that's being look bigger or an animal that's being aggressive trying to look bigger in the aggressive trying to look bigger in the aggressive trying to look bigger in the presence of a um presence of a um presence of a um a foe, a different animal that they're a foe, a different animal that they're a foe, a different animal that they're either going to try and kill or fight in either going to try and kill or fight in either going to try and kill or fight in some way, even if it's to defend some way, even if it's to defend some way, even if it's to defend themselves. Partial postures occur when animals will Partial postures occur when animals will Partial postures occur when animals will approach one another, but they'll keep approach one another, but they'll keep approach one another, but they'll keep their fur down. Humans will do this, their fur down. Humans will do this, their fur down. Humans will do this, too. They were approached during play, too. They were approached during play, too. They were approached during play, but unless it's highly competitive play, but unless it's highly competitive play, but unless it's highly competitive play, like a football game or a boxing match, like a football game or a boxing match, like a football game or a boxing match, they will actually shrink their body they will actually shrink their body they will actually shrink their body size somewhat. We have hair on our size somewhat. We have hair on our size somewhat. We have hair on our bodies, some of us more than others, bodies, some of us more than others, bodies, some of us more than others, and that hair is capable of and that hair is capable of and that hair is capable of piloerection. It can stand up. That's piloerection. It can stand up. That's piloerection. It can stand up. That's the hair standing up on end phenomenon. the hair standing up on end phenomenon. the hair standing up on end phenomenon. But, most of us don't have enough hair But, most of us don't have enough hair But, most of us don't have enough hair on our bodies that we can actually use on our bodies that we can actually use on our bodies that we can actually use that to make ourselves larger. So, what that to make ourselves larger. So, what that to make ourselves larger. So, what you see with people who are about to you see with people who are about to you see with people who are about to engage in play is they tend to make engage in play is they tend to make engage in play is they tend to make their body a little bit smaller unless their body a little bit smaller unless their body a little bit smaller unless they are highly competitive and highly they are highly competitive and highly they are highly competitive and highly competitive play is its own distinct competitive play is its own distinct competitive play is its own distinct form of play that we'll talk about form of play that we'll talk about form of play that we'll talk about later, such as during sport when the later, such as during sport when the later, such as during sport when the stakes are high. A Super Bowl stakes are high. A Super Bowl stakes are high. A Super Bowl football game. football game. football game. I'm just revealing my ignorance about I'm just revealing my ignorance about I'm just revealing my ignorance about sports here. The Super Bowl, as it's sports here. The Super Bowl, as it's sports here. The Super Bowl, as it's typically called, is a very high-stakes typically called, is a very high-stakes typically called, is a very high-stakes game, right? Salaries depend on it, game, right? Salaries depend on it, game, right? Salaries depend on it, sponsorships depend on it, it's on sponsorships depend on it, it's on sponsorships depend on it, it's on television, reputations depend on it. television, reputations depend on it. television, reputations depend on it. So, that's not really playing a game, So, that's not really playing a game, So, that's not really playing a game, that's playing a very high-stakes game, that's playing a very high-stakes game, that's playing a very high-stakes game, and there you're not going to see these and there you're not going to see these and there you're not going to see these partial postures. You're not going to partial postures. You're not going to partial postures. You're not going to see soft eyes and tilting of the head, see soft eyes and tilting of the head, see soft eyes and tilting of the head, at least not between the opposing at least not between the opposing at least not between the opposing players on the team. You're going to see players on the team. You're going to see players on the team. You're going to see quite the opposite. Grunting, screaming, quite the opposite. Grunting, screaming, quite the opposite. Grunting, screaming, shouldering, um, people not blinking, lowering their um, people not blinking, lowering their um, people not blinking, lowering their eyes, or eyes, or eyes, or um, rather shrinking their eyes down to um, rather shrinking their eyes down to um, rather shrinking their eyes down to be to appear more aggressive, these be to appear more aggressive, these be to appear more aggressive, these kinds of things. Staring right through kinds of things. Staring right through kinds of things. Staring right through the other person, you know, verbal the other person, you know, verbal the other person, you know, verbal threats, et cetera. So, that's not threats, et cetera. So, that's not threats, et cetera. So, that's not really play, even though we say they're really play, even though we say they're really play, even though we say they're playing a game of football, it's very playing a game of football, it's very playing a game of football, it's very high-stakes play. high-stakes play. high-stakes play. What I'm referring to here is when it's What I'm referring to here is when it's What I'm referring to here is when it's fairly low stakes, and we see this again fairly low stakes, and we see this again fairly low stakes, and we see this again in animals and in humans. So, there are in animals and in humans. So, there are in animals and in humans. So, there are many, many of these partial postures. many, many of these partial postures. many, many of these partial postures. Again, they happen spontaneously. So, if Again, they happen spontaneously. So, if Again, they happen spontaneously. So, if someone ever looks at you and they tilt someone ever looks at you and they tilt someone ever looks at you and they tilt their head a little bit and they raise their head a little bit and they raise their head a little bit and they raise their eyebrows and they maybe smile a their eyebrows and they maybe smile a their eyebrows and they maybe smile a little bit, they're looking at you little bit, they're looking at you little bit, they're looking at you playfully. That's the universal human playfully. That's the universal human playfully. That's the universal human exchange of I want to play. Do you want exchange of I want to play. Do you want exchange of I want to play. Do you want to play? to play? to play? There's another play expression that is There's another play expression that is There's another play expression that is considered the most extreme of the come considered the most extreme of the come considered the most extreme of the come on, let's play expressions and postures. on, let's play expressions and postures. on, let's play expressions and postures. And this is one that's seen in a lot of And this is one that's seen in a lot of And this is one that's seen in a lot of primates and indeed in some humans as primates and indeed in some humans as primates and indeed in some humans as well. And that's the eyes wide open and well. And that's the eyes wide open and well. And that's the eyes wide open and believe it or not, tongue out. It's the believe it or not, tongue out. It's the believe it or not, tongue out. It's the that kind of silly thing. It's not I that kind of silly thing. It's not I that kind of silly thing. It's not I don't think that I've ever done that don't think that I've ever done that don't think that I've ever done that before. Um just that kind of thing is before. Um just that kind of thing is before. Um just that kind of thing is basically what primate species of all kinds and what primate species of all kinds and what primate species of all kinds and indeed we are old world primates as well indeed we are old world primates as well indeed we are old world primates as well do when they want to say, "I'm do when they want to say, "I'm do when they want to say, "I'm definitely here to play." And that's why definitely here to play." And that's why definitely here to play." And that's why I'm here. Okay? It's it has this kind of I'm here. Okay? It's it has this kind of I'm here. Okay? It's it has this kind of silly look or connotation, but if you silly look or connotation, but if you silly look or connotation, but if you watch chimpanzees or you look at bonobos watch chimpanzees or you look at bonobos watch chimpanzees or you look at bonobos or even in the so-called new world or even in the so-called new world or even in the so-called new world monkeys, which tend to be the smaller monkeys, which tend to be the smaller monkeys, which tend to be the smaller monkeys. Um old world monkeys tend to be monkeys. Um old world monkeys tend to be monkeys. Um old world monkeys tend to be the ones that in general um see the ones that in general um see the ones that in general um see the world as we do. They have what we call world as we do. They have what we call world as we do. They have what we call trichromacy. Um they're the ones that trichromacy. Um they're the ones that trichromacy. Um they're the ones that often can look very human-like. The new often can look very human-like. The new often can look very human-like. The new world monkeys tend to be the little world monkeys tend to be the little world monkeys tend to be the little ones. In general, I'll give you a little ones. In general, I'll give you a little ones. In general, I'll give you a little trick here, little tool based on trick here, little tool based on trick here, little tool based on primatology. If you see a monkey and primatology. If you see a monkey and primatology. If you see a monkey and it's making very slow movements or you it's making very slow movements or you it's making very slow movements or you see an ape of any kind is making very see an ape of any kind is making very see an ape of any kind is making very slow movements, very likely to be an old slow movements, very likely to be an old slow movements, very likely to be an old world primate. world primate. world primate. If you see a monkey and it's making very If you see a monkey and it's making very If you see a monkey and it's making very quick movements, like it's doing this quick movements, like it's doing this quick movements, like it's doing this kind of thing, like it's like a kind of thing, like it's like a kind of thing, like it's like a could be a squirrel monkey, could be a could be a squirrel monkey, could be a could be a squirrel monkey, could be a marmoset, likely to be a new world marmoset, likely to be a new world marmoset, likely to be a new world monkey. And they don't see the world monkey. And they don't see the world monkey. And they don't see the world that the same way we do. They see the that the same way we do. They see the that the same way we do. They see the world more like a dog. They don't really world more like a dog. They don't really world more like a dog. They don't really see reds. They see reds as orange, etc. see reds. They see reds as orange, etc. see reds. They see reds as orange, etc. Okay, that's not a hard and fast rule Okay, that's not a hard and fast rule Okay, that's not a hard and fast rule and I'm sure the primatologists are and I'm sure the primatologists are and I'm sure the primatologists are going to come after me with whatever going to come after me with whatever going to come after me with whatever primatologists come after you with primatologists come after you with primatologists come after you with monkey biscuits or something like that. monkey biscuits or something like that. monkey biscuits or something like that. In general, it's a good rule if you're In general, it's a good rule if you're In general, it's a good rule if you're at the zoo and you see a slow moving at the zoo and you see a slow moving at the zoo and you see a slow moving monkey with slow deliberate gestures, monkey with slow deliberate gestures, monkey with slow deliberate gestures, kind of moves its eyes, makes eye kind of moves its eyes, makes eye kind of moves its eyes, makes eye contact every once in a while, those contact every once in a while, those contact every once in a while, those tend to be the old world primates. Those tend to be the old world primates. Those tend to be the old world primates. Those kind of jittery ones that look like kind of jittery ones that look like kind of jittery ones that look like they're really nervous wrapping their they're really nervous wrapping their they're really nervous wrapping their tail and kind of hiding there in a tail and kind of hiding there in a tail and kind of hiding there in a little bundle, those tend to be the new little bundle, those tend to be the new little bundle, those tend to be the new world monkeys. Okay? Again, not a world monkeys. Okay? Again, not a world monkeys. Okay? Again, not a black and white type division, but black and white type division, but black and white type division, but that'll get you most of the way. that'll get you most of the way. that'll get you most of the way. So, the whole purpose of these partial So, the whole purpose of these partial So, the whole purpose of these partial postures or the tongue out thing is to postures or the tongue out thing is to postures or the tongue out thing is to limit power in deliberate ways. To limit power in deliberate ways. To limit power in deliberate ways. To really take bodily expressions that really take bodily expressions that really take bodily expressions that could be could be could be portrayed or could be interpreted as portrayed or could be interpreted as portrayed or could be interpreted as aggressive or as threatening or as aggressive or as threatening or as aggressive or as threatening or as wanting to mate or as wanting to do wanting to mate or as wanting to do wanting to mate or as wanting to do anything for that matter and to limit anything for that matter and to limit anything for that matter and to limit the power with which they are expressed the power with which they are expressed the power with which they are expressed in very deliberate way. So that's the in very deliberate way. So that's the in very deliberate way. So that's the putting the hair down despite getting putting the hair down despite getting putting the hair down despite getting into a fighting stance. That's saying into a fighting stance. That's saying into a fighting stance. That's saying let's fight, but I'm not really here to let's fight, but I'm not really here to let's fight, but I'm not really here to fight fight. It's low stakes fighting. fight fight. It's low stakes fighting. fight fight. It's low stakes fighting. Like if I pin you and then I'll let you Like if I pin you and then I'll let you Like if I pin you and then I'll let you go or if you pin me then you ought to go or if you pin me then you ought to go or if you pin me then you ought to let me go. And so immediately you can let me go. And so immediately you can let me go. And so immediately you can start to see how play starts to call start to see how play starts to call start to see how play starts to call into action social dynamics in which into action social dynamics in which into action social dynamics in which both parties have to make some sort of both parties have to make some sort of both parties have to make some sort of agreement about how high the stakes are. agreement about how high the stakes are. agreement about how high the stakes are. Now, the failures to do this are also Now, the failures to do this are also Now, the failures to do this are also very informative in how we develop in very informative in how we develop in very informative in how we develop in social groups. And this also can inform social groups. And this also can inform social groups. And this also can inform why some people really play well with why some people really play well with why some people really play well with others and other people don't and some others and other people don't and some others and other people don't and some people seem to get along well with people seem to get along well with people seem to get along well with groups and can handle other people and groups and can handle other people and groups and can handle other people and some people are very rigid. some people are very rigid. some people are very rigid. In fact, I have a anecdote about this. In fact, I have a anecdote about this. In fact, I have a anecdote about this. When I was a kid, we used to play this When I was a kid, we used to play this When I was a kid, we used to play this game. It's not a game I suggest, but we game. It's not a game I suggest, but we game. It's not a game I suggest, but we used to do what were called dirt cloud used to do what were called dirt cloud used to do what were called dirt cloud wars. So a friend of mine his parents wars. So a friend of mine his parents wars. So a friend of mine his parents were generally not home in the were generally not home in the were generally not home in the afternoon. So we must have been afternoon. So we must have been afternoon. So we must have been somewhere around 10 or 11 years old and somewhere around 10 or 11 years old and somewhere around 10 or 11 years old and we would set up these two big dirt we would set up these two big dirt we would set up these two big dirt mounds. We would shovel them to big dirt mounds. We would shovel them to big dirt mounds. We would shovel them to big dirt mounds on two sides of the yard and then mounds on two sides of the yard and then mounds on two sides of the yard and then we would just take dirt clouds and we'd we would just take dirt clouds and we'd we would just take dirt clouds and we'd throw them at one another and just have throw them at one another and just have throw them at one another and just have dirt cloud wars. Again, not suggesting dirt cloud wars. Again, not suggesting dirt cloud wars. Again, not suggesting this. Um, I'm not responsible for what happens Um, I'm not responsible for what happens Um, I'm not responsible for what happens if you do, but there were rules. And the if you do, but there were rules. And the if you do, but there were rules. And the rules were for instance, um, you rules were for instance, um, you rules were for instance, um, you couldn't pack rocks into the dirt couldn't pack rocks into the dirt couldn't pack rocks into the dirt clouds. Um, and you could run across to the Um, and you could run across to the Um, and you could run across to the other side and you could jump on the other side and you could jump on the other side and you could jump on the other person's mound and you could throw other person's mound and you could throw other person's mound and you could throw dirt clouds in there. I guess this is dirt clouds in there. I guess this is dirt clouds in there. I guess this is stuff that we thought was stuff that we thought was stuff that we thought was entertaining. But if someone got hit in the head, But if someone got hit in the head, But if someone got hit in the head, generally there was an unspoken rule generally there was an unspoken rule generally there was an unspoken rule that you kind of stop and see whether or that you kind of stop and see whether or that you kind of stop and see whether or not they were damaged or not before not they were damaged or not before not they were damaged or not before you'd continue. You couldn't continue you'd continue. You couldn't continue you'd continue. You couldn't continue pelting them. And of course people broke pelting them. And of course people broke pelting them. And of course people broke this rule. In fact, I remember one kid, this rule. In fact, I remember one kid, this rule. In fact, I remember one kid, I'm not going to name him I'm not going to name him I'm not going to name him um because actually he's grown into a um because actually he's grown into a um because actually he's grown into a very uh very actually prominent and very uh very actually prominent and very uh very actually prominent and functional adult. But he got hit once in functional adult. But he got hit once in functional adult. But he got hit once in the head and then I think someone had the head and then I think someone had the head and then I think someone had thrown a dirt cloud shortly thereafter. thrown a dirt cloud shortly thereafter. thrown a dirt cloud shortly thereafter. And all of a sudden he just went into a And all of a sudden he just went into a And all of a sudden he just went into a rage, picking up rocks and sticks and rage, picking up rocks and sticks and rage, picking up rocks and sticks and attacking another kid. And so clearly attacking another kid. And so clearly attacking another kid. And so clearly that was a case in which the rules of that was a case in which the rules of that was a case in which the rules of the game were now being violated. But it the game were now being violated. But it the game were now being violated. But it served a very important purpose. There served a very important purpose. There served a very important purpose. There was, you know, the typical thing that was, you know, the typical thing that was, you know, the typical thing that there were some tears I think as I there were some tears I think as I there were some tears I think as I recall from one kid or the other. There recall from one kid or the other. There recall from one kid or the other. There was like snot coming out of the nose and was like snot coming out of the nose and was like snot coming out of the nose and turning bright red. A kid went home. It turning bright red. A kid went home. It turning bright red. A kid went home. It was a mess. The parents had to say was a mess. The parents had to say was a mess. The parents had to say something or maybe there was a phone something or maybe there was a phone something or maybe there was a phone call. I don't quite recall how it got call. I don't quite recall how it got call. I don't quite recall how it got resolved. But the idea is that there's resolved. But the idea is that there's resolved. But the idea is that there's an agreed upon set of rules about how an agreed upon set of rules about how an agreed upon set of rules about how high the stakes are and what we're all high the stakes are and what we're all high the stakes are and what we're all going to do. And this is separate from going to do. And this is separate from going to do. And this is separate from sport where there are clearly defined sport where there are clearly defined sport where there are clearly defined rules about what's out of bounds, what's rules about what's out of bounds, what's rules about what's out of bounds, what's in bounds, what sorts of behaviors will in bounds, what sorts of behaviors will in bounds, what sorts of behaviors will get you a yellow card or a red card for get you a yellow card or a red card for get you a yellow card or a red card for instance on the soccer field. instance on the soccer field. instance on the soccer field. All animals including humans are doing All animals including humans are doing All animals including humans are doing this low stakes contingency testing and this low stakes contingency testing and this low stakes contingency testing and all animals including humans you'll find all animals including humans you'll find all animals including humans you'll find start to up the stakes. start to up the stakes. start to up the stakes. And inevitably in group play, one member And inevitably in group play, one member And inevitably in group play, one member of the group will kind of break rules. of the group will kind of break rules. of the group will kind of break rules. You see this also in puppies. So for You see this also in puppies. So for You see this also in puppies. So for instance, puppies will bite one another instance, puppies will bite one another instance, puppies will bite one another with those sharp little needle-like with those sharp little needle-like with those sharp little needle-like puppy teeth. I remember when Costello puppy teeth. I remember when Costello puppy teeth. I remember when Costello had those teeth, those things were so had those teeth, those things were so had those teeth, those things were so darn sharp. And puppies will yelp when darn sharp. And puppies will yelp when darn sharp. And puppies will yelp when an one of their littermates bites them. an one of their littermates bites them. an one of their littermates bites them. That yelp actually serves a very That yelp actually serves a very That yelp actually serves a very important inhibitory function. This is important inhibitory function. This is important inhibitory function. This is well defined to tell the other one well defined to tell the other one well defined to tell the other one that's too tough. And this is how that's too tough. And this is how that's too tough. And this is how animals learn soft bite. animals learn soft bite. animals learn soft bite. Okay? If they don't get that feedback Okay? If they don't get that feedback Okay? If they don't get that feedback from other littermates, they never from other littermates, they never from other littermates, they never actually learn what's too hard and actually learn what's too hard and actually learn what's too hard and what's soft. And so humans do this as what's soft. And so humans do this as what's soft. And so humans do this as well. Now you can look at your adult well. Now you can look at your adult well. Now you can look at your adult counterparts and indeed we should counterparts and indeed we should counterparts and indeed we should probably look at ourselves and ask, you probably look at ourselves and ask, you probably look at ourselves and ask, you know, did we learn proper play know, did we learn proper play know, did we learn proper play contingency when we were younger? Do we contingency when we were younger? Do we contingency when we were younger? Do we tend to take things too seriously? Do we tend to take things too seriously? Do we tend to take things too seriously? Do we tend to tend to tend to overreact aggressively when other people overreact aggressively when other people overreact aggressively when other people are clearly engaging in, you know, are clearly engaging in, you know, are clearly engaging in, you know, playful jabbing or sarcasm or things of that jabbing or sarcasm or things of that jabbing or sarcasm or things of that sort. So, each of you will have a sort. So, each of you will have a sort. So, each of you will have a different experience of this, but different experience of this, but different experience of this, but the point is that play serves many the point is that play serves many the point is that play serves many functions. It's not just about the self, functions. It's not just about the self, functions. It's not just about the self, it's also about interactions between it's also about interactions between it's also about interactions between multiple people. It's about rule testing multiple people. It's about rule testing multiple people. It's about rule testing in low-stakes contingency. Rule breaking in low-stakes contingency. Rule breaking in low-stakes contingency. Rule breaking also serves an important role as is with also serves an important role as is with also serves an important role as is with the example of the dirt cloud war, the example of the dirt cloud war, the example of the dirt cloud war, puppies biting other puppies, etc. puppies biting other puppies, etc. puppies biting other puppies, etc. And last but not least, there are And last but not least, there are And last but not least, there are different forms of play that help us different forms of play that help us different forms of play that help us establish who we will become as adults. establish who we will become as adults. establish who we will become as adults. One of the more powerful of these is One of the more powerful of these is One of the more powerful of these is role play. When role play. When role play. When children and sometimes adults will take children and sometimes adults will take children and sometimes adults will take on different roles that are distinct on different roles that are distinct on different roles that are distinct from their natural world roles in order from their natural world roles in order from their natural world roles in order to, for instance, establish hierarchies. to, for instance, establish hierarchies. to, for instance, establish hierarchies. So, someone's going to be the leader and So, someone's going to be the leader and So, someone's going to be the leader and someone's going to be the follower. someone's going to be the follower. someone's going to be the follower. Someone will be dominant and someone Someone will be dominant and someone Someone will be dominant and someone will be submissive. Someone will be submissive. Someone will be submissive. Someone will work alone, other people will work in a work alone, other people will work in a work alone, other people will work in a group. These kinds of role playing are, group. These kinds of role playing are, group. These kinds of role playing are, again, ways in which the prefrontal again, ways in which the prefrontal again, ways in which the prefrontal cortex has to expand the number of cortex has to expand the number of cortex has to expand the number of operations in neuroscience, we call operations in neuroscience, we call operations in neuroscience, we call these algorithms that it has to run in these algorithms that it has to run in these algorithms that it has to run in order to make predictions. You have to order to make predictions. You have to order to make predictions. You have to take in a lot of information about your take in a lot of information about your take in a lot of information about your environment all the time and make environment all the time and make environment all the time and make predictions. But, if you are suddenly predictions. But, if you are suddenly predictions. But, if you are suddenly cast into a new role, well, then you cast into a new role, well, then you cast into a new role, well, then you definitely have to make even more definitely have to make even more definitely have to make even more predictions from a different standpoint. predictions from a different standpoint. predictions from a different standpoint. So, these are very powerful for teaching So, these are very powerful for teaching So, these are very powerful for teaching the brain how to function. I had a the brain how to function. I had a the brain how to function. I had a sister growing up, I still have a sister growing up, I still have a sister growing up, I still have a sister, fortunately. And sister, fortunately. And sister, fortunately. And she and her friends largely played with she and her friends largely played with she and her friends largely played with dolls and doll houses in the in the room dolls and doll houses in the in the room dolls and doll houses in the in the room next door. And they would take on next door. And they would take on next door. And they would take on different roles. In fact, some kids, if different roles. In fact, some kids, if different roles. In fact, some kids, if they play alone, will start to take on they play alone, will start to take on they play alone, will start to take on the role of leader by taking on an the role of leader by taking on an the role of leader by taking on an imaginary or creating an imaginary or creating an imaginary or creating an imaginary friend. And, you know, my apologies to friend. And, you know, my apologies to friend. And, you know, my apologies to my sibling, but for a long time, she my sibling, but for a long time, she my sibling, but for a long time, she had an imaginary friend. Eventually, had an imaginary friend. Eventually, had an imaginary friend. Eventually, that imaginary friend disappeared. I that imaginary friend disappeared. I that imaginary friend disappeared. I don't know the science around imaginary don't know the science around imaginary don't know the science around imaginary friends and what makes them disappear or friends and what makes them disappear or friends and what makes them disappear or not at what stage of development, but not at what stage of development, but not at what stage of development, but imaginary friends are pretty common and imaginary friends are pretty common and imaginary friends are pretty common and that's just another way of being able that's just another way of being able that's just another way of being able to, you know, boss somebody around if to, you know, boss somebody around if to, you know, boss somebody around if that's your thing or to do engage in that's your thing or to do engage in that's your thing or to do engage in cooperative play. So, we can look at the cooperative play. So, we can look at the cooperative play. So, we can look at the stage of development we call childhood stage of development we call childhood stage of development we call childhood and we can look at each stage of it and we can look at each stage of it and we can look at each stage of it and we can say, "Wow, there are all these we can say, "Wow, there are all these we can say, "Wow, there are all these different dimensions of play that really different dimensions of play that really different dimensions of play that really are about testing out how we feel are about testing out how we feel are about testing out how we feel comfortable or uncomfortable, how we comfortable or uncomfortable, how we comfortable or uncomfortable, how we react good or bad, how we react um with react good or bad, how we react um with react good or bad, how we react um with stress or with glee when others behave stress or with glee when others behave stress or with glee when others behave in certain ways." And so, what I'm in certain ways." And so, what I'm in certain ways." And so, what I'm hoping is coming through is that play is hoping is coming through is that play is hoping is coming through is that play is not just about having fun. Play is about not just about having fun. Play is about not just about having fun. Play is about testing. It's about experimenting and testing. It's about experimenting and testing. It's about experimenting and it's about expanding your brain's it's about expanding your brain's it's about expanding your brain's capacity and that's true early in capacity and that's true early in capacity and that's true early in development and it's true throughout the development and it's true throughout the development and it's true throughout the lifespan. So, at this point in the lifespan. So, at this point in the lifespan. So, at this point in the discussion, I want to take a step back, discussion, I want to take a step back, discussion, I want to take a step back, look at the biology and neurochemistry look at the biology and neurochemistry look at the biology and neurochemistry of play just a little bit and in doing of play just a little bit and in doing of play just a little bit and in doing that, really define what is effective that, really define what is effective that, really define what is effective play. If the goal of play is to explore play. If the goal of play is to explore play. If the goal of play is to explore different contingencies in low-stakes different contingencies in low-stakes different contingencies in low-stakes environments and to expand the function environments and to expand the function environments and to expand the function of our prefrontal cortex so that we can of our prefrontal cortex so that we can of our prefrontal cortex so that we can see new possibilities and new ways of see new possibilities and new ways of see new possibilities and new ways of being, become more flexible, more being, become more flexible, more being, become more flexible, more creative, more effective outside of the creative, more effective outside of the creative, more effective outside of the games of play games of play games of play or the arenas of play, I should say. or the arenas of play, I should say. or the arenas of play, I should say. Well, then Well, then Well, then we should be asking, "How do I know if we should be asking, "How do I know if we should be asking, "How do I know if I'm playing? How do I know if I'm playing? How do I know if I'm playing? How do I know if I'm playing correctly?" playing correctly?" playing correctly?" Turns out there's an answer to that. Turns out there's an answer to that. Turns out there's an answer to that. Earlier, I referred to this brain area, Earlier, I referred to this brain area, Earlier, I referred to this brain area, the periaqueductal gray, that releases the periaqueductal gray, that releases the periaqueductal gray, that releases opioids, endogenous opioids, into our opioids, endogenous opioids, into our opioids, endogenous opioids, into our brain and body brain and body brain and body and tends to relax us a bit. Uh it and tends to relax us a bit. Uh it and tends to relax us a bit. Uh it actually is what leads to these things actually is what leads to these things actually is what leads to these things like soft eyes and head tilts and like soft eyes and head tilts and like soft eyes and head tilts and puppies making uh you know, puppy puppies making uh you know, puppy puppies making uh you know, puppy postures and things of that sort. And postures and things of that sort. And postures and things of that sort. And how that opens up the number of how that opens up the number of how that opens up the number of different functions or algorithms that different functions or algorithms that different functions or algorithms that the prefrontal cortex can run. the prefrontal cortex can run. the prefrontal cortex can run. But there's another piece of the puzzle, But there's another piece of the puzzle, But there's another piece of the puzzle, which is for something to genuinely be which is for something to genuinely be which is for something to genuinely be play and playful and for it to have this play and playful and for it to have this play and playful and for it to have this effect of expanding our brain and effect of expanding our brain and effect of expanding our brain and engaging neuroplasticity of really engaging neuroplasticity of really engaging neuroplasticity of really changing our brain so that we can see changing our brain so that we can see changing our brain so that we can see and engage in more possible behaviors and engage in more possible behaviors and engage in more possible behaviors and thoughts, etc. and thoughts, etc. and thoughts, etc. We also have to have low amounts of We also have to have low amounts of We also have to have low amounts of adrenaline, so-called epinephrine in our brain and so-called epinephrine in our brain and so-called epinephrine in our brain and body. Now, the background science for this is Now, the background science for this is Now, the background science for this is quite extensive, but if for those of you quite extensive, but if for those of you quite extensive, but if for those of you that are interested in papers and that are interested in papers and that are interested in papers and manuscripts, perhaps the best one is a manuscripts, perhaps the best one is a manuscripts, perhaps the best one is a review published in Neuroscience and review published in Neuroscience and review published in Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews by the very Jaak Biobehavioral Reviews by the very Jaak Biobehavioral Reviews by the very Jaak Panksepp, although he has a co-author, Panksepp, although he has a co-author, Panksepp, although he has a co-author, which is Steven Siviy, S I V I Y. I'll which is Steven Siviy, S I V I Y. I'll which is Steven Siviy, S I V I Y. I'll provide a link to this in the caption provide a link to this in the caption provide a link to this in the caption show notes. And the title of this paper show notes. And the title of this paper show notes. And the title of this paper is In Search of the Neurobiological is In Search of the Neurobiological is In Search of the Neurobiological Substrates for Social Playfulness in Substrates for Social Playfulness in Substrates for Social Playfulness in Mammalian Brains. And it's a quite Mammalian Brains. And it's a quite Mammalian Brains. And it's a quite extensive review, but it basically boils extensive review, but it basically boils extensive review, but it basically boils down to down to down to some key findings whereby some key findings whereby some key findings whereby any sorts of drugs or behaviors or any sorts of drugs or behaviors or any sorts of drugs or behaviors or scenarios that increase levels of scenarios that increase levels of scenarios that increase levels of adrenaline too much adrenaline too much adrenaline too much will tend to inhibit play. will tend to inhibit play. will tend to inhibit play. And drugs and scenarios, and I'm not drugs and scenarios, and I'm not drugs and scenarios, and I'm not suggesting recreational drugs here, but suggesting recreational drugs here, but suggesting recreational drugs here, but these were experiments that were done in these were experiments that were done in these were experiments that were done in the laboratory setting, the laboratory setting, the laboratory setting, that increase the endogenous opioid that increase the endogenous opioid that increase the endogenous opioid output will tend to increase output will tend to increase output will tend to increase playfulness. And so really the state of playfulness. And so really the state of playfulness. And so really the state of mind that one needs to adopt when mind that one needs to adopt when mind that one needs to adopt when playing is first of all, you have to playing is first of all, you have to playing is first of all, you have to engage in the play at whatever it engage in the play at whatever it engage in the play at whatever it happens to be with some degree of focus happens to be with some degree of focus happens to be with some degree of focus and seriousness. And focus and seriousness. And focus and seriousness. And focus and seriousness in the neurobiological seriousness in the neurobiological seriousness in the neurobiological context generally means epinephrine, um context generally means epinephrine, um context generally means epinephrine, um being able to focus is largely reliant being able to focus is largely reliant being able to focus is largely reliant on things like adrenaline, epinephrine, on things like adrenaline, epinephrine, on things like adrenaline, epinephrine, but also the presence of dopamine, uh but also the presence of dopamine, uh but also the presence of dopamine, uh which is a molecule that generates which is a molecule that generates which is a molecule that generates motivation and focus in concert with motivation and focus in concert with motivation and focus in concert with epinephrine. But also that these epinephrine. But also that these epinephrine. But also that these endogenous opioids be liberated. And endogenous opioids be liberated. And endogenous opioids be liberated. And it's really the low stakes feature of it's really the low stakes feature of it's really the low stakes feature of play that allows those endogenous play that allows those endogenous play that allows those endogenous opioids to be liberated. What do I mean opioids to be liberated. What do I mean opioids to be liberated. What do I mean by that? Well, if you are very, very by that? Well, if you are very, very by that? Well, if you are very, very concerned about the outcome, like you've concerned about the outcome, like you've concerned about the outcome, like you've put a lot of money on the table in a put a lot of money on the table in a put a lot of money on the table in a given game, given game, given game, um or uh you're a football player in the or uh you're a football player in the or uh you're a football player in the Super Bowl, or you're playing a game for Super Bowl, or you're playing a game for Super Bowl, or you're playing a game for which, you know, defeating the other which, you know, defeating the other which, you know, defeating the other person or your team winning is person or your team winning is person or your team winning is absolutely crucial to you, well, then absolutely crucial to you, well, then absolutely crucial to you, well, then that's not really going to engage the that's not really going to engage the that's not really going to engage the play circuitry. play circuitry. play circuitry. On the contrary, if you're engaging in On the contrary, if you're engaging in On the contrary, if you're engaging in those same or any other behavior in a those same or any other behavior in a those same or any other behavior in a way that you're simply there to explore, way that you're simply there to explore, way that you're simply there to explore, but you don't have high levels of but you don't have high levels of but you don't have high levels of adrenaline in your system, you're not adrenaline in your system, you're not adrenaline in your system, you're not stressed about the potential outcome, stressed about the potential outcome, stressed about the potential outcome, well, then that constitutes play. well, then that constitutes play. well, then that constitutes play. Now, that's somewhat obvious on the one Now, that's somewhat obvious on the one Now, that's somewhat obvious on the one hand, that you take seriously what you hand, that you take seriously what you hand, that you take seriously what you take seriously, and you can be more take seriously, and you can be more take seriously, and you can be more playful about things that you don't take playful about things that you don't take playful about things that you don't take so seriously. But, what is absolutely so seriously. But, what is absolutely so seriously. But, what is absolutely not obvious not obvious not obvious is that the state of playfulness is that the state of playfulness is that the state of playfulness is actually what allows you to perform is actually what allows you to perform is actually what allows you to perform best because the state of playfulness offers because the state of playfulness offers because the state of playfulness offers you the opportunity to engage in novel you the opportunity to engage in novel you the opportunity to engage in novel types of behaviors and interactions that types of behaviors and interactions that types of behaviors and interactions that you would not otherwise be able to you would not otherwise be able to you would not otherwise be able to access if you are so focused on the access if you are so focused on the access if you are so focused on the outcome. Okay, so a state of playfulness outcome. Okay, so a state of playfulness outcome. Okay, so a state of playfulness is absolutely critical, not just during is absolutely critical, not just during is absolutely critical, not just during play, but during competitive scenarios play, but during competitive scenarios play, but during competitive scenarios of any kind. I actually started to of any kind. I actually started to of any kind. I actually started to cultivate a practice cultivate a practice cultivate a practice related to this when I was in college. I related to this when I was in college. I related to this when I was in college. I had this um had this um had this um kind of general practice of when I kind of general practice of when I kind of general practice of when I wanted to learn something, I would tell wanted to learn something, I would tell wanted to learn something, I would tell myself that it was the most important myself that it was the most important myself that it was the most important information in the world, and that I was information in the world, and that I was information in the world, and that I was very, very interested in it. I'd kind of very, very interested in it. I'd kind of very, very interested in it. I'd kind of lie to myself and say, "Oh, I'm super lie to myself and say, "Oh, I'm super lie to myself and say, "Oh, I'm super interested in" I won't name the topics, interested in" I won't name the topics, interested in" I won't name the topics, but super interested in this or super but super interested in this or super but super interested in this or super interested in that. And I could sort of interested in that. And I could sort of interested in that. And I could sort of delude myself into being hyper-focused delude myself into being hyper-focused delude myself into being hyper-focused on whatever it is on whatever it is on whatever it is that I was learning in ways that I was learning in ways that I was learning in ways that surprised me. surprised me. surprised me. However, when However, when However, when we are hyper-focused on something, and we are hyper-focused on something, and we are hyper-focused on something, and we are rigidly attached to the outcome, we are rigidly attached to the outcome, we are rigidly attached to the outcome, we can't engage in flexible thinking. we can't engage in flexible thinking. we can't engage in flexible thinking. So, it's a great tool to be So, it's a great tool to be So, it's a great tool to be hyper-focused on something and take it hyper-focused on something and take it hyper-focused on something and take it very, very seriously when we're simply very, very seriously when we're simply very, very seriously when we're simply trying to learn trying to learn trying to learn things by kind of rote memory. Learn things by kind of rote memory. Learn things by kind of rote memory. Learn things and regurgitate. Learn and things and regurgitate. Learn and things and regurgitate. Learn and regurgitate. Of the sort that, you know, regurgitate. Of the sort that, you know, regurgitate. Of the sort that, you know, frankly, a lot of schooling involves. frankly, a lot of schooling involves. frankly, a lot of schooling involves. But, if we are trying to get better at But, if we are trying to get better at But, if we are trying to get better at something, we've sort of hit a wall in something, we've sort of hit a wall in something, we've sort of hit a wall in athletic performance or in cognitive athletic performance or in cognitive athletic performance or in cognitive performance, where we're not creative performance, where we're not creative performance, where we're not creative enough, or we're finding, let's just use enough, or we're finding, let's just use enough, or we're finding, let's just use a sports example, that you know, we only a sports example, that you know, we only a sports example, that you know, we only have a certain number of moves that we have a certain number of moves that we have a certain number of moves that we can deploy, or certain number of swings can deploy, or certain number of swings can deploy, or certain number of swings of the racket that we can deploy. The of the racket that we can deploy. The of the racket that we can deploy. The way to actually expand your practice is way to actually expand your practice is way to actually expand your practice is to engage in this kind of low-stakes to engage in this kind of low-stakes to engage in this kind of low-stakes thinking. The idea that, well, I'm just thinking. The idea that, well, I'm just thinking. The idea that, well, I'm just going to kind of play and tinker. I'm going to kind of play and tinker. I'm going to kind of play and tinker. I'm going to explore in a way that it going to explore in a way that it going to explore in a way that it doesn't really matter if the ball goes doesn't really matter if the ball goes doesn't really matter if the ball goes back over the net. Doesn't really matter back over the net. Doesn't really matter back over the net. Doesn't really matter if the ball goes in the hole. And it's if the ball goes in the hole. And it's if the ball goes in the hole. And it's counterintuitive because you think, no, counterintuitive because you think, no, counterintuitive because you think, no, the thing that we need to do is drill the thing that we need to do is drill the thing that we need to do is drill and drill and drill and drill. And and drill and drill and drill. And and drill and drill and drill. And indeed, there's a place for that. But, indeed, there's a place for that. But, indeed, there's a place for that. But, this mode of play with this mode of play with this mode of play with modest levels of endogenous opioids modest levels of endogenous opioids modest levels of endogenous opioids being released in our system, plus low being released in our system, plus low being released in our system, plus low levels of adrenaline, right? levels of adrenaline, right? levels of adrenaline, right? Epinephrine. Low levels of epinephrine Epinephrine. Low levels of epinephrine Epinephrine. Low levels of epinephrine and adrenaline and adrenaline and adrenaline are possible only when the stakes are possible only when the stakes are possible only when the stakes are low enough that we're not stressed. low enough that we're not stressed. low enough that we're not stressed. Well, that combination really allows the Well, that combination really allows the Well, that combination really allows the prefrontal cortex to explore different prefrontal cortex to explore different prefrontal cortex to explore different possibilities in ways that can truly possibilities in ways that can truly possibilities in ways that can truly expand our capabilities over time. Now, expand our capabilities over time. Now, expand our capabilities over time. Now, this has been seen again and again also this has been seen again and again also this has been seen again and again also in the business sector. in the business sector. in the business sector. Some of the more, Some of the more, Some of the more, challenging, or I should say, challenging, or I should say, challenging, or I should say, competitive companies to get jobs at are competitive companies to get jobs at are competitive companies to get jobs at are very interested in hiring that as very interested in hiring that as very interested in hiring that as children were so-called tinkerers. And children were so-called tinkerers. And children were so-called tinkerers. And actually, NASA was first famous for actually, NASA was first famous for actually, NASA was first famous for this, that many of the people that this, that many of the people that this, that many of the people that achieved great success in engineering at achieved great success in engineering at achieved great success in engineering at NASA, when they looked back into their NASA, when they looked back into their NASA, when they looked back into their childhood histories, those people tended childhood histories, those people tended childhood histories, those people tended to be tinkerers. They were people that to be tinkerers. They were people that to be tinkerers. They were people that would kind of play with things in a way would kind of play with things in a way would kind of play with things in a way that wasn't about rigidly following a recipe wasn't about rigidly following a recipe wasn't about rigidly following a recipe or an instruction manual. Great cooks or an instruction manual. Great cooks or an instruction manual. Great cooks discover new forms of food, um, create discover new forms of food, um, create discover new forms of food, um, create entire genres of food, uh, entire genres of food, uh, entire genres of food, uh, by way of being tinkers. Okay, musicians by way of being tinkers. Okay, musicians by way of being tinkers. Okay, musicians do this. Um, I grew up playing various do this. Um, I grew up playing various do this. Um, I grew up playing various sports, but skateboarding was one that, sports, but skateboarding was one that, sports, but skateboarding was one that, um, I was particularly involved in for a um, I was particularly involved in for a um, I was particularly involved in for a long time. Uh, one of the greatest long time. Uh, one of the greatest long time. Uh, one of the greatest skateboarders of all time is, um, some skateboarders of all time is, um, some skateboarders of all time is, um, some of you may recognize his name as the of you may recognize his name as the of you may recognize his name as the great Rodney Mullen. And Rodney was kind great Rodney Mullen. And Rodney was kind great Rodney Mullen. And Rodney was kind of famous for, um, of famous for, um, of famous for, um, evolving the sport and continuing to evolving the sport and continuing to evolving the sport and continuing to evolve the sport in ways that no one evolve the sport in ways that no one evolve the sport in ways that no one could predict, using skateboards in all could predict, using skateboards in all could predict, using skateboards in all sorts of ways that no one had thought of sorts of ways that no one had thought of sorts of ways that no one had thought of previously. And of course, there are previously. And of course, there are previously. And of course, there are other skateboarders that did that as other skateboarders that did that as other skateboarders that did that as well, but he's particularly well known well, but he's particularly well known well, but he's particularly well known for that. And his process is, uh, his for that. And his process is, uh, his for that. And his process is, uh, his own. I can't speak to it, um, too much, own. I can't speak to it, um, too much, own. I can't speak to it, um, too much, but he was also known as a, kind of a but he was also known as a, kind of a but he was also known as a, kind of a tinkerer, as somebody who would spend a tinkerer, as somebody who would spend a tinkerer, as somebody who would spend a lot of time just kind of flipping the lot of time just kind of flipping the lot of time just kind of flipping the board and just, um, flipping it in the board and just, um, flipping it in the board and just, um, flipping it in the air and watching the ways in which it air and watching the ways in which it air and watching the ways in which it flipped and kind of studying the physics flipped and kind of studying the physics flipped and kind of studying the physics of it, really. And it expanding on of it, really. And it expanding on of it, really. And it expanding on his existing understanding of what could his existing understanding of what could his existing understanding of what could happen on a skateboard by way of just happen on a skateboard by way of just happen on a skateboard by way of just playing. Now, he took it very seriously, playing. Now, he took it very seriously, playing. Now, he took it very seriously, but it's this kind of razor's edge but it's this kind of razor's edge but it's this kind of razor's edge between taking something very seriously, between taking something very seriously, between taking something very seriously, but also tinkering and playing and but also tinkering and playing and but also tinkering and playing and exploring and just seeing what happens. exploring and just seeing what happens. exploring and just seeing what happens. A kind of like, "Well, let's just see A kind of like, "Well, let's just see A kind of like, "Well, let's just see what happens if we did this." That what happens if we did this." That what happens if we did this." That mindset is extremely powerful to export mindset is extremely powerful to export mindset is extremely powerful to export from this thing that we call play into from this thing that we call play into from this thing that we call play into what we could call more serious what we could call more serious what we could call more serious endeavors of one's occupation or sport, endeavors of one's occupation or sport, endeavors of one's occupation or sport, whether or not it's behind a desk or whether or not it's behind a desk or whether or not it's behind a desk or whether or not it's running around on a whether or not it's running around on a whether or not it's running around on a field, really for or engineering, any field, really for or engineering, any field, really for or engineering, any endeavor. And so, the endeavor. And so, the endeavor. And so, the whole purpose of this episode on play whole purpose of this episode on play whole purpose of this episode on play is, yes, on the one hand, to illustrate is, yes, on the one hand, to illustrate is, yes, on the one hand, to illustrate the incredible, um, evolutionary utility the incredible, um, evolutionary utility the incredible, um, evolutionary utility of play for setting up, uh, the self and of play for setting up, uh, the self and of play for setting up, uh, the self and relation of the self to others. Indeed, relation of the self to others. Indeed, relation of the self to others. Indeed, for setting up cultures entirely, cuz for setting up cultures entirely, cuz for setting up cultures entirely, cuz cultures will watch sport together or cultures will watch sport together or cultures will watch sport together or they'll celebrate their team winning. I they'll celebrate their team winning. I they'll celebrate their team winning. I mean, World Cup, I've never been a big mean, World Cup, I've never been a big mean, World Cup, I've never been a big soccer fan, even though my dad is soccer fan, even though my dad is soccer fan, even though my dad is Argentine, um, Argentine, um, Argentine, um, but it's incredible. I mean, the entire but it's incredible. I mean, the entire but it's incredible. I mean, the entire world kind of lights up and gets engaged world kind of lights up and gets engaged world kind of lights up and gets engaged around whether or not their team, their around whether or not their team, their around whether or not their team, their country is going to win. The Olympics country is going to win. The Olympics country is going to win. The Olympics also being another example. But, play also being another example. But, play also being another example. But, play and sport are not quite the same as I've and sport are not quite the same as I've and sport are not quite the same as I've pointed out before. And for all of us pointed out before. And for all of us pointed out before. And for all of us who are thinking about tools and things who are thinking about tools and things who are thinking about tools and things that we can extract from science to that we can extract from science to that we can extract from science to enrich our lives, enrich our lives, enrich our lives, I would say, for those of you that are I would say, for those of you that are I would say, for those of you that are already playing on a regular basis in already playing on a regular basis in already playing on a regular basis in one form or another, terrific. Start to one form or another, terrific. Start to one form or another, terrific. Start to expand other forms of play, in expand other forms of play, in expand other forms of play, in particular forms of play that involve particular forms of play that involve particular forms of play that involve new groups of individuals. So, if you're new groups of individuals. So, if you're new groups of individuals. So, if you're somebody that typically plays one-on-one somebody that typically plays one-on-one somebody that typically plays one-on-one with somebody, try to expand into with somebody, try to expand into with somebody, try to expand into playing as teams. If you're somebody who playing as teams. If you're somebody who playing as teams. If you're somebody who only plays alone, only plays alone, only plays alone, then try to expand into playing in uh then try to expand into playing in uh then try to expand into playing in uh perhaps one-on-one first and then perhaps one-on-one first and then perhaps one-on-one first and then groups. This is the way that your brain groups. This is the way that your brain groups. This is the way that your brain learns and evolves and changes and gets learns and evolves and changes and gets learns and evolves and changes and gets better. And I raise this because another better. And I raise this because another better. And I raise this because another one of the top 10 questions I get is, one of the top 10 questions I get is, one of the top 10 questions I get is, "How can I keep my brain young? How can "How can I keep my brain young? How can "How can I keep my brain young? How can I continue to learn? How can I get I continue to learn? How can I get I continue to learn? How can I get better in school, in sport, in life, in better in school, in sport, in life, in better in school, in sport, in life, in relationships, et cetera, emotionally, relationships, et cetera, emotionally, relationships, et cetera, emotionally, cognitively?" And on and on and on. And yes, there are And on and on and on. And yes, there are And on and on and on. And yes, there are supplements that can support supplements that can support supplements that can support neuroplasticity. Yes, there are brain neuroplasticity. Yes, there are brain neuroplasticity. Yes, there are brain games and apps that can support games and apps that can support games and apps that can support neuroplasticity. But, if you really want neuroplasticity. But, if you really want neuroplasticity. But, if you really want to engage neuroplasticity at any age, to engage neuroplasticity at any age, to engage neuroplasticity at any age, what you need to do is return to the what you need to do is return to the what you need to do is return to the same sorts of practices and tools that same sorts of practices and tools that same sorts of practices and tools that your nervous system naturally used your nervous system naturally used your nervous system naturally used throughout development and that evolved throughout development and that evolved throughout development and that evolved over hundreds of thousands of years to over hundreds of thousands of years to over hundreds of thousands of years to trigger this thing that we call trigger this thing that we call trigger this thing that we call neuroplasticity. And the reason this is neuroplasticity. And the reason this is neuroplasticity. And the reason this is so important is because it starts to so important is because it starts to so important is because it starts to move us away from what some people move us away from what some people move us away from what some people called hacks. I define hacks as using called hacks. I define hacks as using called hacks. I define hacks as using one thing for a different purpose to one thing for a different purpose to one thing for a different purpose to kind of uh get a shortcut. I don't kind of uh get a shortcut. I don't kind of uh get a shortcut. I don't really like the term, frankly, and I really like the term, frankly, and I really like the term, frankly, and I don't like it because it's not don't like it because it's not don't like it because it's not grounded in any biological mechanism. grounded in any biological mechanism. grounded in any biological mechanism. But, when we look at play, we can say But, when we look at play, we can say But, when we look at play, we can say play is the portal to plasticity. Play play is the portal to plasticity. Play play is the portal to plasticity. Play at every stage of life is the way in at every stage of life is the way in at every stage of life is the way in which we learn the rules for that stage which we learn the rules for that stage which we learn the rules for that stage of life. And play is the way in which we of life. And play is the way in which we of life. And play is the way in which we were able to test how we might function were able to test how we might function were able to test how we might function in the real-world context. So, play is in the real-world context. So, play is in the real-world context. So, play is powerful and we could even say that play powerful and we could even say that play powerful and we could even say that play is the most powerful portal to is the most powerful portal to is the most powerful portal to plasticity. The reason for that is that plasticity. The reason for that is that plasticity. The reason for that is that yes, this yes, this yes, this high opioid, low epinephrine or high opioid, low epinephrine or high opioid, low epinephrine or adrenaline state is what opens up play, adrenaline state is what opens up play, adrenaline state is what opens up play, but then inside of the arena of play, but then inside of the arena of play, but then inside of the arena of play, when the prefrontal cortex is running when the prefrontal cortex is running when the prefrontal cortex is running all these different possibilities in all these different possibilities in all these different possibilities in this low stakes way, but with some this low stakes way, but with some this low stakes way, but with some degree of focus, degree of focus, degree of focus, there are number of other chemicals that there are number of other chemicals that there are number of other chemicals that are deployed. Things like brain-derived are deployed. Things like brain-derived are deployed. Things like brain-derived neurotrophic factor and other growth neurotrophic factor and other growth neurotrophic factor and other growth factors that actually trigger the factors that actually trigger the factors that actually trigger the rewiring of brain circuits that allow rewiring of brain circuits that allow rewiring of brain circuits that allow for it to expand and indeed that's what for it to expand and indeed that's what for it to expand and indeed that's what is neuroplasticity. If you're interested is neuroplasticity. If you're interested is neuroplasticity. If you're interested in those chemicals and the kind of arena in those chemicals and the kind of arena in those chemicals and the kind of arena of things that happen when one engages of things that happen when one engages of things that happen when one engages in neuroplasticity, there's a vast in neuroplasticity, there's a vast in neuroplasticity, there's a vast literature out there, but one of the literature out there, but one of the literature out there, but one of the more popular books that I think is quite more popular books that I think is quite more popular books that I think is quite good is from my friend and colleague good is from my friend and colleague good is from my friend and colleague John Ratey, who's a psychiatrist at John Ratey, who's a psychiatrist at John Ratey, who's a psychiatrist at Harvard Medical School. That's r a t e Harvard Medical School. That's r a t e Harvard Medical School. That's r a t e y. He wrote the book Spark um y. He wrote the book Spark um y. He wrote the book Spark um a few years back and I think it's still a few years back and I think it's still a few years back and I think it's still very relevant and John talks about very relevant and John talks about very relevant and John talks about uh the important role that play uh the important role that play uh the important role that play exerts in the neuroplasticity process exerts in the neuroplasticity process exerts in the neuroplasticity process and points to a number of different and points to a number of different and points to a number of different protocols that one can engage in. He protocols that one can engage in. He protocols that one can engage in. He also points to the importance of also points to the importance of also points to the importance of navigating new environments, to not just navigating new environments, to not just navigating new environments, to not just go on the same hike every week or take go on the same hike every week or take go on the same hike every week or take the same walk, but actually get into new the same walk, but actually get into new the same walk, but actually get into new novel environments. So, you're starting novel environments. So, you're starting novel environments. So, you're starting to sense a theme here. There's novelty, to sense a theme here. There's novelty, to sense a theme here. There's novelty, um exploring contingencies, keeping the um exploring contingencies, keeping the um exploring contingencies, keeping the stakes relatively low, et cetera, et stakes relatively low, et cetera, et stakes relatively low, et cetera, et cetera. But these really are the gates cetera. But these really are the gates cetera. But these really are the gates to this holy grail that we call to this holy grail that we call to this holy grail that we call neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity, as neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity, as neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity, as I've talked about on the podcast before, I've talked about on the podcast before, I've talked about on the podcast before, is a two-step process. It involves is a two-step process. It involves is a two-step process. It involves focusing very intensely or at least focusing very intensely or at least focusing very intensely or at least focusing somewhat on whatever it is that focusing somewhat on whatever it is that focusing somewhat on whatever it is that one is trying to learn and then engaging one is trying to learn and then engaging one is trying to learn and then engaging in deep rest, ideally deep sleep, in the in deep rest, ideally deep sleep, in the in deep rest, ideally deep sleep, in the following nights. And I've also talked following nights. And I've also talked following nights. And I've also talked about the benefits of things like naps about the benefits of things like naps about the benefits of things like naps and yoga nidra, so-called NSDR, and yoga nidra, so-called NSDR, and yoga nidra, so-called NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, for enhancing or non-sleep deep rest, for enhancing or non-sleep deep rest, for enhancing or accelerating plasticity. You can check accelerating plasticity. You can check accelerating plasticity. You can check out the episodes on focus at uh out the episodes on focus at uh out the episodes on focus at uh hubermanlab.com or the episodes on how hubermanlab.com or the episodes on how hubermanlab.com or the episodes on how to learn faster that detail all those we to learn faster that detail all those we to learn faster that detail all those we had a newsletter uh that lists out all had a newsletter uh that lists out all had a newsletter uh that lists out all the uh tools for neuroplasticity and the uh tools for neuroplasticity and the uh tools for neuroplasticity and enhancing neuroplasticity. All that is enhancing neuroplasticity. All that is enhancing neuroplasticity. All that is available zero cost to you at available zero cost to you at available zero cost to you at hubermanlab.com uh etc. You can just download um that uh etc. You can just download um that uh etc. You can just download um that information. But, John's book, that information. But, John's book, that information. But, John's book, that newsletter, those episodes, they really newsletter, those episodes, they really newsletter, those episodes, they really point to this two-step process where point to this two-step process where point to this two-step process where it's focus and then rest. Focus and then it's focus and then rest. Focus and then it's focus and then rest. Focus and then rest. And play is its own unique form of rest. And play is its own unique form of rest. And play is its own unique form of focused and then rest. Focus and rest. focused and then rest. Focus and rest. focused and then rest. Focus and rest. It's not the same as learning something It's not the same as learning something It's not the same as learning something for sake of school or critically trying for sake of school or critically trying for sake of school or critically trying to learn a motor behavior for sake of to learn a motor behavior for sake of to learn a motor behavior for sake of sport. It's really about expanding the sport. It's really about expanding the sport. It's really about expanding the number of things that you could learn number of things that you could learn number of things that you could learn down the line, okay? So, said once down the line, okay? So, said once down the line, okay? So, said once again, so I just want to make sure it's again, so I just want to make sure it's again, so I just want to make sure it's abundantly clear. Play is about abundantly clear. Play is about abundantly clear. Play is about establishing a broader framework within establishing a broader framework within establishing a broader framework within which you can learn new things. It's not which you can learn new things. It's not which you can learn new things. It's not about learning some specific thing. It's about learning some specific thing. It's about learning some specific thing. It's not about the game you happen to be not about the game you happen to be not about the game you happen to be playing. It's not about the doll house playing. It's not about the doll house playing. It's not about the doll house that the kids are playing with so that the kids are playing with so that the kids are playing with so that they could become amazing doll house they could become amazing doll house they could become amazing doll house players when they grow up, right? The players when they grow up, right? The players when they grow up, right? The dirt cloud war that I referred to dirt cloud war that I referred to dirt cloud war that I referred to earlier uh for better or for worse uh earlier uh for better or for worse uh earlier uh for better or for worse uh was not about becoming the best dirt was not about becoming the best dirt was not about becoming the best dirt cloud thrower um or winning the trophy cloud thrower um or winning the trophy cloud thrower um or winning the trophy for dirt clouds in the neighborhood, for dirt clouds in the neighborhood, for dirt clouds in the neighborhood, although we actually had a trophy for although we actually had a trophy for although we actually had a trophy for the best dirt cloud team. Um alas, it the best dirt cloud team. Um alas, it the best dirt cloud team. Um alas, it was not my team that year. But, the was not my team that year. But, the was not my team that year. But, the point is that you're learning rules and point is that you're learning rules and point is that you're learning rules and establishing a broader foundation of establishing a broader foundation of establishing a broader foundation of practices that then you can learn more practices that then you can learn more practices that then you can learn more things within that context. Thus far, things within that context. Thus far, things within that context. Thus far, I've tried to convince you through a I've tried to convince you through a I've tried to convince you through a combination of data and anecdotes and combination of data and anecdotes and combination of data and anecdotes and explanation that adopting a stance of explanation that adopting a stance of explanation that adopting a stance of playfulness and indeed engaging in play playfulness and indeed engaging in play playfulness and indeed engaging in play on a somewhat regular basis could be on a somewhat regular basis could be on a somewhat regular basis could be beneficial to you regardless of beneficial to you regardless of beneficial to you regardless of circumstances or goals. circumstances or goals. circumstances or goals. If I haven't done that already, what I'm If I haven't done that already, what I'm If I haven't done that already, what I'm about to tell you, hopefully, will push about to tell you, hopefully, will push about to tell you, hopefully, will push you over the line. you over the line. you over the line. It turns out that when you look across It turns out that when you look across It turns out that when you look across the kingdom of all animals, the kingdom of all animals, the kingdom of all animals, what you find is that animals that what you find is that animals that what you find is that animals that engage in playful behaviors for the engage in playful behaviors for the engage in playful behaviors for the longest period of time longest period of time longest period of time are also the animals that have the are also the animals that have the are also the animals that have the greatest degree of neuroplasticity. greatest degree of neuroplasticity. greatest degree of neuroplasticity. The brain and nervous system's ability The brain and nervous system's ability The brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. to change in response to experience. to change in response to experience. Put differently, animals that only play Put differently, animals that only play Put differently, animals that only play for a very small fraction of their for a very small fraction of their for a very small fraction of their entire life entire life entire life have very rigid brains that don't learn have very rigid brains that don't learn have very rigid brains that don't learn new things. new things. new things. Whereas animals that play for a long Whereas animals that play for a long Whereas animals that play for a long period throughout their life have very period throughout their life have very period throughout their life have very plastic brains. plastic brains. plastic brains. And there's even some evidence, that's And there's even some evidence, that's And there's even some evidence, that's at this point largely anecdotal, but at this point largely anecdotal, but at this point largely anecdotal, but there's some data starting to emerge there's some data starting to emerge there's some data starting to emerge that adults that maintain a playful that adults that maintain a playful that adults that maintain a playful stance, that engage in things again that stance, that engage in things again that stance, that engage in things again that are low stakes low stakes low stakes contingency exploring contingency exploring contingency exploring important enough that people focus and important enough that people focus and important enough that people focus and that people pay attention to what that people pay attention to what that people pay attention to what they're doing, but that they are not, they're doing, but that they are not, they're doing, but that they are not, you know, filled with adrenaline, you know, filled with adrenaline, you know, filled with adrenaline, you know, freaked out about the outcome know, freaked out about the outcome know, freaked out about the outcome being A or B. being A or B. being A or B. They're not super competitive, They're not super competitive, They're not super competitive, maybe just a little bit competitive or maybe just a little bit competitive or maybe just a little bit competitive or not competitive at all. not competitive at all. not competitive at all. That allows for more ongoing plasticity. That allows for more ongoing plasticity. That allows for more ongoing plasticity. And one of the people that comes to mind And one of the people that comes to mind And one of the people that comes to mind in thinking about this is of course the in thinking about this is of course the in thinking about this is of course the physicist and physicist and physicist and I should say the great physicist Richard I should say the great physicist Richard I should say the great physicist Richard Feynman, Nobel Prize winner, professor Feynman, Nobel Prize winner, professor Feynman, Nobel Prize winner, professor at Caltech, at Caltech, at Caltech, um was involved in the Manhattan um was involved in the Manhattan um was involved in the Manhattan Project, but was also known for being a Project, but was also known for being a Project, but was also known for being a lifelong tinkerer, right? He also was a lifelong tinkerer, right? He also was a lifelong tinkerer, right? He also was a mischievous tinkerer. Uh if you read any mischievous tinkerer. Uh if you read any mischievous tinkerer. Uh if you read any of the books about Feynman or by of the books about Feynman or by of the books about Feynman or by Feynman, Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman, Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman, Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman or What Do You Care What Other Feynman or What Do You Care What Other Feynman or What Do You Care What Other People Think, these are wonderful short People Think, these are wonderful short People Think, these are wonderful short stories mostly about Feynman doing stories mostly about Feynman doing stories mostly about Feynman doing things like um things like um things like um picking all the locks at the Los Alamos picking all the locks at the Los Alamos picking all the locks at the Los Alamos Laboratory and putting all the top Laboratory and putting all the top Laboratory and putting all the top secret documents out on the floor of the secret documents out on the floor of the secret documents out on the floor of the office so that when people came in office so that when people came in office so that when people came in the morning they were all out there. Um the morning they were all out there. Um the morning they were all out there. Um obviously, they weren't released to the obviously, they weren't released to the obviously, they weren't released to the general public. Um he didn't want to general public. Um he didn't want to general public. Um he didn't want to threaten national security. But playing threaten national security. But playing threaten national security. But playing pranks like that. Well, and actually pranks like that. Well, and actually pranks like that. Well, and actually Caltech, um I don't know if this is Caltech, um I don't know if this is Caltech, um I don't know if this is still the case, but Caltech where he was still the case, but Caltech where he was still the case, but Caltech where he was employed was always known for doing very employed was always known for doing very employed was always known for doing very technologically challenging technologically challenging technologically challenging pranks. They're not known for their pranks. They're not known for their pranks. They're not known for their athletic prowess at Caltech. Sorry, athletic prowess at Caltech. Sorry, athletic prowess at Caltech. Sorry, Caltech. But, they were known, for Caltech. But, they were known, for Caltech. But, they were known, for example, disrupting the scoreboard at the Rose disrupting the scoreboard at the Rose disrupting the scoreboard at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, for instance, and Bowl in Pasadena, for instance, and Bowl in Pasadena, for instance, and things of that sort through things of that sort through things of that sort through technological feats that at least at the technological feats that at least at the technological feats that at least at the time required a lot of time required a lot of time required a lot of playfulness and technological prowess. playfulness and technological prowess. playfulness and technological prowess. So, if you look in science or you look So, if you look in science or you look So, if you look in science or you look in art or you look in medicine or you in art or you look in medicine or you in art or you look in medicine or you look in any domain, what you find is the look in any domain, what you find is the look in any domain, what you find is the people that continue to evolve new people that continue to evolve new people that continue to evolve new practices tend to be people that were tinkerers, tend to be people that were tinkerers, tend to be people that were tinkerers, people that are very creative, tend to people that are very creative, tend to people that are very creative, tend to be people that are unafraid of exploring be people that are unafraid of exploring be people that are unafraid of exploring things in a this low-stakes way. They're things in a this low-stakes way. They're things in a this low-stakes way. They're not so rigidly attached to the outcome not so rigidly attached to the outcome not so rigidly attached to the outcome that they have to do everything that they have to do everything that they have to do everything perfectly all the time. Now, they might perfectly all the time. Now, they might perfectly all the time. Now, they might cloak these playful behaviors so that cloak these playful behaviors so that cloak these playful behaviors so that their final works always look perfect or their final works always look perfect or their final works always look perfect or always look incredible, but they have always look incredible, but they have always look incredible, but they have this kind of playful nature about them. this kind of playful nature about them. this kind of playful nature about them. I would venture even to say that the I would venture even to say that the I would venture even to say that the street artist Banksy, for instance, street artist Banksy, for instance, street artist Banksy, for instance, obviously an incredible artist, puts a obviously an incredible artist, puts a obviously an incredible artist, puts a ton of thought and preparation ton of thought and preparation ton of thought and preparation into their work, into their work, into their work, but there's a kind of playfulness to the but there's a kind of playfulness to the but there's a kind of playfulness to the whole thing, too, of using whole thing, too, of using whole thing, too, of using two-dimensional paintings in concert two-dimensional paintings in concert two-dimensional paintings in concert with three-dimensional city dwellings in with three-dimensional city dwellings in with three-dimensional city dwellings in ways that, you know, I think that most ways that, you know, I think that most ways that, you know, I think that most people hadn't previously. There were people hadn't previously. There were people hadn't previously. There were other people like Christo and you know, other people like Christo and you know, other people like Christo and you know, artists of that sort that did that, but artists of that sort that did that, but artists of that sort that did that, but I think Banksy is kind of recognized as I think Banksy is kind of recognized as I think Banksy is kind of recognized as the modern the modern the modern the modern rendition of that kind of the modern rendition of that kind of the modern rendition of that kind of playfulness using cities in ways that playfulness using cities in ways that playfulness using cities in ways that most people don't use cities, using art most people don't use cities, using art most people don't use cities, using art in ways that most people don't use art, in ways that most people don't use art, in ways that most people don't use art, for instance. So, to go back to the for instance. So, to go back to the for instance. So, to go back to the example of Feynman, Feynman was somebody example of Feynman, Feynman was somebody example of Feynman, Feynman was somebody who learned to paint and draw quite well who learned to paint and draw quite well who learned to paint and draw quite well into his 60s. He was somewhat famous or into his 60s. He was somewhat famous or into his 60s. He was somewhat famous or infamous, I should say, for bongo infamous, I should say, for bongo infamous, I should say, for bongo drumming on the roof of Caltech. I say drumming on the roof of Caltech. I say drumming on the roof of Caltech. I say infamous because he was known also for infamous because he was known also for infamous because he was known also for doing that naked, something that I doing that naked, something that I doing that naked, something that I certainly not in concert with the certainly not in concert with the certainly not in concert with the ethical standards and behaviors of ethical standards and behaviors of ethical standards and behaviors of universities today, but Feynman had this universities today, but Feynman had this universities today, but Feynman had this playful spirit. As a child, he had that playful spirit. As a child, he had that playful spirit. As a child, he had that playful spirit as a teenager, and he had playful spirit as a teenager, and he had playful spirit as a teenager, and he had that playful spirit as an adult. And that playful spirit as an adult. And that playful spirit as an adult. And that's one of the hallmarks of Feynman that's one of the hallmarks of Feynman that's one of the hallmarks of Feynman was that he wasn't just a rigid was that he wasn't just a rigid was that he wasn't just a rigid physicist who could explain things physicist who could explain things physicist who could explain things clearly to the general public. He always clearly to the general public. He always clearly to the general public. He always carried through this playful spirit. And carried through this playful spirit. And carried through this playful spirit. And in some of his writings, he pointed to in some of his writings, he pointed to in some of his writings, he pointed to the fact that playful spirit was the fact that playful spirit was the fact that playful spirit was something that he worked very hard to something that he worked very hard to something that he worked very hard to continue to cultivate in himself because continue to cultivate in himself because continue to cultivate in himself because it was the way in which he could see the it was the way in which he could see the it was the way in which he could see the world differently and to indeed make world differently and to indeed make world differently and to indeed make great discoveries in the field of great discoveries in the field of great discoveries in the field of physics, but also to kind of evolve his physics, but also to kind of evolve his physics, but also to kind of evolve his relationship to life more generally. And relationship to life more generally. And relationship to life more generally. And so, he comes to mind as a prominent so, he comes to mind as a prominent so, he comes to mind as a prominent example of somebody who did this. example of somebody who did this. example of somebody who did this. And if I could achieve anything with And if I could achieve anything with And if I could achieve anything with this episode besides teaching you this episode besides teaching you this episode besides teaching you something about the biology of play something about the biology of play something about the biology of play would be to teach you about the utility would be to teach you about the utility would be to teach you about the utility of play. of play. of play. Again, I'm don't consider myself a Again, I'm don't consider myself a Again, I'm don't consider myself a particularly playful person by nature, particularly playful person by nature, particularly playful person by nature, but I've tried over the years to adopt but I've tried over the years to adopt but I've tried over the years to adopt this stance of exploring things that are this stance of exploring things that are this stance of exploring things that are you know, very focused on contingencies you know, very focused on contingencies you know, very focused on contingencies of different kinds, but keep the stakes of different kinds, but keep the stakes of different kinds, but keep the stakes low enough that I can have some fun low enough that I can have some fun low enough that I can have some fun doing them. And I like to think that doing them. And I like to think that doing them. And I like to think that it's benefited me somewhat. I'd like to it's benefited me somewhat. I'd like to it's benefited me somewhat. I'd like to drill a little bit further into this drill a little bit further into this drill a little bit further into this thing that we call neuroplasticity. thing that we call neuroplasticity. thing that we call neuroplasticity. Again, neuroplasticity is the brain and Again, neuroplasticity is the brain and Again, neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability to change in nervous system's ability to change in nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. And I should response to experience. And I should response to experience. And I should just say that throughout the entire just say that throughout the entire just say that throughout the entire lifespan, the nervous system can change lifespan, the nervous system can change lifespan, the nervous system can change very quickly in response to negative very quickly in response to negative very quickly in response to negative experiences. We can almost all engage in experiences. We can almost all engage in experiences. We can almost all engage in what's called one-trial learning where what's called one-trial learning where what's called one-trial learning where if something really terrible or if something really terrible or if something really terrible or traumatic happens to us, our nervous traumatic happens to us, our nervous traumatic happens to us, our nervous system will rewire almost immediately, system will rewire almost immediately, system will rewire almost immediately, at least within a few days, such that we at least within a few days, such that we at least within a few days, such that we tend to want to avoid the experience tend to want to avoid the experience tend to want to avoid the experience that led to that trauma. that led to that trauma. that led to that trauma. Now, the whole business of why people Now, the whole business of why people Now, the whole business of why people return to things that are traumatic to return to things that are traumatic to return to things that are traumatic to them is a whole other issue. There are them is a whole other issue. There are them is a whole other issue. There are books about things like trauma are books about things like trauma are books about things like trauma bonding. There's the so-called bonding. There's the so-called bonding. There's the so-called repetition compulsion from repetition compulsion from repetition compulsion from psychoanalysis that people go back into psychoanalysis that people go back into psychoanalysis that people go back into trauma to retest and gain new trauma to retest and gain new trauma to retest and gain new opportunities to overcome the trauma, opportunities to overcome the trauma, opportunities to overcome the trauma, etc. But in general, what I'm etc. But in general, what I'm etc. But in general, what I'm referring to here is, you know, you have referring to here is, you know, you have referring to here is, you know, you have a bad experience at the swimming pool a bad experience at the swimming pool a bad experience at the swimming pool when you're a kid where someone holds when you're a kid where someone holds when you're a kid where someone holds your head under water too long and then your head under water too long and then your head under water too long and then you just don't want to get back in the you just don't want to get back in the you just don't want to get back in the water. That's one trial learning of water. That's one trial learning of water. That's one trial learning of sorts. That of course can be overcome through That of course can be overcome through That of course can be overcome through proper exposure therapy or someone that proper exposure therapy or someone that proper exposure therapy or someone that you trust taking you there or you trust taking you there or you trust taking you there or any number of behaviors that allow you any number of behaviors that allow you any number of behaviors that allow you to overcome that be that particular to overcome that be that particular to overcome that be that particular scenario and experience something new in scenario and experience something new in scenario and experience something new in that same context. that same context. that same context. But across the lifespan, the learning of But across the lifespan, the learning of But across the lifespan, the learning of new things, new contingencies, new things, new contingencies, new things, new contingencies, new possibilities occurs very differently from about age occurs very differently from about age occurs very differently from about age zero when we're born until about age 25 zero when we're born until about age 25 zero when we're born until about age 25 and thereafter. So, from about about, I and thereafter. So, from about about, I and thereafter. So, from about about, I want to emphasize, approximately age 25 want to emphasize, approximately age 25 want to emphasize, approximately age 25 onward neuroplasticity occurs through the neuroplasticity occurs through the neuroplasticity occurs through the process that is exactly as I described process that is exactly as I described process that is exactly as I described before. Focus, rest. Focus, rest. We before. Focus, rest. Focus, rest. We before. Focus, rest. Focus, rest. We focus very intensely, we can't do the focus very intensely, we can't do the focus very intensely, we can't do the thing, we can't do the new movement, we thing, we can't do the new movement, we thing, we can't do the new movement, we can't do the golf swing, we can't learn can't do the golf swing, we can't learn can't do the golf swing, we can't learn the math. the math. the math. We try, we try, we try, we try, we sleep We try, we try, we try, we try, we sleep We try, we try, we try, we try, we sleep a few nights and then all of a sudden we a few nights and then all of a sudden we a few nights and then all of a sudden we can do it, right? Because the rewiring can do it, right? Because the rewiring can do it, right? Because the rewiring actually occurs during deep rest or actually occurs during deep rest or actually occurs during deep rest or naps, but mostly during deep sleep. naps, but mostly during deep sleep. naps, but mostly during deep sleep. From birth till about age 25, however, From birth till about age 25, however, From birth till about age 25, however, we can learn things, new things and new we can learn things, new things and new we can learn things, new things and new contingencies not just negative things and traumatic not just negative things and traumatic not just negative things and traumatic things through somewhat passive exposure to through somewhat passive exposure to through somewhat passive exposure to those things, right? I will never forget those things, right? I will never forget those things, right? I will never forget the first time that we went on a family the first time that we went on a family the first time that we went on a family trip to Washington D.C. and we went to the to Washington D.C. and we went to the to Washington D.C. and we went to the Smithsonian and I got to see the old Smithsonian and I got to see the old Smithsonian and I got to see the old fighter planes and I think I think the fighter planes and I think I think the fighter planes and I think I think the Kitty Hawk or the first one of the first Kitty Hawk or the first one of the first Kitty Hawk or the first one of the first planes was there. Anyway, I obviously my planes was there. Anyway, I obviously my planes was there. Anyway, I obviously my recollection isn't terrific, my recollection isn't terrific, my recollection isn't terrific, my hippocampus is flailing on that one, hippocampus is flailing on that one, hippocampus is flailing on that one, but I'll never forget the trip and I'll but I'll never forget the trip and I'll but I'll never forget the trip and I'll never forget who went and I think I was never forget who went and I think I was never forget who went and I think I was probably eight or nine years old. probably eight or nine years old. probably eight or nine years old. It's embedded somewhere in my memory and It's embedded somewhere in my memory and It's embedded somewhere in my memory and so just through passive experience and so just through passive experience and so just through passive experience and my focusing on the things that excited my focusing on the things that excited my focusing on the things that excited me about that trip, I have a me about that trip, I have a me about that trip, I have a recollection of that experience. I recollection of that experience. I recollection of that experience. I didn't have to deliberately focus. I didn't have to deliberately focus. I didn't have to deliberately focus. I didn't wasn't telling myself focus, didn't wasn't telling myself focus, didn't wasn't telling myself focus, you're going to need to remember this you're going to need to remember this you're going to need to remember this trip someday Andrew, you're going to be trip someday Andrew, you're going to be trip someday Andrew, you're going to be podcasting about this, you know, in podcasting about this, you know, in podcasting about this, you know, in 39 years or whatever. Again, I forget 39 years or whatever. Again, I forget 39 years or whatever. Again, I forget exactly how old I was. But exactly how old I was. But exactly how old I was. But the key feature here is that the key feature here is that the key feature here is that the developing brain is able to learn developing brain is able to learn developing brain is able to learn through passive experience because the through passive experience because the through passive experience because the neurons, the nerve cells in the neurons, the nerve cells in the neurons, the nerve cells in the developing brain are developing brain are developing brain are much more over connected than they will much more over connected than they will much more over connected than they will be later in life. The way to think about be later in life. The way to think about be later in life. The way to think about this is sort of if you use Google Maps this is sort of if you use Google Maps this is sort of if you use Google Maps as I do as I do as I do too often, I think, too often, I think, too often, I think, um when I drive, there are a number of when I drive, there are a number of when I drive, there are a number of roads and pathways that would get you roads and pathways that would get you roads and pathways that would get you from point A to point B. We could have from point A to point B. We could have from point A to point B. We could have imagine those as neural circuits or we imagine those as neural circuits or we imagine those as neural circuits or we can imagine neural circuits as those can imagine neural circuits as those can imagine neural circuits as those roads. Early in development, the nerve Early in development, the nerve Early in development, the nerve connections are much more extensive. It connections are much more extensive. It connections are much more extensive. It would It's like having a Google Maps would It's like having a Google Maps would It's like having a Google Maps that where everything is connected to that where everything is connected to that where everything is connected to everything through tiny little cross everything through tiny little cross everything through tiny little cross streets and the whole thing is just a streets and the whole thing is just a streets and the whole thing is just a complete mess. complete mess. complete mess. But then by taking particular routes of But then by taking particular routes of But then by taking particular routes of behavior, of thought, of emotion, behavior, of thought, of emotion, behavior, of thought, of emotion, certain routes certain routes certain routes become well established and the other become well established and the other become well established and the other routes that are not taken routes that are not taken routes that are not taken simply disappear. simply disappear. simply disappear. Now, in the biological context in the Now, in the biological context in the Now, in the biological context in the brain, we call that process pruning. And brain, we call that process pruning. And brain, we call that process pruning. And the simple way to envision this is early the simple way to envision this is early the simple way to envision this is early in development, you have many, many more in development, you have many, many more in development, you have many, many more neurons than you will have as an adult. neurons than you will have as an adult. neurons than you will have as an adult. Those neurons are extensively Those neurons are extensively Those neurons are extensively interconnected and approximately 40% of interconnected and approximately 40% of interconnected and approximately 40% of those interconnections will disappear by those interconnections will disappear by those interconnections will disappear by time you're 25 years old. They are gone. time you're 25 years old. They are gone. time you're 25 years old. They are gone. They are actively removed through They are actively removed through They are actively removed through processes that involve things like glial processes that involve things like glial processes that involve things like glial cells that come in and literally sneak cells that come in and literally sneak cells that come in and literally sneak their little processes in between their little processes in between their little processes in between neurons at the synapse, which are the neurons at the synapse, which are the neurons at the synapse, which are the points of contact and communication points of contact and communication points of contact and communication between neurons, and push those apart, between neurons, and push those apart, between neurons, and push those apart, even eat neurons, right? There's some even eat neurons, right? There's some even eat neurons, right? There's some incredible work from for instance Beth incredible work from for instance Beth incredible work from for instance Beth Stevens lab at Stevens lab at Stevens lab at Harvard Medical School showing that Harvard Medical School showing that Harvard Medical School showing that glial cells go in and eat glial cells go in and eat glial cells go in and eat synapses that are not functional for synapses that are not functional for synapses that are not functional for that particular circuit. Now, that particular circuit. Now, that particular circuit. Now, what this tells us is that much of our what this tells us is that much of our what this tells us is that much of our learning during development is the learning during development is the learning during development is the removal of incorrect connections, but it removal of incorrect connections, but it removal of incorrect connections, but it also involves the strengthening of also involves the strengthening of also involves the strengthening of connections that are going to serve connections that are going to serve connections that are going to serve certain emotions, certain functions, certain emotions, certain functions, certain emotions, certain functions, motor functions, cognitive functions, motor functions, cognitive functions, motor functions, cognitive functions, etc. The process of play The process of play The process of play is largely a process of engaging pruning is largely a process of engaging pruning is largely a process of engaging pruning of neural connections and strengthening of neural connections and strengthening of neural connections and strengthening of the remaining connections. I'm sure of the remaining connections. I'm sure of the remaining connections. I'm sure that many of you have heard the term that many of you have heard the term that many of you have heard the term fire together, wire together. fire together, wire together. fire together, wire together. That phrase is often incorrectly That phrase is often incorrectly That phrase is often incorrectly attributed to the great Donald Hebb, who attributed to the great Donald Hebb, who attributed to the great Donald Hebb, who indeed was great, did incredible work, a indeed was great, did incredible work, a indeed was great, did incredible work, a psychologist from Canada who established psychologist from Canada who established psychologist from Canada who established a lot of the basic cellular learning a lot of the basic cellular learning a lot of the basic cellular learning rules for learning and memory, but it rules for learning and memory, but it rules for learning and memory, but it was the also great Dr. Carla Shatz, who was the also great Dr. Carla Shatz, who was the also great Dr. Carla Shatz, who is now at Stanford and was at Berkeley is now at Stanford and was at Berkeley is now at Stanford and was at Berkeley and Harvard as well, but who is at and Harvard as well, but who is at and Harvard as well, but who is at Stanford Medical School who coined this Stanford Medical School who coined this Stanford Medical School who coined this term fire together, wire together. term fire together, wire together. term fire together, wire together. Indeed, that's what happens. Indeed, that's what happens. Indeed, that's what happens. When children play, When children play, When children play, when adolescents play, and when young when adolescents play, and when young when adolescents play, and when young adults play, whether or not it's social adults play, whether or not it's social adults play, whether or not it's social play or play with an object, whether or play or play with an object, whether or play or play with an object, whether or not it's a sport or play of any kind, not it's a sport or play of any kind, not it's a sport or play of any kind, imaginary play, imaginary friend play, imaginary play, imaginary friend play, imaginary play, imaginary friend play, there is a strengthening of certain there is a strengthening of certain there is a strengthening of certain neural connections and a pruning away of neural connections and a pruning away of neural connections and a pruning away of up to 40%, perhaps even more, of up to 40%, perhaps even more, of up to 40%, perhaps even more, of connections that are not necessary for connections that are not necessary for connections that are not necessary for certain types of behaviors, emotions, certain types of behaviors, emotions, certain types of behaviors, emotions, and thoughts. and thoughts. and thoughts. What this means is that it is through What this means is that it is through What this means is that it is through the process of play that we become who the process of play that we become who the process of play that we become who we are as adults. And as I mentioned we are as adults. And as I mentioned we are as adults. And as I mentioned earlier, it is through the process of earlier, it is through the process of earlier, it is through the process of play that are we that we are able to play that are we that we are able to play that are we that we are able to adjust who are as adults. Now, there adjust who are as adults. Now, there adjust who are as adults. Now, there are bounds on this process. are bounds on this process. are bounds on this process. As far as I know, there's never been a As far as I know, there's never been a As far as I know, there's never been a reported case of an individual who had a reported case of an individual who had a reported case of an individual who had a hyperplastic or I should say a hyperplastic or I should say a hyperplastic or I should say a brain that was as plastic in adulthood brain that was as plastic in adulthood brain that was as plastic in adulthood as it was in childhood. as it was in childhood. as it was in childhood. But, what this tells us is that what we do in what this tells us is that what we do in what this tells us is that what we do in the process of play as children is the process of play as children is the process of play as children is really how we set up the rules for how really how we set up the rules for how really how we set up the rules for how we behave as adults in almost all we behave as adults in almost all we behave as adults in almost all domains, which is really incredible. And domains, which is really incredible. And domains, which is really incredible. And of course, the reassuring thing is that of course, the reassuring thing is that of course, the reassuring thing is that playing as an adult will allow you to playing as an adult will allow you to playing as an adult will allow you to expand on those neural circuits. You can expand on those neural circuits. You can expand on those neural circuits. You can literally grow new connections. Some of literally grow new connections. Some of literally grow new connections. Some of you may be saying, "Does it create new you may be saying, "Does it create new you may be saying, "Does it create new neurons?" As neurons?" As neurons?" As for better or for worse, it does not for better or for worse, it does not for better or for worse, it does not seem that many new neurons are added to seem that many new neurons are added to seem that many new neurons are added to your brain in adulthood. There are some your brain in adulthood. There are some your brain in adulthood. There are some papers that report a few neurons in papers that report a few neurons in papers that report a few neurons in certain brain areas, isolated brain certain brain areas, isolated brain certain brain areas, isolated brain areas, but by and large, most of the areas, but by and large, most of the areas, but by and large, most of the rewiring of neural connections is the rewiring of neural connections is the rewiring of neural connections is the removal of certain connections, this removal of certain connections, this removal of certain connections, this process we're calling pruning, and the process we're calling pruning, and the process we're calling pruning, and the strengthening of the remaining strengthening of the remaining strengthening of the remaining connections that make those kind of connections that make those kind of connections that make those kind of Google Maps roads in the analogy I laid Google Maps roads in the analogy I laid Google Maps roads in the analogy I laid out before thicker and more robust. out before thicker and more robust. out before thicker and more robust. Think about it as taking little trails Think about it as taking little trails Think about it as taking little trails and turning them into roads, then paving and turning them into roads, then paving and turning them into roads, then paving those roads, then turning those roads those roads, then turning those roads those roads, then turning those roads into highways, then putting up um more into highways, then putting up um more into highways, then putting up um more lanes on those highways, and eliminating lanes on those highways, and eliminating lanes on those highways, and eliminating all the small little back country roads all the small little back country roads all the small little back country roads that one could take. And again, this is that one could take. And again, this is that one could take. And again, this is an analogy for what is happening at the an analogy for what is happening at the an analogy for what is happening at the level of neural circuitry. level of neural circuitry. level of neural circuitry. Now, one of the key findings that has emerged one of the key findings that has emerged one of the key findings that has emerged from the literature from the literature from the literature is that children that have been subjected that children that have been subjected that children that have been subjected to trauma to trauma to trauma or immense amounts of stress of any kind or immense amounts of stress of any kind or immense amounts of stress of any kind have a harder time both engaging in have a harder time both engaging in have a harder time both engaging in play, but also a harder time accessing play, but also a harder time accessing play, but also a harder time accessing neuroplasticity later in life. neuroplasticity later in life. neuroplasticity later in life. The good news is this is not a permanent The good news is this is not a permanent The good news is this is not a permanent effect, and we'll talk about some of the effect, and we'll talk about some of the effect, and we'll talk about some of the ways to overcome that um in a moment. ways to overcome that um in a moment. ways to overcome that um in a moment. But, this should make sense to you But, this should make sense to you But, this should make sense to you because earlier we talked about how because earlier we talked about how because earlier we talked about how a high level of adrenaline, epinephrine, a high level of adrenaline, epinephrine, a high level of adrenaline, epinephrine, in the brain and body actually inhibits in the brain and body actually inhibits in the brain and body actually inhibits blocks the circuits in the brain and blocks the circuits in the brain and blocks the circuits in the brain and body that generate play behavior. And body that generate play behavior. And body that generate play behavior. And when I say that, I mean that in a very when I say that, I mean that in a very when I say that, I mean that in a very concrete way, that epinephrine and concrete way, that epinephrine and concrete way, that epinephrine and adrenaline can actually suppress the adrenaline can actually suppress the adrenaline can actually suppress the sorts of circuitry that can lead to sorts of circuitry that can lead to sorts of circuitry that can lead to things like soft eyes or tongue out or things like soft eyes or tongue out or things like soft eyes or tongue out or the head tilt or what we called partial the head tilt or what we called partial the head tilt or what we called partial postures of being able to engage in uh postures of being able to engage in uh postures of being able to engage in uh you know, a rough-and-tumble play but you know, a rough-and-tumble play but you know, a rough-and-tumble play but not take that to the point of outright not take that to the point of outright not take that to the point of outright aggression and damaging the other person aggression and damaging the other person aggression and damaging the other person or them damaging you. So, when I say or them damaging you. So, when I say or them damaging you. So, when I say that, you know, trauma and stress can that, you know, trauma and stress can that, you know, trauma and stress can inhibit neuroplasticity by way of inhibit neuroplasticity by way of inhibit neuroplasticity by way of inhibiting play inhibiting play inhibiting play at a deeper neurobiological level, what at a deeper neurobiological level, what at a deeper neurobiological level, what I'm really saying is that the high I'm really saying is that the high I'm really saying is that the high levels of adrenaline that are generated levels of adrenaline that are generated levels of adrenaline that are generated from trauma and stress actually shut from trauma and stress actually shut from trauma and stress actually shut down the circuits that allow a child or down the circuits that allow a child or down the circuits that allow a child or a young adult to enter the game of play a young adult to enter the game of play a young adult to enter the game of play or engage in the game of play in the or engage in the game of play in the or engage in the game of play in the same way that a child or young adult who same way that a child or young adult who same way that a child or young adult who didn't have high levels of adrenaline in didn't have high levels of adrenaline in didn't have high levels of adrenaline in their system their system their system could possibly engage in. could possibly engage in. could possibly engage in. Now, the good news is that many of the Now, the good news is that many of the Now, the good news is that many of the existing trauma therapies that are out existing trauma therapies that are out existing trauma therapies that are out there now, including things like EMDR, there now, including things like EMDR, there now, including things like EMDR, exposure therapy, cognitive behavioral exposure therapy, cognitive behavioral exposure therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, and on and on, including some therapy, and on and on, including some therapy, and on and on, including some of the of the of the uh therapies that are more neurochemical, therapies that are more neurochemical, therapies that are more neurochemical, things like ketamine or uh are more things like ketamine or uh are more things like ketamine or uh are more engineering-based um things like engineering-based um things like engineering-based um things like transcranial magnetic stimulation, for transcranial magnetic stimulation, for transcranial magnetic stimulation, for instance, many of those are paired with instance, many of those are paired with instance, many of those are paired with forms of talk therapy that are really forms of talk therapy that are really forms of talk therapy that are really about the same thing that play is about, about the same thing that play is about, about the same thing that play is about, which is exploring different which is exploring different which is exploring different contingencies. It's about contingencies. It's about contingencies. It's about exploring different types of emotional exploring different types of emotional exploring different types of emotional experiences as they relate to the same experiences as they relate to the same experiences as they relate to the same sort of scenario that created the sort of scenario that created the sort of scenario that created the trauma. And we did an entire episode on trauma. And we did an entire episode on trauma. And we did an entire episode on fear and trauma, and I recommend you fear and trauma, and I recommend you fear and trauma, and I recommend you check out that episode. It's easy to check out that episode. It's easy to check out that episode. It's easy to find again at hubermanlab.com. It's on find again at hubermanlab.com. It's on find again at hubermanlab.com. It's on YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc., etc. Very YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc., etc. Very YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc., etc. Very easy to find. And there I talk all about easy to find. And there I talk all about easy to find. And there I talk all about trauma treatments um and the various trauma treatments um and the various trauma treatments um and the various kinds of trauma treatments that are out kinds of trauma treatments that are out kinds of trauma treatments that are out there, their um, efficacy in different there, their um, efficacy in different there, their um, efficacy in different scenarios and traumas, uh, and so on. scenarios and traumas, uh, and so on. scenarios and traumas, uh, and so on. But, the point I'd like to make now is But, the point I'd like to make now is But, the point I'd like to make now is that the reason why children who that the reason why children who that the reason why children who experience a lot of trauma and stress experience a lot of trauma and stress experience a lot of trauma and stress have limited plasticity later on is have limited plasticity later on is have limited plasticity later on is because of the neurochemical substrates because of the neurochemical substrates because of the neurochemical substrates that are created from trauma and stress. that are created from trauma and stress. that are created from trauma and stress. Because after all, stress is epinephrine Because after all, stress is epinephrine Because after all, stress is epinephrine and epinephrine is stress. Those are and epinephrine is stress. Those are and epinephrine is stress. Those are inseparable. And the way in which it more or less And the way in which it more or less And the way in which it more or less shuts down or at least inhibits or shuts down or at least inhibits or shuts down or at least inhibits or suppresses those play circuits. And suppresses those play circuits. And suppresses those play circuits. And again, the reassuring thing is that by again, the reassuring thing is that by again, the reassuring thing is that by engaging in play as adults, we can engaging in play as adults, we can engaging in play as adults, we can reactivate some of those circuits and reactivate some of those circuits and reactivate some of those circuits and reopen the plasticity. In fact, one very reopen the plasticity. In fact, one very reopen the plasticity. In fact, one very prominent trauma treatment now, prominent trauma treatment now, prominent trauma treatment now, especially for people that have, um, especially for people that have, um, especially for people that have, um, been subjected to very severe traumas, been subjected to very severe traumas, been subjected to very severe traumas, uh, in the in the ongoing sense, meaning uh, in the in the ongoing sense, meaning uh, in the in the ongoing sense, meaning traumas that went on for many, many traumas that went on for many, many traumas that went on for many, many years, is to get them to engage in play, years, is to get them to engage in play, years, is to get them to engage in play, in things like dance, and basically in things like dance, and basically in things like dance, and basically getting them to engage their bodily getting them to engage their bodily getting them to engage their bodily movements in ways that they would movements in ways that they would movements in ways that they would otherwise not feel comfortable to engage otherwise not feel comfortable to engage otherwise not feel comfortable to engage in. And I find this area so interesting in. And I find this area so interesting in. And I find this area so interesting because on the face of it, you could because on the face of it, you could because on the face of it, you could say, "Oh, well, that's kind of, you say, "Oh, well, that's kind of, you say, "Oh, well, that's kind of, you know, is that really biomedical know, is that really biomedical know, is that really biomedical treatment? You know, you're taking treatment? You know, you're taking treatment? You know, you're taking people who are traumatized and having people who are traumatized and having people who are traumatized and having them dance." I mean, it seems kind of them dance." I mean, it seems kind of them dance." I mean, it seems kind of silly on the one hand, depending on silly on the one hand, depending on silly on the one hand, depending on your, you know, um, your, you know, um, your, you know, um, uh, your uh, particular orientation. uh, your uh, particular orientation. uh, your uh, particular orientation. But, on the other hand, it's actually But, on the other hand, it's actually But, on the other hand, it's actually quite profound and quite grounded in the quite profound and quite grounded in the quite profound and quite grounded in the mechanisms by which the brain circuits mechanisms by which the brain circuits mechanisms by which the brain circuits change. So again, change. So again, change. So again, back to this original principle, which back to this original principle, which back to this original principle, which is that play isn't just one portal to is that play isn't just one portal to is that play isn't just one portal to plasticity, play is the fundamental plasticity, play is the fundamental plasticity, play is the fundamental portal to plasticity. And that play and portal to plasticity. And that play and portal to plasticity. And that play and dance and exploration of novel dance and exploration of novel dance and exploration of novel movements, exploration of novel athletic movements, exploration of novel athletic movements, exploration of novel athletic movements, are the route by which we access new are the route by which we access new are the route by which we access new ways of thinking, new contingencies. ways of thinking, new contingencies. ways of thinking, new contingencies. And I find it wonderful that the trauma And I find it wonderful that the trauma And I find it wonderful that the trauma release and the, uh, psychiatric and release and the, uh, psychiatric and release and the, uh, psychiatric and psychology community are exploring psychology community are exploring psychology community are exploring things like play and dance and other things like play and dance and other things like play and dance and other forms of reopening these circuits forms of reopening these circuits forms of reopening these circuits because indeed, we would all love for there to indeed, we would all love for there to indeed, we would all love for there to be a magic pill by which trauma could be a magic pill by which trauma could be a magic pill by which trauma could be erased and new memories could be laid erased and new memories could be laid erased and new memories could be laid down or a device that could do that, but down or a device that could do that, but down or a device that could do that, but frankly, if you ask me or a number of my frankly, if you ask me or a number of my frankly, if you ask me or a number of my colleagues whether or not that's likely colleagues whether or not that's likely colleagues whether or not that's likely to happen anytime soon in an effective to happen anytime soon in an effective to happen anytime soon in an effective way, I think the short answer is way, I think the short answer is way, I think the short answer is going to be no, that there are going to going to be no, that there are going to going to be no, that there are going to be chemicals and things that can augment be chemicals and things that can augment be chemicals and things that can augment and support that process, but that and support that process, but that and support that process, but that there's not going to be just a magic there's not going to be just a magic there's not going to be just a magic pill that will suddenly reverse trauma pill that will suddenly reverse trauma pill that will suddenly reverse trauma altogether, that it's always going to be altogether, that it's always going to be altogether, that it's always going to be a case whereby shifts in neurochemical a case whereby shifts in neurochemical a case whereby shifts in neurochemical states are going to have to be combined states are going to have to be combined states are going to have to be combined with new ways of thinking and new with new ways of thinking and new with new ways of thinking and new behaviors, and I find it wonderful and behaviors, and I find it wonderful and behaviors, and I find it wonderful and reassuring that people are looking at reassuring that people are looking at reassuring that people are looking at play and play behavior as a not just one play and play behavior as a not just one play and play behavior as a not just one tiny shard of possibility there, but tiny shard of possibility there, but tiny shard of possibility there, but that it might actually be the main that it might actually be the main that it might actually be the main driver and a driver and a driver and a highly productive lever by which to highly productive lever by which to highly productive lever by which to rewire the traumatized brain. So, if rewire the traumatized brain. So, if rewire the traumatized brain. So, if you're like me, you might be thinking, you're like me, you might be thinking, you're like me, you might be thinking, "Okay, I'm willing to be more playful. "Okay, I'm willing to be more playful. "Okay, I'm willing to be more playful. I'm willing to explore play as a portal I'm willing to explore play as a portal I'm willing to explore play as a portal to plasticity, and that all makes good to plasticity, and that all makes good to plasticity, and that all makes good sense. But, what should I play? What should I But, what should I play? What should I But, what should I play? What should I do?" Well, we've already established that you want we've already established that you want we've already established that you want to keep your adrenaline low. You have to keep your adrenaline low. You have to keep your adrenaline low. You have to keep the stakes low enough that you're keep the stakes low enough that you're keep the stakes low enough that you're not going to get totally consumed by the not going to get totally consumed by the not going to get totally consumed by the outcome. Now, for some people who are highly Now, for some people who are highly Now, for some people who are highly competitive, that's going to be competitive, that's going to be competitive, that's going to be challenging, and yet I don't want to challenging, and yet I don't want to challenging, and yet I don't want to make it seem as if you can't be make it seem as if you can't be make it seem as if you can't be competitive during play. There are many competitive during play. There are many competitive during play. There are many forms of competitive play that forms of competitive play that forms of competitive play that because you are a competitive person, because you are a competitive person, because you are a competitive person, allow you to derive great joy from that allow you to derive great joy from that allow you to derive great joy from that competitive play. I have a friend who's competitive play. I have a friend who's competitive play. I have a friend who's particularly good at horseshoes. I'm not particularly good at horseshoes. I'm not particularly good at horseshoes. I'm not particularly good at horseshoes, but particularly good at horseshoes, but particularly good at horseshoes, but whenever we play horseshoes, I can tell whenever we play horseshoes, I can tell whenever we play horseshoes, I can tell he's out there to crush me on he's out there to crush me on he's out there to crush me on horseshoes. And it's just one of these horseshoes. And it's just one of these horseshoes. And it's just one of these things where, you know, I can tell he things where, you know, I can tell he things where, you know, I can tell he derives great pleasure from crushing me derives great pleasure from crushing me derives great pleasure from crushing me at a game of horseshoes. at a game of horseshoes. at a game of horseshoes. I can't say because I haven't actually I can't say because I haven't actually I can't say because I haven't actually done the microdialysis, which is a way done the microdialysis, which is a way done the microdialysis, which is a way of extracting chemistry from the brain of extracting chemistry from the brain of extracting chemistry from the brain in real-time, nor have I recorded from in real-time, nor have I recorded from in real-time, nor have I recorded from his brain or imaged it in a scanner his brain or imaged it in a scanner his brain or imaged it in a scanner whether or not uh he has high levels of whether or not uh he has high levels of whether or not uh he has high levels of epinephrine or low levels of epinephrine or low levels of epinephrine or low levels of epinephrine during those games of horseshoes. I during those games of horseshoes. I during those games of horseshoes. I suspect it is low levels of epinephrine suspect it is low levels of epinephrine suspect it is low levels of epinephrine and high levels of dopamine, especially and high levels of dopamine, especially and high levels of dopamine, especially when he wins, and yes, he wins every when he wins, and yes, he wins every when he wins, and yes, he wins every time. But, the point is that you can be time. But, the point is that you can be time. But, the point is that you can be competitive during play, provided that competitive during play, provided that competitive during play, provided that you are enjoying yourself. you are enjoying yourself. you are enjoying yourself. Okay? You can be competitive provided Okay? You can be competitive provided Okay? You can be competitive provided that you are enjoying yourself. that you are enjoying yourself. that you are enjoying yourself. There are particular forms of play that There are particular forms of play that There are particular forms of play that lend themselves best to neuroplasticity. lend themselves best to neuroplasticity. lend themselves best to neuroplasticity. And those particular forms of play, And those particular forms of play, And those particular forms of play, again, are not designed to necessarily again, are not designed to necessarily again, are not designed to necessarily just engage the plasticity that allows just engage the plasticity that allows just engage the plasticity that allows you to perform that behavior, but rather you to perform that behavior, but rather you to perform that behavior, but rather to expand the number of possibilities to expand the number of possibilities to expand the number of possibilities for your brain to change in general for your brain to change in general for your brain to change in general throughout life. throughout life. throughout life. And the two major forms of those for And the two major forms of those for And the two major forms of those for which there's good peer-reviewed which there's good peer-reviewed which there's good peer-reviewed research is to engage in novel forms of research is to engage in novel forms of research is to engage in novel forms of movement, including different speeds of movement, including different speeds of movement, including different speeds of movement. So, let's say for instance, movement. So, let's say for instance, movement. So, let's say for instance, you're somebody who runs. I happen to you're somebody who runs. I happen to you're somebody who runs. I happen to like running. I try to run three times a like running. I try to run three times a like running. I try to run three times a week. And generally, when I run, I run And generally, when I run, I run And generally, when I run, I run forward. I don't run backward, although forward. I don't run backward, although forward. I don't run backward, although recently, because I've become very recently, because I've become very recently, because I've become very excited about the work of so-called excited about the work of so-called excited about the work of so-called knees over toes guy. His name is Ben knees over toes guy. His name is Ben knees over toes guy. His name is Ben Parker, uh but he goes by knees over Parker, uh but he goes by knees over Parker, uh but he goes by knees over toes guy on Instagram. I've never met toes guy on Instagram. I've never met toes guy on Instagram. I've never met him, but uh we've exchanged a few him, but uh we've exchanged a few him, but uh we've exchanged a few messages back and forth, and some of his messages back and forth, and some of his messages back and forth, and some of his practices involve um walking backwards practices involve um walking backwards practices involve um walking backwards or um doing sled pulls backwards. I or um doing sled pulls backwards. I or um doing sled pulls backwards. I found these to be very beneficial for my found these to be very beneficial for my found these to be very beneficial for my back and for my, you know, anterior back and for my, you know, anterior back and for my, you know, anterior tibialis and some things that have tibialis and some things that have tibialis and some things that have really helped with my posture and so really helped with my posture and so really helped with my posture and so forth. But, in general, when I run, I forth. But, in general, when I run, I forth. But, in general, when I run, I run forward. I don't tend to run forward. I don't tend to run forward. I don't tend to run backward that much, and I might do that backward that much, and I might do that backward that much, and I might do that for a few minutes at the end, but not so for a few minutes at the end, but not so for a few minutes at the end, but not so much uh throughout the entire run. much uh throughout the entire run. much uh throughout the entire run. Running doesn't lend itself to a lot of Running doesn't lend itself to a lot of Running doesn't lend itself to a lot of novel forms of movement, lateral novel forms of movement, lateral novel forms of movement, lateral movement. So, so for you nerds out movement. So, so for you nerds out movement. So, so for you nerds out there, the movement in the sagittal there, the movement in the sagittal there, the movement in the sagittal plane, um or angled movements, but it plane, um or angled movements, but it plane, um or angled movements, but it does appear that things like dance or does appear that things like dance or does appear that things like dance or sports where you end up generating a lot sports where you end up generating a lot sports where you end up generating a lot of dynamic movements, where there's of dynamic movements, where there's of dynamic movements, where there's jumping, where there's movement at jumping, where there's movement at jumping, where there's movement at different angles, where there's ducking, different angles, where there's ducking, different angles, where there's ducking, where there's leaping, where there's leaping, where there's leaping, that basically involve a lot of dynamic that basically involve a lot of dynamic that basically involve a lot of dynamic movement and aren't just strictly movement and aren't just strictly movement and aren't just strictly linear, those seem to open the portals for those seem to open the portals for those seem to open the portals for plasticity. And that's because they mimic a lot of And that's because they mimic a lot of And that's because they mimic a lot of the brain circuitry that is associated the brain circuitry that is associated the brain circuitry that is associated with play. with play. with play. And the reason for that is the way in And the reason for that is the way in And the reason for that is the way in which those dynamic movements and which those dynamic movements and which those dynamic movements and movements of different speeds engage the movements of different speeds engage the movements of different speeds engage the vestibular system, the balance system. vestibular system, the balance system. vestibular system, the balance system. The vestibular system is in the inner The vestibular system is in the inner The vestibular system is in the inner ear, relates to the cerebellum, which ear, relates to the cerebellum, which ear, relates to the cerebellum, which translates to mini brain, you got a translates to mini brain, you got a translates to mini brain, you got a little mini brain in the back of your little mini brain in the back of your little mini brain in the back of your brain. It brings together visual brain. It brings together visual brain. It brings together visual information in a very direct way. I information in a very direct way. I information in a very direct way. I talked a lot about this in the episode talked a lot about this in the episode talked a lot about this in the episode on how to learn faster. So, if you want on how to learn faster. So, if you want on how to learn faster. So, if you want to go in-depth on how vestibular and to go in-depth on how vestibular and to go in-depth on how vestibular and different types of motor movements can different types of motor movements can different types of motor movements can open plasticity, I talk a little bit open plasticity, I talk a little bit open plasticity, I talk a little bit more, I should say a lot more there, but more, I should say a lot more there, but more, I should say a lot more there, but suffice to say that suffice to say that suffice to say that engaging in play that has a lot of engaging in play that has a lot of engaging in play that has a lot of dynamic movement or movements of dynamic movement or movements of dynamic movement or movements of different speeds, things like dance, different speeds, things like dance, different speeds, things like dance, things like sports, like soccer, where things like sports, like soccer, where things like sports, like soccer, where you're moving in different dimensions, you're moving in different dimensions, you're moving in different dimensions, that tends to be very conducive to what that tends to be very conducive to what that tends to be very conducive to what we would call play-related circuitry, we would call play-related circuitry, we would call play-related circuitry, provided you don't take it too provided you don't take it too provided you don't take it too seriously, you don't get those high seriously, you don't get those high seriously, you don't get those high levels of epinephrine. levels of epinephrine. levels of epinephrine. Now, for those of you that Now, for those of you that Now, for those of you that are also interested in non-physical or are also interested in non-physical or are also interested in non-physical or non-athletic forms of play that can non-athletic forms of play that can non-athletic forms of play that can really expand plasticity, there's some really expand plasticity, there's some really expand plasticity, there's some very interesting research about the game very interesting research about the game very interesting research about the game of chess. of chess. of chess. Uh I don't play the game of chess. I've Uh I don't play the game of chess. I've Uh I don't play the game of chess. I've played a few times. I confess I don't played a few times. I confess I don't played a few times. I confess I don't know how to move all the pieces, so I'm know how to move all the pieces, so I'm know how to move all the pieces, so I'm not going to try to describe that here, not going to try to describe that here, not going to try to describe that here, but I've always wanted to learn chess, but I've always wanted to learn chess, but I've always wanted to learn chess, and I think after reading some of the and I think after reading some of the and I think after reading some of the peer-reviewed research about chess and peer-reviewed research about chess and peer-reviewed research about chess and play and neuroplasticity, now I play and neuroplasticity, now I play and neuroplasticity, now I understand why. There's a really nice understand why. There's a really nice understand why. There's a really nice paper that was published in the International that was published in the International that was published in the International Journal of Research in Education and Journal of Research in Education and Journal of Research in Education and Science in 2017, and the title of this Science in 2017, and the title of this Science in 2017, and the title of this paper is paper is paper is "Is Chess just a game or is it a mirror "Is Chess just a game or is it a mirror "Is Chess just a game or is it a mirror that reflects a child's inner world? that reflects a child's inner world? that reflects a child's inner world? That's a very That's a very That's a very a very intense title for a biologist a very intense title for a biologist a very intense title for a biologist like me. like me. like me. But this paper is so interesting because this paper is so interesting because this paper is so interesting because what it really points to is the fact what it really points to is the fact what it really points to is the fact that in a single game, chess, you have that in a single game, chess, you have that in a single game, chess, you have at least as I understand two players and at least as I understand two players and at least as I understand two players and those two players are moving pieces on those two players are moving pieces on those two players are moving pieces on the chessboard the chessboard the chessboard for which each piece can do different for which each piece can do different for which each piece can do different things, right? Can move in different things, right? Can move in different things, right? Can move in different ways under different scenarios, but ways under different scenarios, but ways under different scenarios, but they're different rules for different they're different rules for different they're different rules for different pieces and so each player actually has pieces and so each player actually has pieces and so each player actually has to assume multiple identities during the to assume multiple identities during the to assume multiple identities during the same game. same game. same game. And each of those identities has And each of those identities has And each of those identities has different rules and ways of interacting. different rules and ways of interacting. different rules and ways of interacting. So in a way we can think of chess as one So in a way we can think of chess as one So in a way we can think of chess as one game, but actually chess is a game, but actually chess is a game, but actually chess is a kind of a substrate for exploring kind of a substrate for exploring kind of a substrate for exploring multiple roles for different characters. multiple roles for different characters. multiple roles for different characters. And this is quite a bit different than And this is quite a bit different than And this is quite a bit different than for instance video games where somebody for instance video games where somebody for instance video games where somebody has their favorite video game player or has their favorite video game player or has their favorite video game player or they have an avatar and they're always they have an avatar and they're always they have an avatar and they're always in the same role. It's also quite a bit in the same role. It's also quite a bit in the same role. It's also quite a bit different for when you engage in any different for when you engage in any different for when you engage in any kind of play where you are yourself. kind of play where you are yourself. kind of play where you are yourself. You're just being you in that game. And You're just being you in that game. And You're just being you in that game. And so now I'm highly incentivized to so now I'm highly incentivized to so now I'm highly incentivized to explore chess. explore chess. explore chess. You see quotes out there for instance You see quotes out there for instance You see quotes out there for instance things like chess is life or jiu-jitsu things like chess is life or jiu-jitsu things like chess is life or jiu-jitsu is life. I always assumed that is life. I always assumed that is life. I always assumed that meant that someone's entire life was meant that someone's entire life was meant that someone's entire life was chess or their entire life was jiu-jitsu chess or their entire life was jiu-jitsu chess or their entire life was jiu-jitsu for instance. But for instance. But for instance. But in reading over the research about chess in reading over the research about chess in reading over the research about chess in particular, but also certain martial in particular, but also certain martial in particular, but also certain martial arts, also certain forms of dance, what arts, also certain forms of dance, what arts, also certain forms of dance, what one finds is that indeed those games are one finds is that indeed those games are one finds is that indeed those games are life in the sense that they involve life in the sense that they involve life in the sense that they involve adopting multiple roles and exploring adopting multiple roles and exploring adopting multiple roles and exploring contingencies in a number of different contingencies in a number of different contingencies in a number of different ways. So there are some games that allow ways. So there are some games that allow ways. So there are some games that allow you to explore a much vaster landscape you to explore a much vaster landscape you to explore a much vaster landscape of movements or of mental roles or of movements or of mental roles or of movements or of mental roles or of ways of engaging in strategic movement ways of engaging in strategic movement ways of engaging in strategic movement as is the case with chess. And so when as is the case with chess. And so when as is the case with chess. And so when you hear that, you know, activity blank you hear that, you know, activity blank you hear that, you know, activity blank is life, it often reflects the passion is life, it often reflects the passion is life, it often reflects the passion for that activity, but I think looked at for that activity, but I think looked at for that activity, but I think looked at differently it also reflects the fact differently it also reflects the fact differently it also reflects the fact that activity is a that activity is a that activity is a portal through which you can explore portal through which you can explore portal through which you can explore life through many, many different life through many, many different life through many, many different lenses. And I think that that's lenses. And I think that that's lenses. And I think that that's especially powerful in terms of thinking especially powerful in terms of thinking especially powerful in terms of thinking about how play can be leveraged for about how play can be leveraged for about how play can be leveraged for plasticity. So for those of you that are plasticity. So for those of you that are plasticity. So for those of you that are interested in leveraging play for interested in leveraging play for interested in leveraging play for neuroplasticity and expanding your mind, neuroplasticity and expanding your mind, neuroplasticity and expanding your mind, if you will, if you will, if you will, I highly recommend picking an activity I highly recommend picking an activity I highly recommend picking an activity that will allow you to adopt different that will allow you to adopt different that will allow you to adopt different roles within that activity, where it's roles within that activity, where it's roles within that activity, where it's not rigidly linear. This is actually a not rigidly linear. This is actually a not rigidly linear. This is actually a way in which I start to depart from this way in which I start to depart from this way in which I start to depart from this modern and important, but somewhat modern and important, but somewhat modern and important, but somewhat narrow idea that exercise is the only narrow idea that exercise is the only narrow idea that exercise is the only route to plasticity. route to plasticity. route to plasticity. Yes, it's true. I have Nobel Prize Yes, it's true. I have Nobel Prize Yes, it's true. I have Nobel Prize winning colleagues that swim for 2 miles winning colleagues that swim for 2 miles winning colleagues that swim for 2 miles a day and have done that for a long a day and have done that for a long a day and have done that for a long time, and they will tell you, I always time, and they will tell you, I always time, and they will tell you, I always think more clearly after my swimming, think more clearly after my swimming, think more clearly after my swimming, and I certainly, in my experience, after and I certainly, in my experience, after and I certainly, in my experience, after a good run or a good workout, my mind a good run or a good workout, my mind a good run or a good workout, my mind seems to work best, seems to work best, seems to work best, um, unless of course that workout was um, unless of course that workout was um, unless of course that workout was very, very intense. I've talked about very, very intense. I've talked about very, very intense. I've talked about this before. If you do workout very, this before. If you do workout very, this before. If you do workout very, very hard in, whether or not it's very hard in, whether or not it's very hard in, whether or not it's aerobic or resistance training or sport aerobic or resistance training or sport aerobic or resistance training or sport of any kind, your brain won't function of any kind, your brain won't function of any kind, your brain won't function as well afterwards, mostly because of as well afterwards, mostly because of as well afterwards, mostly because of the diversion of oxygen to tissues away the diversion of oxygen to tissues away the diversion of oxygen to tissues away from your brain. You actually are from your brain. You actually are from your brain. You actually are getting less oxygen to your brain. But getting less oxygen to your brain. But getting less oxygen to your brain. But in general, most of us feel that if we in general, most of us feel that if we in general, most of us feel that if we exercise regularly, our brain functions exercise regularly, our brain functions exercise regularly, our brain functions better. But there are activities that extend But there are activities that extend But there are activities that extend beyond linear exercise, beyond just beyond linear exercise, beyond just beyond linear exercise, beyond just generating the same sets of movements generating the same sets of movements generating the same sets of movements over and over again, whether or not it's over and over again, whether or not it's over and over again, whether or not it's exercise or not. And that's really what exercise or not. And that's really what exercise or not. And that's really what play is. Play is about dynamically play is. Play is about dynamically play is. Play is about dynamically exploring different kinds of movements, exploring different kinds of movements, exploring different kinds of movements, dynamically exploring different kinds of dynamically exploring different kinds of dynamically exploring different kinds of thoughts, dynamically exploring thoughts, dynamically exploring thoughts, dynamically exploring different kinds of roles that one could different kinds of roles that one could different kinds of roles that one could adopt. And that is the way that the adopt. And that is the way that the adopt. And that is the way that the brain learns new things. So, I encourage brain learns new things. So, I encourage brain learns new things. So, I encourage you to explore chess. I intend to learn you to explore chess. I intend to learn you to explore chess. I intend to learn chess this year. I'm very excited to do chess this year. I'm very excited to do chess this year. I'm very excited to do that. Now, if you already play chess and that. Now, if you already play chess and that. Now, if you already play chess and you are an expert chess player, you are an expert chess player, you are an expert chess player, you actually will derive less benefit in actually will derive less benefit in actually will derive less benefit in terms of this play-induced terms of this play-induced terms of this play-induced neuroplasticity than you would, for neuroplasticity than you would, for neuroplasticity than you would, for instance, if you went out and instance, if you went out and instance, if you went out and I don't know, played a game of soccer or I don't know, played a game of soccer or I don't know, played a game of soccer or did something that was very novel for did something that was very novel for did something that was very novel for your nervous system. Because in that your nervous system. Because in that your nervous system. Because in that novelty and in that exploration of new novelty and in that exploration of new novelty and in that exploration of new behaviors and new ways of thinking, you behaviors and new ways of thinking, you behaviors and new ways of thinking, you are opening the portal to plasticity. are opening the portal to plasticity. are opening the portal to plasticity. Whereas in doing what you already know Whereas in doing what you already know Whereas in doing what you already know how to do and trying just to perform how to do and trying just to perform how to do and trying just to perform better and better at it, you will get better and better at it, you will get better and better at it, you will get better at chess, but again, that's just better at chess, but again, that's just better at chess, but again, that's just chess. You are not expanding the realms chess. You are not expanding the realms chess. You are not expanding the realms in which you can become more plastic, in which you can become more plastic, in which you can become more plastic, that you are able to learn new things in that you are able to learn new things in that you are able to learn new things in relationship, in life, in finance, in relationship, in life, in finance, in relationship, in life, in finance, in friendship, etc. In researching this friendship, etc. In researching this friendship, etc. In researching this episode, one of the most interesting episode, one of the most interesting episode, one of the most interesting areas I discovered was this notion of areas I discovered was this notion of areas I discovered was this notion of personal play identity. personal play identity. personal play identity. Personal play identity is a term that at Personal play identity is a term that at Personal play identity is a term that at least to my knowledge was coined by a least to my knowledge was coined by a least to my knowledge was coined by a Turkish researcher by the name, and forgive me, researcher by the name, and forgive me, researcher by the name, and forgive me, I'm going to mispronounce this, is I'm going to mispronounce this, is I'm going to mispronounce this, is Gokhan Guness. G O K H A N, last name G Gokhan Guness. G O K H A N, last name G Gokhan Guness. G O K H A N, last name G U N E S, and forgive me, Gokhan, and if U N E S, and forgive me, Gokhan, and if U N E S, and forgive me, Gokhan, and if um we have any um Turkish-speaking um we have any um Turkish-speaking um we have any um Turkish-speaking members of the audience, please put the members of the audience, please put the members of the audience, please put the correction in the correction in the correction in the uh comment section on YouTube. Uh uh comment section on YouTube. Uh uh comment section on YouTube. Uh make it phonetic so I can understand make it phonetic so I can understand make it phonetic so I can understand what it is. Please, I'd love to correct what it is. Please, I'd love to correct what it is. Please, I'd love to correct it and I apologies or who knows if I got it and I apologies or who knows if I got it and I apologies or who knows if I got it right, then uh it was pure luck. it right, then uh it was pure luck. it right, then uh it was pure luck. Gokhan Guness has coined this term Gokhan Guness has coined this term Gokhan Guness has coined this term personal play identity personal play identity personal play identity and the key role that and the key role that and the key role that personal play identity establishes in personal play identity establishes in personal play identity establishes in who we see ourselves as being and not who we see ourselves as being and not who we see ourselves as being and not just in the context of play. Personal just in the context of play. Personal just in the context of play. Personal play identity has four well-defined play identity has four well-defined play identity has four well-defined dimensions. And I should say that dimensions. And I should say that dimensions. And I should say that you're interested in learning more about you're interested in learning more about you're interested in learning more about this, the this, the this, the um the paper that I found uh the paper that I found uh the paper that I found uh particularly informative is published in particularly informative is published in particularly informative is published in Current Psychology, and the title is Current Psychology, and the title is Current Psychology, and the title is Personal Play Identity and the Personal Play Identity and the Personal Play Identity and the fundamental elements in its fundamental elements in its fundamental elements in its developmental process. And the author, developmental process. And the author, developmental process. And the author, of course, is Gökhan Güneş, g u n e s of course, is Gökhan Güneş, g u n e s of course, is Gökhan Güneş, g u n e s last name. This is from 2021, so recent last name. This is from 2021, so recent last name. This is from 2021, so recent review. There are four components to personal There are four components to personal There are four components to personal play identity. play identity. play identity. How you play, How you play, How you play, your personality, your personality, your personality, socio-culture, and environment, so that's the third and environment, so that's the third and environment, so that's the third one, that's together, socio-culture one, that's together, socio-culture one, that's together, socio-culture environment, and economics and environment, and economics and environment, and economics and technology. Now, that sounds somewhat technology. Now, that sounds somewhat technology. Now, that sounds somewhat complex, and this paper is somewhat complex, and this paper is somewhat complex, and this paper is somewhat complex, but basically what it says is complex, but basically what it says is complex, but basically what it says is that we bring together certain aspects of we bring together certain aspects of we bring together certain aspects of ourselves and how we react to different ourselves and how we react to different ourselves and how we react to different play scenarios when we're younger, and play scenarios when we're younger, and play scenarios when we're younger, and we bring that forward into the world in we bring that forward into the world in we bring that forward into the world in all contexts as adults. all contexts as adults. all contexts as adults. To illustrate this, I'm going to ask you To illustrate this, I'm going to ask you To illustrate this, I'm going to ask you a question. a question. a question. When you were a child, let's say 10 When you were a child, let's say 10 When you were a child, let's say 10 years old, years old, years old, would you have considered yourself would you have considered yourself would you have considered yourself competitive? Would you have considered yourself Would you have considered yourself Would you have considered yourself somebody who's cooperative? And realize, somebody who's cooperative? And realize, somebody who's cooperative? And realize, of course, that those are not mutually of course, that those are not mutually of course, that those are not mutually exclusive. You could be competitive and exclusive. You could be competitive and exclusive. You could be competitive and cooperative. Would you consider yourself cooperative. Would you consider yourself cooperative. Would you consider yourself somebody that preferred to play alone or somebody that preferred to play alone or somebody that preferred to play alone or preferred to play with one or two close preferred to play with one or two close preferred to play with one or two close friends? Or were you somebody that friends? Or were you somebody that friends? Or were you somebody that really enjoyed playing in large groups? really enjoyed playing in large groups? really enjoyed playing in large groups? Here's a key one. Were you somebody that Here's a key one. Were you somebody that Here's a key one. Were you somebody that enjoyed playing the leader in one moment enjoyed playing the leader in one moment enjoyed playing the leader in one moment and was equally okay with being a and was equally okay with being a and was equally okay with being a follower at a later moment? Were you follower at a later moment? Were you follower at a later moment? Were you okay with having your role switched okay with having your role switched okay with having your role switched midway through a game? midway through a game? midway through a game? Would you Would you Would you get upset or be delighted or not care at get upset or be delighted or not care at get upset or be delighted or not care at all about having to switch teams during all about having to switch teams during all about having to switch teams during the middle of game because your team was the middle of game because your team was the middle of game because your team was winning? Right? To even things out. You can Right? To even things out. You can Right? To even things out. You can imagine how that would um play out imagine how that would um play out imagine how that would um play out internally. You would immediately internally. You would immediately internally. You would immediately register that you must be a valuable register that you must be a valuable register that you must be a valuable player because you're being moved off player because you're being moved off player because you're being moved off the winning team toward the losing team. the winning team toward the losing team. the winning team toward the losing team. But then again, you're now being forced But then again, you're now being forced But then again, you're now being forced to join the losing team. How did you to join the losing team. How did you to join the losing team. How did you feel about that? feel about that? feel about that? Were you somebody that was comfortable Were you somebody that was comfortable Were you somebody that was comfortable with other people breaking rules or with other people breaking rules or with other people breaking rules or perhaps even yourself breaking rules or perhaps even yourself breaking rules or perhaps even yourself breaking rules or bending rules? bending rules? bending rules? Kind of be able to find term. Or were Kind of be able to find term. Or were Kind of be able to find term. Or were you somebody that you somebody that you somebody that really needed to know all the rules and really needed to know all the rules and really needed to know all the rules and if everyone didn't rigidly adhere to if everyone didn't rigidly adhere to if everyone didn't rigidly adhere to those rules was quite disturbed by that. those rules was quite disturbed by that. those rules was quite disturbed by that. The number of questions goes on and on The number of questions goes on and on The number of questions goes on and on and on and I will provide a link to a and on and I will provide a link to a and on and I will provide a link to a paper that asks a number of questions paper that asks a number of questions paper that asks a number of questions that helps you arrive at a sort of that helps you arrive at a sort of that helps you arrive at a sort of score of sorts or an index of what score of sorts or an index of what score of sorts or an index of what Gunness and others have referred to as Gunness and others have referred to as Gunness and others have referred to as personal play identity. personal play identity. personal play identity. The point is that if we look back to our The point is that if we look back to our The point is that if we look back to our early adolescence, somewhere between 10 early adolescence, somewhere between 10 early adolescence, somewhere between 10 and 14 years old, and 14 years old, and 14 years old, a peak time for social development, a peak time for social development, a peak time for social development, a peak time for play of various kinds, a peak time for play of various kinds, a peak time for play of various kinds, a peak time for motor development, peak time for motor development, peak time for motor development, a peak time a peak time a peak time of psychosocial development where we of psychosocial development where we of psychosocial development where we learn where we fit into hierarchies as learn where we fit into hierarchies as learn where we fit into hierarchies as we relate to members of the same sex, of we relate to members of the same sex, of we relate to members of the same sex, of the opposite sex, et cetera. the opposite sex, et cetera. the opposite sex, et cetera. We can start to get a portal into how We can start to get a portal into how We can start to get a portal into how and why we show up to various activities and why we show up to various activities and why we show up to various activities in work, in relationship, et cetera as in work, in relationship, et cetera as in work, in relationship, et cetera as adults. In fact, In fact, In fact, I'll venture to say that if we go into I'll venture to say that if we go into I'll venture to say that if we go into that process for ourselves for 5 or 10 that process for ourselves for 5 or 10 that process for ourselves for 5 or 10 minutes, you start to see some minutes, you start to see some minutes, you start to see some remarkable parallels between the way you remarkable parallels between the way you remarkable parallels between the way you were at that stage and your tendencies were at that stage and your tendencies were at that stage and your tendencies and your preferences as adults. We tend and your preferences as adults. We tend and your preferences as adults. We tend to look at our early childhood to look at our early childhood to look at our early childhood experiences and our families and to some experiences and our families and to some experiences and our families and to some degree our friends in terms of how we degree our friends in terms of how we degree our friends in terms of how we become who we become. become who we become. become who we become. I've talked about the incredible work of I've talked about the incredible work of I've talked about the incredible work of Allan Shore on previous episodes of the Allan Shore on previous episodes of the Allan Shore on previous episodes of the podcast. Allan Shore is a psychiatrist podcast. Allan Shore is a psychiatrist podcast. Allan Shore is a psychiatrist and has done extensive work on how and has done extensive work on how and has done extensive work on how parent-child interactions, in particular parent-child interactions, in particular parent-child interactions, in particular baby and mother, but also baby and baby and mother, but also baby and baby and mother, but also baby and father, shape the brain and the brain father, shape the brain and the brain father, shape the brain and the brain and emotional systems ability to go from and emotional systems ability to go from and emotional systems ability to go from states of elation and excitement, the states of elation and excitement, the states of elation and excitement, the so-called dopamine epinephrine type so-called dopamine epinephrine type so-called dopamine epinephrine type circuitry, to the more warm soothing circuitry, to the more warm soothing circuitry, to the more warm soothing types of calm interactions that in broad types of calm interactions that in broad types of calm interactions that in broad terms could be described as more terms could be described as more terms could be described as more serotonin, oxytocin, and things of that serotonin, oxytocin, and things of that serotonin, oxytocin, and things of that sort. That work really points to the key roles That work really points to the key roles That work really points to the key roles that the caregiver and the child, you, that the caregiver and the child, you, that the caregiver and the child, you, engaged in early life. And that is engaged in early life. And that is engaged in early life. And that is incredible work. I do hope to host Dr. incredible work. I do hope to host Dr. incredible work. I do hope to host Dr. Shore on the podcast at some point in Shore on the podcast at some point in Shore on the podcast at some point in the not too distant future. the not too distant future. the not too distant future. But equally important, of course, are But equally important, of course, are But equally important, of course, are the interactions that we export from the interactions that we export from the interactions that we export from that early laying down of biological that early laying down of biological that early laying down of biological circuitry and psychological circuitry to circuitry and psychological circuitry to circuitry and psychological circuitry to the way we play by ourselves and the way the way we play by ourselves and the way the way we play by ourselves and the way we play with others we play with others we play with others in small numbers or in great numbers. in small numbers or in great numbers. in small numbers or in great numbers. And of course, it would be the case And of course, it would be the case And of course, it would be the case that how we played as a 10- or that how we played as a 10- or that how we played as a 10- or 12-year-old would impact how we behave 12-year-old would impact how we behave 12-year-old would impact how we behave as a 16-year-old and as a 20-year-old as a 16-year-old and as a 20-year-old as a 16-year-old and as a 20-year-old and as a 30-year-old and so on and so and as a 30-year-old and so on and so and as a 30-year-old and so on and so on. One of my favorite things about One of my favorite things about One of my favorite things about developmental biology and developmental biology and developmental biology and developmental psychology is that it is grounded in the psychology is that it is grounded in the psychology is that it is grounded in the fact that we don't just have a childhood fact that we don't just have a childhood fact that we don't just have a childhood and an adulthood. There isn't just our and an adulthood. There isn't just our and an adulthood. There isn't just our child self and our adult self. And even child self and our adult self. And even child self and our adult self. And even though there are transitions around the though there are transitions around the though there are transitions around the mechanisms that underlie neuroplasticity mechanisms that underlie neuroplasticity mechanisms that underlie neuroplasticity at approximately age 25, at approximately age 25, at approximately age 25, it is simply the case that development it is simply the case that development it is simply the case that development is our entire lifespan. That our is our entire lifespan. That our is our entire lifespan. That our lifespan is one long developmental arc. lifespan is one long developmental arc. lifespan is one long developmental arc. How long depends on How long depends on How long depends on our genetics, our lifestyle, accidents, our genetics, our lifestyle, accidents, our genetics, our lifestyle, accidents, injury, and disease, of course, injury, and disease, of course, injury, and disease, of course, but it is one long developmental arc. but it is one long developmental arc. but it is one long developmental arc. And so it shouldn't surprise us at all And so it shouldn't surprise us at all And so it shouldn't surprise us at all that how we learn to play as a that how we learn to play as a that how we learn to play as a 10-year-old or 12-year-old would impact 10-year-old or 12-year-old would impact 10-year-old or 12-year-old would impact how we play and interact with people as how we play and interact with people as how we play and interact with people as a teenager and a young adult and on and a teenager and a young adult and on and a teenager and a young adult and on and on and on. on and on. on and on. And that play is the place in which we And that play is the place in which we And that play is the place in which we explore, in which we learn. Play is the explore, in which we learn. Play is the explore, in which we learn. Play is the substrate by which our nervous system substrate by which our nervous system substrate by which our nervous system changes us from this hyperconnected changes us from this hyperconnected changes us from this hyperconnected batch of neurons where everything is batch of neurons where everything is batch of neurons where everything is connected to everything, more or less, connected to everything, more or less, connected to everything, more or less, to a to a to a brain and nervous system whereby certain brain and nervous system whereby certain brain and nervous system whereby certain circuits work with immense proficiency circuits work with immense proficiency circuits work with immense proficiency and others are less accessible to us. and others are less accessible to us. and others are less accessible to us. But again, the wonderful thing about the But again, the wonderful thing about the But again, the wonderful thing about the human nervous system is that because human nervous system is that because human nervous system is that because it is plastic for the entire lifespan, it is plastic for the entire lifespan, it is plastic for the entire lifespan, and because these two elements of focus and because these two elements of focus and because these two elements of focus and rest can be deployed again and again and rest can be deployed again and again and rest can be deployed again and again and again, and again, and again, just because neural circuits didn't form just because neural circuits didn't form just because neural circuits didn't form does not mean that they can't form later does not mean that they can't form later does not mean that they can't form later in life. in life. in life. And today we've been focusing on how And today we've been focusing on how And today we've been focusing on how play itself, the same substrate that we play itself, the same substrate that we play itself, the same substrate that we use during development to become who we use during development to become who we use during development to become who we are, is the portal by which we can change who is the portal by which we can change who is the portal by which we can change who we are for the better. So I hope I've we are for the better. So I hope I've we are for the better. So I hope I've convinced you that play is an extremely convinced you that play is an extremely convinced you that play is an extremely important, fundamental, homeostatically important, fundamental, homeostatically important, fundamental, homeostatically regulated aspect of our nervous system, regulated aspect of our nervous system, regulated aspect of our nervous system, which is just a mouthful of nerd speak which is just a mouthful of nerd speak which is just a mouthful of nerd speak to say play can change your brain for to say play can change your brain for to say play can change your brain for the better, the better, the better, and that is true for every stage of and that is true for every stage of and that is true for every stage of life. The recommendation that I make, and The recommendation that I make, and The recommendation that I make, and certainly the one that I'm going to certainly the one that I'm going to certainly the one that I'm going to direct at myself as well, direct at myself as well, direct at myself as well, is to try and engage in at least 1 hour is to try and engage in at least 1 hour is to try and engage in at least 1 hour of pure play per week. of pure play per week. of pure play per week. Now, I came to that recommendation Now, I came to that recommendation Now, I came to that recommendation because of the literature that says, because of the literature that says, because of the literature that says, "Well, you need to engage in something "Well, you need to engage in something "Well, you need to engage in something pretty repetitively. It should be novel, pretty repetitively. It should be novel, pretty repetitively. It should be novel, so this wouldn't be something that you so this wouldn't be something that you so this wouldn't be something that you are exceptionally good at already. are exceptionally good at already. are exceptionally good at already. If you insist on doing something that If you insist on doing something that If you insist on doing something that you're already exceptionally good at, you're already exceptionally good at, you're already exceptionally good at, then you want to really do some free then you want to really do some free then you want to really do some free form, low-stakes tinkering. So make it form, low-stakes tinkering. So make it form, low-stakes tinkering. So make it safe, but make it safe, but make it safe, but make it free form. So really explore things with free form. So really explore things with free form. So really explore things with that, some people call this beginner's that, some people call this beginner's that, some people call this beginner's mind, although I find that a little mind, although I find that a little mind, although I find that a little abstract. I like the notion of abstract. I like the notion of abstract. I like the notion of beginner's mind, but it's sort of how do beginner's mind, but it's sort of how do beginner's mind, but it's sort of how do you know if you're in beginner's mind? I you know if you're in beginner's mind? I you know if you're in beginner's mind? I think beginner's mind is sort of the think beginner's mind is sort of the think beginner's mind is sort of the expectation that you're not going to do expectation that you're not going to do expectation that you're not going to do it well yet, but play extends beyond it well yet, but play extends beyond it well yet, but play extends beyond beginner's mind. Play is really about beginner's mind. Play is really about beginner's mind. Play is really about not even worrying if you're going to get not even worrying if you're going to get not even worrying if you're going to get good at it or really proficient at it. good at it or really proficient at it. good at it or really proficient at it. It's really about exploring It's really about exploring It's really about exploring contingencies with truly low stakes. contingencies with truly low stakes. contingencies with truly low stakes. That's what will allow you to access That's what will allow you to access That's what will allow you to access these neurochemical combinations of these neurochemical combinations of these neurochemical combinations of elevated endogenous opioids, low elevated endogenous opioids, low elevated endogenous opioids, low epinephrine, etc. that will open up epinephrine, etc. that will open up epinephrine, etc. that will open up neuroplasticity. For those of you who need a little more For those of you who need a little more For those of you who need a little more guidance on how to play, guidance on how to play, guidance on how to play, uh there's a book out there. I actually uh there's a book out there. I actually uh there's a book out there. I actually learned about this from Tim Ferriss's learned about this from Tim Ferriss's learned about this from Tim Ferriss's blog. It's called Play It Away, A blog. It's called Play It Away, A blog. It's called Play It Away, A Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety. So, Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety. So, Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety. So, that's more focused on anxiety. The that's more focused on anxiety. The that's more focused on anxiety. The author is Charlie Hoehn. The last name o author is Charlie Hoehn. The last name o author is Charlie Hoehn. The last name o h o e h n. We'll provide a link for it h o e h n. We'll provide a link for it h o e h n. We'll provide a link for it in the show notes and caption. Play It in the show notes and caption. Play It in the show notes and caption. Play It Away, A Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety. Away, A Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety. Away, A Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety. But, books and other resources aside, But, books and other resources aside, But, books and other resources aside, I think 1 hour of play per week is a I think 1 hour of play per week is a I think 1 hour of play per week is a reasonable amount of time to engage in reasonable amount of time to engage in reasonable amount of time to engage in dedicated play behavior for the purpose dedicated play behavior for the purpose dedicated play behavior for the purpose of opening up these neural circuits for of opening up these neural circuits for of opening up these neural circuits for plasticity. The key feature, of course, is to not The key feature, of course, is to not The key feature, of course, is to not have immense proficiency in that given have immense proficiency in that given have immense proficiency in that given activity, or at least not the way you activity, or at least not the way you activity, or at least not the way you perform it. And if you do gain perform it. And if you do gain perform it. And if you do gain proficiency in that activity, proficiency in that activity, proficiency in that activity, well, then it becomes something else. well, then it becomes something else. well, then it becomes something else. It's no longer about play, it's about It's no longer about play, it's about It's no longer about play, it's about performance. So, in that case you would then want to So, in that case you would then want to So, in that case you would then want to adopt a new play behavior. adopt a new play behavior. adopt a new play behavior. You'll notice that I largely avoided You'll notice that I largely avoided You'll notice that I largely avoided using the word fun throughout this using the word fun throughout this using the word fun throughout this episode. Fun is a somewhat abstract episode. Fun is a somewhat abstract episode. Fun is a somewhat abstract term, and like many emotions and many uh term, and like many emotions and many uh term, and like many emotions and many uh verbal descriptions of experience, it verbal descriptions of experience, it verbal descriptions of experience, it falls short in the context of a falls short in the context of a falls short in the context of a neurobiological discussion about play. neurobiological discussion about play. neurobiological discussion about play. If you have fun, terrific. Some people If you have fun, terrific. Some people If you have fun, terrific. Some people might find, however, that engaging in might find, however, that engaging in might find, however, that engaging in play is kind of uncomfortable. Well, play is kind of uncomfortable. Well, play is kind of uncomfortable. Well, there your goal then should be to lower there your goal then should be to lower there your goal then should be to lower your level of discomfort by focusing your level of discomfort by focusing your level of discomfort by focusing less on the outcomes and just simply less on the outcomes and just simply less on the outcomes and just simply engaging in the behavior because engaging in the behavior because engaging in the behavior because well, I'm telling you that it's good for well, I'm telling you that it's good for well, I'm telling you that it's good for you. But hopefully you will tell you. But hopefully you will tell you. But hopefully you will tell yourself that it's good for you and that yourself that it's good for you and that yourself that it's good for you and that you will experience that it's good for you will experience that it's good for you will experience that it's good for you. The literature certainly points to that. The literature certainly points to that. The literature certainly points to that. And the literature certainly points to the literature certainly points to the literature certainly points to the fact that play is the way that we are fact that play is the way that we are fact that play is the way that we are built. We are built to play. We have built. We are built to play. We have built. We are built to play. We have brain circuits from back to front and brain circuits from back to front and brain circuits from back to front and within our body that are there for play within our body that are there for play within our body that are there for play and they don't disappear. They do not and they don't disappear. They do not and they don't disappear. They do not get pruned away as we go from get pruned away as we go from get pruned away as we go from development to adulthood. So if ever you development to adulthood. So if ever you development to adulthood. So if ever you needed a neurobiological explanation for needed a neurobiological explanation for needed a neurobiological explanation for why play is important throughout the why play is important throughout the why play is important throughout the lifespan, it's that. It's that biology lifespan, it's that. It's that biology lifespan, it's that. It's that biology does not waste resources. It's extremely does not waste resources. It's extremely does not waste resources. It's extremely efficient. And were the circuits for efficient. And were the circuits for efficient. And were the circuits for play not to be important in adulthood, play not to be important in adulthood, play not to be important in adulthood, they would have been pruned away. But I they would have been pruned away. But I they would have been pruned away. But I guarantee you they are there in your guarantee you they are there in your guarantee you they are there in your brain and nervous system now. brain and nervous system now. brain and nervous system now. They will be there tomorrow and they They will be there tomorrow and they They will be there tomorrow and they will be there going forward. So my will be there going forward. So my will be there going forward. So my suggestion is that you use them. 1 hour suggestion is that you use them. 1 hour suggestion is that you use them. 1 hour per week. per week. per week. If you're learning from and or enjoying If you're learning from and or enjoying If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In zero-cost way to support us. In zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the addition, please subscribe to the addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and or Apple. And on podcast on Spotify and or Apple. And on podcast on Spotify and or Apple. And on Apple you have the opportunity to leave Apple you have the opportunity to leave Apple you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. us up to a five-star review. us up to a five-star review. Please leave us comments and suggestions Please leave us comments and suggestions Please leave us comments and suggestions and feedback including suggestions for and feedback including suggestions for and feedback including suggestions for future podcast guests in the comment future podcast guests in the comment future podcast guests in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all those section on YouTube. We do read all those section on YouTube. We do read all those comments. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the mentioned at the beginning of the mentioned at the beginning of the episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon. this podcast. We also have a Patreon. this podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman and there you can support the podcast at and there you can support the podcast at and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. any level that you like. any level that you like. If you're not already following us on If you're not already following us on If you're not already following us on Twitter and Instagram, we are Huberman Twitter and Instagram, we are Huberman Twitter and Instagram, we are Huberman Lab on Twitter and also Huberman Lab on Lab on Twitter and also Huberman Lab on Lab on Twitter and also Huberman Lab on Instagram. On Instagram, I do short posts that are On Instagram, I do short posts that are On Instagram, I do short posts that are related to topics covered on the podcast related to topics covered on the podcast related to topics covered on the podcast but also some additional topics. So but also some additional topics. So but also some additional topics. So these would include science-based tools these would include science-based tools these would include science-based tools for things like focus, for sleep, for things like focus, for sleep, for things like focus, for sleep, for learning and many other topics as learning and many other topics as learning and many other topics as In previous episodes of the Huberman Lab In previous episodes of the Huberman Lab In previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we often refer to supplements. Podcast, we often refer to supplements. Podcast, we often refer to supplements. Now, supplements aren't necessary or Now, supplements aren't necessary or Now, supplements aren't necessary or correct for everybody, but many people correct for everybody, but many people correct for everybody, but many people derive tremendous benefit from them for derive tremendous benefit from them for derive tremendous benefit from them for things like sleep and focus and so on. things like sleep and focus and so on. things like sleep and focus and so on. We've partnered with Thorne, that's t h We've partnered with Thorne, that's t h We've partnered with Thorne, that's t h o r n e, because Thorne supplements are o r n e, because Thorne supplements are o r n e, because Thorne supplements are of the very highest quality in terms of the very highest quality in terms of the very highest quality in terms of the ingredients they use and the ingredients they use and the ingredients they use and the specificity of the amounts of the specificity of the amounts of the specificity of the amounts of the ingredients that are listed on the ingredients that are listed on the ingredients that are listed on the bottle are actually what is in those bottle are actually what is in those bottle are actually what is in those bottles, which is not the case for many bottles, which is not the case for many bottles, which is not the case for many supplement brands out there. If you're supplement brands out there. If you're supplement brands out there. If you're interested in seeing the supplements interested in seeing the supplements interested in seeing the supplements that I take, you can go to that I take, you can go to that I take, you can go to thorne.com/the letter u/huberman. So, that's t h o r n letter u/huberman. So, that's t h o r n letter u/huberman. So, that's t h o r n e.com/the letter u/huberman. letter u/huberman. letter u/huberman. And those supplements you can purchase And those supplements you can purchase And those supplements you can purchase at 20% off. And if you navigate deeper at 20% off. And if you navigate deeper at 20% off. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site through that URL into the Thorne site through that URL into the Thorne site through that URL portal, you can also get 20% off any of portal, you can also get 20% off any of portal, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. the other supplements that Thorne makes. the other supplements that Thorne makes. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for this discussion about the incredible this discussion about the incredible this discussion about the incredible biology and psychology and power of this biology and psychology and power of this biology and psychology and power of this thing that we call play. And last but thing that we call play. And last but thing that we call play. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.