Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based [music] tools for mental science-based [music] tools for mental science-based [music] tools for mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, for my discussion with Jeff Cavalier. for my discussion with Jeff Cavalier. for my discussion with Jeff Cavalier. Jeff, such a pleasure for me to have you Jeff, such a pleasure for me to have you Jeff, such a pleasure for me to have you here. I'm glad to be here. It's amazing. here. I'm glad to be here. It's amazing. here. I'm glad to be here. It's amazing. I'm a long-time consumer of your I'm a long-time consumer of your I'm a long-time consumer of your content. I've learned a tremendous content. I've learned a tremendous content. I've learned a tremendous amount about fitness and both in the amount about fitness and both in the amount about fitness and both in the weight room, cardio, nutrition, things weight room, cardio, nutrition, things weight room, cardio, nutrition, things that I've applied for over a decade. One that I've applied for over a decade. One that I've applied for over a decade. One of your mantras is you know, if you want of your mantras is you know, if you want of your mantras is you know, if you want to look like an athlete, train like an to look like an athlete, train like an to look like an athlete, train like an athlete. And I think that's something athlete. And I think that's something athlete. And I think that's something really special that sets aside what you really special that sets aside what you really special that sets aside what you do from what a lot of other do from what a lot of other do from what a lot of other very well-qualified people do. What's very well-qualified people do. What's very well-qualified people do. What's the sort of contour of a basic program the sort of contour of a basic program the sort of contour of a basic program that anybody could think about as a that anybody could think about as a that anybody could think about as a starting place? I think it's like a starting place? I think it's like a starting place? I think it's like a 60/40 split, which would be leaning 60/40 split, which would be leaning 60/40 split, which would be leaning towards uh weight training, you know, towards uh weight training, you know, towards uh weight training, you know, strength and uh strength and uh strength and uh and then, you know, the conditioning and then, you know, the conditioning and then, you know, the conditioning aspect be about 40%. So, if you look at aspect be about 40%. So, if you look at aspect be about 40%. So, if you look at it over a course of a training week, I it over a course of a training week, I it over a course of a training week, I mean, 5 days in a gym would be a great mean, 5 days in a gym would be a great mean, 5 days in a gym would be a great task. And obviously not in the gym, it task. And obviously not in the gym, it task. And obviously not in the gym, it could be done at home, but 3 days could be done at home, but 3 days could be done at home, but 3 days strength training, Monday, Wednesday, strength training, Monday, Wednesday, strength training, Monday, Wednesday, Friday, conditioning, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, conditioning, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, conditioning, Tuesday, Thursday, you know, 2 days. It's a it's a pretty you know, 2 days. It's a it's a pretty you know, 2 days. It's a it's a pretty easy roundabout way to split that up. Of easy roundabout way to split that up. Of easy roundabout way to split that up. Of course, depending upon training goals course, depending upon training goals course, depending upon training goals and as you said, the aesthetic goals, and as you said, the aesthetic goals, and as you said, the aesthetic goals, like that will shift dramatically. But, like that will shift dramatically. But, like that will shift dramatically. But, if you want to see the benefits of both, if you want to see the benefits of both, if you want to see the benefits of both, that's probably the that's probably the that's probably the effective dose for strength training the effective dose for strength training the effective dose for strength training and the effective dose for conditioning and the effective dose for conditioning and the effective dose for conditioning at the bare minimum level. We try to at the bare minimum level. We try to at the bare minimum level. We try to keep our workouts to an hour or less, if keep our workouts to an hour or less, if keep our workouts to an hour or less, if possible. Now, depending upon the split possible. Now, depending upon the split possible. Now, depending upon the split that you're following, if you're on a that you're following, if you're on a that you're following, if you're on a total body split, there's just going to total body split, there's just going to total body split, there's just going to be more that has to be done in a given be more that has to be done in a given be more that has to be done in a given amount of time. But, in general, when amount of time. But, in general, when amount of time. But, in general, when you're not focused on that one aspect, you're not focused on that one aspect, you're not focused on that one aspect, but the overall health picture, then but the overall health picture, then but the overall health picture, then you can get the job done in under in you can get the job done in under in you can get the job done in under in under an hour. And again, I always say, under an hour. And again, I always say, under an hour. And again, I always say, on top of if you want to look like an on top of if you want to look like an on top of if you want to look like an athlete, train like an athlete, is you athlete, train like an athlete, is you athlete, train like an athlete, is you can either train long or you can train can either train long or you can train can either train long or you can train hard, but you can't do both. As you hard, but you can't do both. As you hard, but you can't do both. As you start to get older, it's the length of start to get older, it's the length of start to get older, it's the length of the workout that actually causes more the workout that actually causes more the workout that actually causes more problems than the intensity of what problems than the intensity of what problems than the intensity of what you're doing. Particularly if you're doing. Particularly if you're doing. Particularly if you're warmed up properly, like you said. I warmed up properly, like you said. I warmed up properly, like you said. I have found personally that my warm-up have found personally that my warm-up have found personally that my warm-up has had to become more of an integral has had to become more of an integral has had to become more of an integral part of my workout than it ever has part of my workout than it ever has part of my workout than it ever has before. In terms of splits, you before. In terms of splits, you before. In terms of splits, you mentioned splits. And so for those who mentioned splits. And so for those who mentioned splits. And so for those who aren't familiar with this uh term aren't familiar with this uh term aren't familiar with this uh term splits, it's really uh which body parts splits, it's really uh which body parts splits, it's really uh which body parts are you training on which days? I've are you training on which days? I've are you training on which days? I've seen you discuss, you know, 3 days a seen you discuss, you know, 3 days a seen you discuss, you know, 3 days a week whole body workouts. I've heard of week whole body workouts. I've heard of week whole body workouts. I've heard of splits like a pushing one day, uh splits like a pushing one day, uh splits like a pushing one day, uh pulling another day, legs another day, a pulling another day, legs another day, a pulling another day, legs another day, a day off, repeat. I mean, there's so many day off, repeat. I mean, there's so many day off, repeat. I mean, there's so many variations on this. What's governing the variations on this. What's governing the variations on this. What's governing the split? Uh for me, the first rule is the split? Uh for me, the first rule is the split? Uh for me, the first rule is will you stick to it? I don't will you stick to it? I don't will you stick to it? I don't particularly like full body splits. I particularly like full body splits. I particularly like full body splits. I don't necessarily like to have to train don't necessarily like to have to train don't necessarily like to have to train everything. Now, of course, the volumes everything. Now, of course, the volumes everything. Now, of course, the volumes will come down per muscle group, but if will come down per muscle group, but if will come down per muscle group, but if you don't like to do that, and you don't like to do that, and you don't like to do that, and you actually don't look forward to your actually don't look forward to your actually don't look forward to your workout because you're dreading having workout because you're dreading having workout because you're dreading having to do everything and feeling maybe too to do everything and feeling maybe too to do everything and feeling maybe too fatigued by the time your workout's fatigued by the time your workout's fatigued by the time your workout's over, or the fact that those generally over, or the fact that those generally over, or the fact that those generally do take a little bit longer and don't do take a little bit longer and don't do take a little bit longer and don't fit into your schedule, I don't care how fit into your schedule, I don't care how fit into your schedule, I don't care how effective the split is, a split not done effective the split is, a split not done effective the split is, a split not done is not effective. So, you need to find is not effective. So, you need to find is not effective. So, you need to find one that fits. So, maybe you go into an one that fits. So, maybe you go into an one that fits. So, maybe you go into an alternative option like uh um a alternative option like uh um a alternative option like uh um a push-pull legs like you mentioned. That push-pull legs like you mentioned. That push-pull legs like you mentioned. That can be done either one cycle through the can be done either one cycle through the can be done either one cycle through the week uh on a Monday, Wednesday, Friday week uh on a Monday, Wednesday, Friday week uh on a Monday, Wednesday, Friday split, or it could be twice in a week, split, or it could be twice in a week, split, or it could be twice in a week, so you're actually training six times. so you're actually training six times. so you're actually training six times. You know, where we where you repeat it, You know, where we where you repeat it, You know, where we where you repeat it, you know, pull, push, legs, pull, push, you know, pull, push, legs, pull, push, you know, pull, push, legs, pull, push, legs, or or, you know, uh you know, legs, or or, you know, uh you know, legs, or or, you know, uh you know, however you want to do it with however you want to do it with however you want to do it with either a day off in between the 3 days either a day off in between the 3 days either a day off in between the 3 days or at the end of the 6 days. Um and or at the end of the 6 days. Um and or at the end of the 6 days. Um and again, that actually impacts your again, that actually impacts your again, that actually impacts your schedule. I've broken that down before schedule. I've broken that down before schedule. I've broken that down before where it's, you know, if you put it in where it's, you know, if you put it in where it's, you know, if you put it in between the 3 days, it's good because between the 3 days, it's good because between the 3 days, it's good because you're giving yourself an extra rest day you're giving yourself an extra rest day you're giving yourself an extra rest day in between, but it starts to shift that in between, but it starts to shift that in between, but it starts to shift that day off every week as we wrap around. day off every week as we wrap around. day off every week as we wrap around. So, for those guys that were choosing So, for those guys that were choosing So, for those guys that were choosing that 7-day schedule out of convenience that 7-day schedule out of convenience that 7-day schedule out of convenience in our heads, you know, it starts to in our heads, you know, it starts to in our heads, you know, it starts to mess with that off day. So, others like mess with that off day. So, others like mess with that off day. So, others like to just keep it predictably, let's say to just keep it predictably, let's say to just keep it predictably, let's say on a Sunday, and train 6 days in a row. on a Sunday, and train 6 days in a row. on a Sunday, and train 6 days in a row. Um But, that's a But, that's a better But, that's a But, that's a better But, that's a But, that's a better way to maybe group similar muscle way to maybe group similar muscle way to maybe group similar muscle actions together, which I think I actions together, which I think I actions together, which I think I definitely prefer that because if I'm definitely prefer that because if I'm definitely prefer that because if I'm going to be training, you know, pulling going to be training, you know, pulling going to be training, you know, pulling movements, at least there there's a movements, at least there there's a movements, at least there there's a synergy between them, and I feel like synergy between them, and I feel like synergy between them, and I feel like I'm looking to achieve one goal that I'm looking to achieve one goal that I'm looking to achieve one goal that day. Um and then, I mean, quite honestly, you Um and then, I mean, quite honestly, you Um and then, I mean, quite honestly, you can go back to the bro split days. And can go back to the bro split days. And can go back to the bro split days. And this Those still work effectively. this Those still work effectively. this Those still work effectively. There's a reason why they worked in the There's a reason why they worked in the There's a reason why they worked in the past. Like I think that science shows past. Like I think that science shows past. Like I think that science shows that there's smarter ways to do them that there's smarter ways to do them that there's smarter ways to do them these days. Like you can You can come these days. Like you can You can come these days. Like you can You can come back and hit a related muscle. So, you back and hit a related muscle. So, you back and hit a related muscle. So, you could do, let's say, biceps on one day, could do, let's say, biceps on one day, could do, let's say, biceps on one day, and then come back 2 days later and do and then come back 2 days later and do and then come back 2 days later and do back, realizing again synergy between back, realizing again synergy between back, realizing again synergy between the exercises there. Your biceps are the exercises there. Your biceps are the exercises there. Your biceps are going to get restimulated again. So, you going to get restimulated again. So, you going to get restimulated again. So, you could figure out ways to make that work. could figure out ways to make that work. could figure out ways to make that work. But, the thing that I think is But, the thing that I think is But, the thing that I think is effective there is that tends to be one effective there is that tends to be one effective there is that tends to be one of the ones that people like the most of the ones that people like the most of the ones that people like the most because they can go in, they get their because they can go in, they get their because they can go in, they get their pump, they feel good, they it's pump, they feel good, they it's pump, they feel good, they it's pretty solely focused on one muscle pretty solely focused on one muscle pretty solely focused on one muscle group. Is that the definition of a bro group. Is that the definition of a bro group. Is that the definition of a bro split? One split? One split? One &gt;&gt; group a day, yeah. I see. So, it's very &gt;&gt; group a day, yeah. I see. So, it's very &gt;&gt; group a day, yeah. I see. So, it's very much geared towards strength and much geared towards strength and much geared towards strength and aesthetics, really maximizing Yeah. So, aesthetics, really maximizing Yeah. So, aesthetics, really maximizing Yeah. So, probably more aesthetics probably more aesthetics probably more aesthetics than strength, yeah. In terms of than strength, yeah. In terms of than strength, yeah. In terms of the mixing up of cardiovascular training the mixing up of cardiovascular training the mixing up of cardiovascular training and resistance training. Um same day, and resistance training. Um same day, and resistance training. Um same day, different day, which one should come different day, which one should come different day, which one should come first, which one could should come first, which one could should come first, which one could should come second? So, again, I think that the second? So, again, I think that the second? So, again, I think that the you know, the bare minimum is probably you know, the bare minimum is probably you know, the bare minimum is probably twice a week in terms of cardiovascular twice a week in terms of cardiovascular twice a week in terms of cardiovascular if you want to have some semblance of if you want to have some semblance of if you want to have some semblance of cardiovascular conditioning. But, I cardiovascular conditioning. But, I cardiovascular conditioning. But, I think most people who actually need it think most people who actually need it think most people who actually need it more or want to pursue it more than that more or want to pursue it more than that more or want to pursue it more than that are going to need more time to do that. are going to need more time to do that. are going to need more time to do that. So, um at some point, it can't just be So, um at some point, it can't just be So, um at some point, it can't just be relegated to a day off or a day off from relegated to a day off or a day off from relegated to a day off or a day off from the from the weight training workouts. the from the weight training workouts. the from the weight training workouts. So, at some point, it has to occur on So, at some point, it has to occur on So, at some point, it has to occur on the same day, you know? And in that the same day, you know? And in that the same day, you know? And in that case, I just like to put it at the end case, I just like to put it at the end case, I just like to put it at the end of the workout cuz you don't want to of the workout cuz you don't want to of the workout cuz you don't want to anyway compromise the weight training anyway compromise the weight training anyway compromise the weight training work workout. The intensity of those work workout. The intensity of those work workout. The intensity of those workouts is important. I just like to, workouts is important. I just like to, workouts is important. I just like to, you know, put that at the end you know, put that at the end you know, put that at the end realizing that even if my effort level realizing that even if my effort level realizing that even if my effort level is lower, my output is lower, if it's is lower, my output is lower, if it's is lower, my output is lower, if it's still placing a demand on my cardiac still placing a demand on my cardiac still placing a demand on my cardiac output to get that conditioning effect output to get that conditioning effect output to get that conditioning effect because I'm fatigued, it still has a because I'm fatigued, it still has a because I'm fatigued, it still has a demand on my cardiac output. So, it's demand on my cardiac output. So, it's demand on my cardiac output. So, it's still achieving its goal, but it didn't still achieving its goal, but it didn't still achieving its goal, but it didn't interfere with my main goal of being interfere with my main goal of being interfere with my main goal of being able to increase my performance in the able to increase my performance in the able to increase my performance in the gym. And in terms of the form of gym. And in terms of the form of gym. And in terms of the form of cardiovascular training, I've seen you cardiovascular training, I've seen you cardiovascular training, I've seen you um do a number of um do a number of um do a number of I have to say uh very impressive uh I have to say uh very impressive uh I have to say uh very impressive uh high-intensity interval type work rather high-intensity interval type work rather high-intensity interval type work rather than uh on the treadmill or out jogging than uh on the treadmill or out jogging than uh on the treadmill or out jogging for 30-45 minutes. Is that because you for 30-45 minutes. Is that because you for 30-45 minutes. Is that because you prefer higher intensity um higher heart prefer higher intensity um higher heart prefer higher intensity um higher heart rate type um training? rate type um training? rate type um training? &gt;&gt; If we could blend &gt;&gt; If we could blend &gt;&gt; If we could blend function across these realms and not function across these realms and not function across these realms and not have such a delineation between this is have such a delineation between this is have such a delineation between this is my weight training and this is my weight training and this is my weight training and this is my conditioning, but figure out a way to conditioning, but figure out a way to conditioning, but figure out a way to blend them together. I always think that blend them together. I always think that blend them together. I always think that you've got you've got a better you've got you've got a better you've got you've got a better opportunity to get that more opportunity to get that more opportunity to get that more well-rounded result. And I like to kind well-rounded result. And I like to kind well-rounded result. And I like to kind of mix up that straight conditioning of mix up that straight conditioning of mix up that straight conditioning work and also some of the footwork, you work and also some of the footwork, you work and also some of the footwork, you know, drills. Like we have we have know, drills. Like we have we have know, drills. Like we have we have some high expectations for guys that some high expectations for guys that some high expectations for guys that come into our programs. Like to just do come into our programs. Like to just do come into our programs. Like to just do some footwork drills. Like ladders. some footwork drills. Like ladders. some footwork drills. Like ladders. &gt;&gt; Like ladders or line drills or &gt;&gt; Like ladders or line drills or &gt;&gt; Like ladders or line drills or something. And you know what happens? something. And you know what happens? something. And you know what happens? People become intrigued and interested. People become intrigued and interested. People become intrigued and interested. Like, I've never I've never tried this Like, I've never I've never tried this Like, I've never I've never tried this since uh high school, you know? And since uh high school, you know? And since uh high school, you know? And they become interested in just the they become interested in just the they become interested in just the challenge of it. And then as we become challenge of it. And then as we become challenge of it. And then as we become almost distracted by the challenge, almost distracted by the challenge, almost distracted by the challenge, we're now like finding ourselves we're now like finding ourselves we're now like finding ourselves conditioning, you know? And and I always conditioning, you know? And and I always conditioning, you know? And and I always think that's an important part that think that's an important part that think that's an important part that sometimes you got to draw people in um sometimes you got to draw people in um sometimes you got to draw people in um to get to show them what they might be to get to show them what they might be to get to show them what they might be interested in. And from the output or interested in. And from the output or interested in. And from the output or the effect of it, I just think that when the effect of it, I just think that when the effect of it, I just think that when you're able to blend some of some you you're able to blend some of some you you're able to blend some of some you know, still maintain some of that know, still maintain some of that know, still maintain some of that strength training into the exercise. So, strength training into the exercise. So, strength training into the exercise. So, as you mentioned, let's say I'm doing as you mentioned, let's say I'm doing as you mentioned, let's say I'm doing some kind of a push-up or a burpee. I some kind of a push-up or a burpee. I some kind of a push-up or a burpee. I mean, there is there is a mean, there is there is a mean, there is there is a um an anaerobic component to that um an anaerobic component to that um an anaerobic component to that is going to be helpful um that is going to be helpful um that is going to be helpful um that rather than just walking or just rather than just walking or just rather than just walking or just jogging. Um Not just not to say that jogging. Um Not just not to say that jogging. Um Not just not to say that isn't an effective means for strict that isn't an effective means for strict that isn't an effective means for strict cardiac conditioning. It's a it's one of cardiac conditioning. It's a it's one of cardiac conditioning. It's a it's one of the ways that we've had for, you know, the ways that we've had for, you know, the ways that we've had for, you know, centuries, you know, to do it. But, I centuries, you know, to do it. But, I centuries, you know, to do it. But, I just think that if we can blend it, then just think that if we can blend it, then just think that if we can blend it, then it becomes maybe a little bit more it becomes maybe a little bit more it becomes maybe a little bit more interesting and you get some of those interesting and you get some of those interesting and you get some of those crossover benefits and it doesn't become crossover benefits and it doesn't become crossover benefits and it doesn't become so segmented in terms of what we're so segmented in terms of what we're so segmented in terms of what we're trying to do. One of the most important trying to do. One of the most important trying to do. One of the most important things I learned from you so over the things I learned from you so over the things I learned from you so over the years was that if you can flex your years was that if you can flex your years was that if you can flex your biceps to the point where it hurts a biceps to the point where it hurts a biceps to the point where it hurts a little bit, like it almost feels like a little bit, like it almost feels like a little bit, like it almost feels like a cramp or a cramp where you can flex your cramp or a cramp where you can flex your cramp or a cramp where you can flex your calf to the point where it really cramps calf to the point where it really cramps calf to the point where it really cramps up a little bit, almost feels like it's up a little bit, almost feels like it's up a little bit, almost feels like it's knotting up, that's a pretty good knotting up, that's a pretty good knotting up, that's a pretty good indication that you're going to be able indication that you're going to be able indication that you're going to be able to stimulate that muscle well under load to stimulate that muscle well under load to stimulate that muscle well under load if you're doing the movement properly. if you're doing the movement properly. if you're doing the movement properly. Right. How did you arrive at this kind Right. How did you arrive at this kind Right. How did you arrive at this kind of cramp test, the Cavalier test as I'll of cramp test, the Cavalier test as I'll of cramp test, the Cavalier test as I'll call it? During my call it? During my call it? During my uh workouts even as a as a young kid uh workouts even as a as a young kid uh workouts even as a as a young kid just starting out, I wanted to know what just starting out, I wanted to know what just starting out, I wanted to know what was supposed to be doing the work. was supposed to be doing the work. was supposed to be doing the work. Once you do that and you start to seek Once you do that and you start to seek Once you do that and you start to seek that out and say, "Okay, well, the bicep that out and say, "Okay, well, the bicep that out and say, "Okay, well, the bicep is what's supposed to be doing the work, is what's supposed to be doing the work, is what's supposed to be doing the work, then I want to make sure the bicep's then I want to make sure the bicep's then I want to make sure the bicep's doing the work, right?" So, I would seek doing the work, right?" So, I would seek doing the work, right?" So, I would seek out ways to make that happen better. And out ways to make that happen better. And out ways to make that happen better. And when I was able to do that, I could feel when I was able to do that, I could feel when I was able to do that, I could feel the stronger contraction. I was no the stronger contraction. I was no the stronger contraction. I was no visionary. I just felt like I knew visionary. I just felt like I knew visionary. I just felt like I knew that was going to be better for me that was going to be better for me that was going to be better for me if the muscle I was trying to grow was if the muscle I was trying to grow was if the muscle I was trying to grow was being stretched more. When I was being stretched more. When I was being stretched more. When I was attempting to do this across different attempting to do this across different attempting to do this across different exercises, I would notice that what I exercises, I would notice that what I exercises, I would notice that what I could do potentially on a could do potentially on a could do potentially on a curl where my arm is up, you know, where curl where my arm is up, you know, where curl where my arm is up, you know, where you asked me to flex my bicep, that you asked me to flex my bicep, that you asked me to flex my bicep, that position, I couldn't do if I was, you position, I couldn't do if I was, you position, I couldn't do if I was, you know, doing a concentration curl or I know, doing a concentration curl or I know, doing a concentration curl or I couldn't carry over to a cable curl. And couldn't carry over to a cable curl. And couldn't carry over to a cable curl. And that shouldn't really change, right? Cuz that shouldn't really change, right? Cuz that shouldn't really change, right? Cuz the function is still largely the same. the function is still largely the same. the function is still largely the same. There's still elbow flexion, there's There's still elbow flexion, there's There's still elbow flexion, there's still supination. Like, why am I not still supination. Like, why am I not still supination. Like, why am I not able to do it there? And that's when it able to do it there? And that's when it able to do it there? And that's when it sort of clued into me that like you your sort of clued into me that like you your sort of clued into me that like you your mind-muscle connection on not just your mind-muscle connection on not just your mind-muscle connection on not just your mind with one muscle, but on every mind with one muscle, but on every mind with one muscle, but on every exercise matters and it varies from exercise matters and it varies from exercise matters and it varies from exercise to exercise. There's a term I exercise to exercise. There's a term I exercise to exercise. There's a term I like to call muscularity, you know, like to call muscularity, you know, like to call muscularity, you know, which is a difference, right? It's the which is a difference, right? It's the which is a difference, right? It's the level of sort of resting tone in the level of sort of resting tone in the level of sort of resting tone in the muscle. That improves dramatically. You muscle. That improves dramatically. You muscle. That improves dramatically. You know, if you can learn how to just start know, if you can learn how to just start know, if you can learn how to just start to engage that muscle better, engage that muscle better, engage that muscle better, the muscularity, the resting tone of the muscularity, the resting tone of the muscularity, the resting tone of that muscle is harder, it's more alive. that muscle is harder, it's more alive. that muscle is harder, it's more alive. That's all driven from being able to That's all driven from being able to That's all driven from being able to connect better neurologically with the connect better neurologically with the connect better neurologically with the muscle that you're trying to train. When muscle that you're trying to train. When muscle that you're trying to train. When you're trying to go and create muscle you're trying to go and create muscle you're trying to go and create muscle hypertrophy or even this muscularity hypertrophy or even this muscularity hypertrophy or even this muscularity that I talk about, you need to seek ways that I talk about, you need to seek ways that I talk about, you need to seek ways to make it feel more uncomfortable, to make it feel more uncomfortable, to make it feel more uncomfortable, right? If you don't feel the discomfort, right? If you don't feel the discomfort, right? If you don't feel the discomfort, then you're doing something wrong. And I then you're doing something wrong. And I then you're doing something wrong. And I struggle to this day on certain muscle struggle to this day on certain muscle struggle to this day on certain muscle groups to still do that even knowing groups to still do that even knowing groups to still do that even knowing what I'm trying to work. It's very what I'm trying to work. It's very what I'm trying to work. It's very difficult for some muscles and for difficult for some muscles and for difficult for some muscles and for certain people to do this on certain people to do this on certain people to do this on certain muscles, but muscles, but muscles, but as you mentioned, practice does help. as you mentioned, practice does help. as you mentioned, practice does help. And the more you become, And the more you become, And the more you become, you know, consistent and deliberate with you know, consistent and deliberate with you know, consistent and deliberate with what you're trying to do, the more of an what you're trying to do, the more of an what you're trying to do, the more of an of a result you actually get. How do you of a result you actually get. How do you of a result you actually get. How do you assess recovery at the local level, assess recovery at the local level, assess recovery at the local level, meaning at the level of the muscles? So, meaning at the level of the muscles? So, meaning at the level of the muscles? So, we'll talk about soreness and getting we'll talk about soreness and getting we'll talk about soreness and getting better, stronger, more repetitions, etc. better, stronger, more repetitions, etc. better, stronger, more repetitions, etc. And then at the systemic level, at the And then at the systemic level, at the And then at the systemic level, at the level of the nervous system. Different level of the nervous system. Different level of the nervous system. Different muscles recover at different rates. You muscles recover at different rates. You muscles recover at different rates. You might have a bicep that's able to be might have a bicep that's able to be might have a bicep that's able to be trained that can be trained again trained that can be trained again trained that can be trained again the next day. the next day. the next day. You know, and then the next day. And You know, and then the next day. And You know, and then the next day. And then maybe you need a day off after then maybe you need a day off after then maybe you need a day off after that. That can vary from person to that. That can vary from person to that. That can vary from person to person for sure and it can vary from person for sure and it can vary from person for sure and it can vary from muscle to muscle in that person over the muscle to muscle in that person over the muscle to muscle in that person over the course of time. As you mentioned, cuz course of time. As you mentioned, cuz course of time. As you mentioned, cuz the systemic recovery is going to impact the systemic recovery is going to impact the systemic recovery is going to impact all those muscles anyway, but let's say all those muscles anyway, but let's say all those muscles anyway, but let's say you're systemically recovering, you're systemically recovering, you're systemically recovering, every muscle itself is going to have a every muscle itself is going to have a every muscle itself is going to have a recovery rate and I think that using recovery rate and I think that using recovery rate and I think that using muscle soreness as a guideline for that muscle soreness as a guideline for that muscle soreness as a guideline for that is one of the only tools we have in is one of the only tools we have in is one of the only tools we have in terms of the local level. Well, that's terms of the local level. Well, that's terms of the local level. Well, that's the one that most people can relate to the one that most people can relate to the one that most people can relate to and easily identify and then use that as and easily identify and then use that as and easily identify and then use that as a guideline and if you're training when a guideline and if you're training when a guideline and if you're training when you're really sore, you're really sore, you're really sore, it's probably not a great idea. But as it's probably not a great idea. But as it's probably not a great idea. But as far as the systemic, you know, far as the systemic, you know, far as the systemic, you know, recovery, grip strength is very recovery, grip strength is very recovery, grip strength is very much tied to performance and recovery. much tied to performance and recovery. much tied to performance and recovery. And when I was at the Mets, we used to And when I was at the Mets, we used to And when I was at the Mets, we used to actually take grip strength measurements as a take grip strength measurements as a take grip strength measurements as a baseline in spring training all the baseline in spring training all the baseline in spring training all the time. Now, obviously, as a baseball time. Now, obviously, as a baseball time. Now, obviously, as a baseball player, you're gripping a bat, you're player, you're gripping a bat, you're player, you're gripping a bat, you're pitcher, you're gripping a ball. Like, pitcher, you're gripping a ball. Like, pitcher, you're gripping a ball. Like, you know, grip having good grip strength you know, grip having good grip strength you know, grip having good grip strength is important. So, if we noticed somebody is important. So, if we noticed somebody is important. So, if we noticed somebody had a very weak grip, it's just a good had a very weak grip, it's just a good had a very weak grip, it's just a good focal point of a specialized training focal point of a specialized training focal point of a specialized training component for the program. component for the program. component for the program. &gt;&gt; day with those guys? No, we would do in &gt;&gt; day with those guys? No, we would do in &gt;&gt; day with those guys? No, we would do in spring training we'd do sort of a spring training we'd do sort of a spring training we'd do sort of a baseline entry level measurement and baseline entry level measurement and baseline entry level measurement and then we would we would measure it then we would we would measure it then we would we would measure it throughout the season, maybe once every throughout the season, maybe once every throughout the season, maybe once every 2 weeks or 3 weeks. And and you 2 weeks or 3 weeks. And and you 2 weeks or 3 weeks. And and you know, the idea there was to measure know, the idea there was to measure know, the idea there was to measure the recovery. We have found that with the recovery. We have found that with the recovery. We have found that with one of those scales, those with one of those scales, those with one of those scales, those old-fashioned bathroom scales, it's a old-fashioned bathroom scales, it's a old-fashioned bathroom scales, it's a great tool for just squeezing the great tool for just squeezing the great tool for just squeezing the scale with your hands and seeing the scale with your hands and seeing the scale with your hands and seeing what type of output you could get. what type of output you could get. what type of output you could get. Imagine the last time you were sick or Imagine the last time you were sick or Imagine the last time you were sick or that when you or just try this, you that when you or just try this, you that when you or just try this, you know, the next time you wake up in the know, the next time you wake up in the know, the next time you wake up in the morning. When you first wake up in the morning. When you first wake up in the morning. When you first wake up in the morning, you're still groggy. Try to morning, you're still groggy. Try to morning, you're still groggy. Try to squeeze your hand. Try to make a fist as squeeze your hand. Try to make a fist as squeeze your hand. Try to make a fist as hard as you can. You're going to sit hard as you can. You're going to sit hard as you can. You're going to sit there angry at your fist because it there angry at your fist because it there angry at your fist because it won't contract as hard as you know it won't contract as hard as you know it won't contract as hard as you know it can. You don't have the ability to just can. You don't have the ability to just can. You don't have the ability to just create the output and that is because in create the output and that is because in create the output and that is because in that state you're still sleepy, you're that state you're still sleepy, you're that state you're still sleepy, you're still fatigued, you know, you're still fatigued, you know, you're still fatigued, you know, you're not even awake at the you know, the not even awake at the you know, the not even awake at the you know, the whole level at this point. So, when you whole level at this point. So, when you whole level at this point. So, when you start to measure that on a daily basis, start to measure that on a daily basis, start to measure that on a daily basis, you can get a pretty good sense of where you can get a pretty good sense of where you can get a pretty good sense of where you're at. And I think when people start you're at. And I think when people start you're at. And I think when people start to see a drop off of 10% or so or to see a drop off of 10% or so or to see a drop off of 10% or so or even greater of their grip output, um even greater of their grip output, um even greater of their grip output, um you really should skip the gym that day you really should skip the gym that day you really should skip the gym that day because I don't think there's much because I don't think there's much because I don't think there's much you're going to do there that's going to you're going to do there that's going to you're going to do there that's going to be that beneficial. Even if it is be that beneficial. Even if it is be that beneficial. Even if it is the day to train legs or whatever day it the day to train legs or whatever day it the day to train legs or whatever day it is. I mean, there certainly are more is. I mean, there certainly are more is. I mean, there certainly are more sophisticated tools to as a as a PT, you sophisticated tools to as a as a PT, you sophisticated tools to as a as a PT, you know, we have a know, we have a know, we have a hand grip dynamometers, you know, we can hand grip dynamometers, you know, we can hand grip dynamometers, you know, we can we can measure one side at a time. Tell we can measure one side at a time. Tell we can measure one side at a time. Tell me what that comes the cost of the me what that comes the cost of the me what that comes the cost of the pretty expensive devices, but if it's pretty expensive devices, but if it's pretty expensive devices, but if it's Listen, if you're an athlete, you know, Listen, if you're an athlete, you know, Listen, if you're an athlete, you know, the 200 300 bucks it cost to have the 200 300 bucks it cost to have the 200 300 bucks it cost to have one of those would be well worth, you one of those would be well worth, you one of those would be well worth, you know, the added investment. know, the added investment. know, the added investment. &gt;&gt; When's the best time to stretch for &gt;&gt; When's the best time to stretch for &gt;&gt; When's the best time to stretch for particular types of results? And maybe particular types of results? And maybe particular types of results? And maybe you could define some of the different you could define some of the different you could define some of the different types of stretching. In general, the two types of stretching. In general, the two types of stretching. In general, the two basic forms of stretching are active basic forms of stretching are active basic forms of stretching are active stretching and passive stretching. And stretching and passive stretching. And stretching and passive stretching. And your passive stretching is done with the your passive stretching is done with the your passive stretching is done with the goal of trying to create an increase in goal of trying to create an increase in goal of trying to create an increase in the flexibility of the muscle. So, the flexibility of the muscle. So, the flexibility of the muscle. So, whether you're actually increasing the whether you're actually increasing the whether you're actually increasing the length of that muscle, well, you know, length of that muscle, well, you know, length of that muscle, well, you know, more so what you're doing is increasing more so what you're doing is increasing more so what you're doing is increasing the resist or decreasing the resistance the resist or decreasing the resistance the resist or decreasing the resistance of that muscle to want to stay at a of that muscle to want to stay at a of that muscle to want to stay at a certain level of flexibility. When we certain level of flexibility. When we certain level of flexibility. When we can sort of take the brakes off and can sort of take the brakes off and can sort of take the brakes off and allow that muscle to allow us more allow that muscle to allow us more allow that muscle to allow us more range of motion, we're inherently in range of motion, we're inherently in range of motion, we're inherently in increasing flexibility without increasing flexibility without increasing flexibility without necessarily having to increase the necessarily having to increase the necessarily having to increase the length of that muscle. That is usually length of that muscle. That is usually length of that muscle. That is usually done at a time far away from your done at a time far away from your done at a time far away from your workout because there is a period of workout because there is a period of workout because there is a period of recalibration that is needed after doing recalibration that is needed after doing recalibration that is needed after doing this because you're disrupting the this because you're disrupting the this because you're disrupting the length tension relationship of the length tension relationship of the length tension relationship of the muscle that causes you to not muscle that causes you to not muscle that causes you to not necessarily be able to rely on these necessarily be able to rely on these necessarily be able to rely on these I've talked about before stored motor I've talked about before stored motor I've talked about before stored motor engrams in your mind in terms of this is engrams in your mind in terms of this is engrams in your mind in terms of this is the pattern for how I swing a golf club, the pattern for how I swing a golf club, the pattern for how I swing a golf club, say, you know, and say, you know, and say, you know, and now introducing a little bit of now introducing a little bit of now introducing a little bit of flexibility or added flexibility or flexibility or added flexibility or flexibility or added flexibility or range because of the stretching I did range because of the stretching I did range because of the stretching I did before, it takes maybe a hole or two or before, it takes maybe a hole or two or before, it takes maybe a hole or two or three to match up again three to match up again three to match up again Oh, this is the this is what he's trying Oh, this is the this is what he's trying Oh, this is the this is what he's trying to do that golf swing thing I that I to do that golf swing thing I that I to do that golf swing thing I that I remembered again. Like it's not remembered again. Like it's not remembered again. Like it's not remembering that every component like I remembering that every component like I remembering that every component like I have to bend my right wrist back 10° and have to bend my right wrist back 10° and have to bend my right wrist back 10° and then I have to bend my elbow and I have then I have to bend my elbow and I have then I have to bend my elbow and I have to bring Like your body stores these to bring Like your body stores these to bring Like your body stores these patterns for motor efficiency. So, and patterns for motor efficiency. So, and patterns for motor efficiency. So, and when I have to start matching up that when I have to start matching up that when I have to start matching up that stored pattern with what's feeling new stored pattern with what's feeling new stored pattern with what's feeling new because of the increased range, I can because of the increased range, I can because of the increased range, I can impair performance. And again, it could impair performance. And again, it could impair performance. And again, it could happen even in a gym workout where happen even in a gym workout where happen even in a gym workout where you're talking about your first second you're talking about your first second you're talking about your first second set third set um where it maybe the set third set um where it maybe the set third set um where it maybe the repercussions aren't as big cuz I'll repercussions aren't as big cuz I'll repercussions aren't as big cuz I'll just do a few extra sets. But in just do a few extra sets. But in just do a few extra sets. But in performance, if you screw up your first performance, if you screw up your first performance, if you screw up your first three rounds, you play on a PGA tour and three rounds, you play on a PGA tour and three rounds, you play on a PGA tour and you shoot, you know, you're you shoot, you know, you're you shoot, you know, you're six over after three, you're six over after three, you're six over after three, you're done, you know? So, we you're done, you know? So, we you're done, you know? So, we relegate that, as I mentioned, sort of relegate that, as I mentioned, sort of relegate that, as I mentioned, sort of towards the end of the day, when it's towards the end of the day, when it's towards the end of the day, when it's not going to impact performance, but not going to impact performance, but not going to impact performance, but even maybe have the additional benefit even maybe have the additional benefit even maybe have the additional benefit of creating the feeling of length or of creating the feeling of length or of creating the feeling of length or the increase or decrease in resistance the increase or decrease in resistance the increase or decrease in resistance to this length, um at a time when I know to this length, um at a time when I know to this length, um at a time when I know my body is going to try to tend to heal my body is going to try to tend to heal my body is going to try to tend to heal and heal shorter. Never longer, but heal and heal shorter. Never longer, but heal and heal shorter. Never longer, but heal shorter. So, if I can introduce a little shorter. So, if I can introduce a little shorter. So, if I can introduce a little bit of that extra uh length or bit of that extra uh length or bit of that extra uh length or decrease resistance to that length, decrease resistance to that length, decrease resistance to that length, it's a better time to do it. So, I think it's a better time to do it. So, I think it's a better time to do it. So, I think it promotes a it promotes a it promotes a better recovery. I'm intrigued by this a better recovery. I'm intrigued by this a better recovery. I'm intrigued by this concept of heal shorter. So, part of the concept of heal shorter. So, part of the concept of heal shorter. So, part of the healing and recovery process means a healing and recovery process means a healing and recovery process means a shortening of the muscles. This is the shortening of the muscles. This is the shortening of the muscles. This is the tensing up in sleep. Could you elaborate tensing up in sleep. Could you elaborate tensing up in sleep. Could you elaborate just a bit on that? just a bit on that? just a bit on that? &gt;&gt; Basically, you know, what what's been &gt;&gt; Basically, you know, what what's been &gt;&gt; Basically, you know, what what's been shown is that when I'm when the shown is that when I'm when the shown is that when I'm when the repair process, muscular repair from, repair process, muscular repair from, repair process, muscular repair from, let's say, strength training during the let's say, strength training during the let's say, strength training during the day, the repair process usually results day, the repair process usually results day, the repair process usually results in a muscle that is slightly shorter in a muscle that is slightly shorter in a muscle that is slightly shorter rather than increased in length. You rather than increased in length. You rather than increased in length. You know, muscles prefer to sort of ratchet know, muscles prefer to sort of ratchet know, muscles prefer to sort of ratchet their way down into that uh their way down into that uh their way down into that uh contraction. So, when you're sleeping, contraction. So, when you're sleeping, contraction. So, when you're sleeping, it tends to err on the side of it tends to err on the side of it tends to err on the side of shorter rather than longer, when ideally shorter rather than longer, when ideally shorter rather than longer, when ideally we don't really want that. We want to we don't really want that. We want to we don't really want that. We want to maintain as much of that length, because maintain as much of that length, because maintain as much of that length, because with more length, we actually have more with more length, we actually have more with more length, we actually have more leverage. So, again, it's just making it leverage. So, again, it's just making it leverage. So, again, it's just making it a conscious choice to do it at a time of a conscious choice to do it at a time of a conscious choice to do it at a time of the day that makes a little bit more the day that makes a little bit more the day that makes a little bit more sense. Dynamic stretching is really not sense. Dynamic stretching is really not sense. Dynamic stretching is really not done for that purpose of trying to done for that purpose of trying to done for that purpose of trying to create any type of increasing the create any type of increasing the create any type of increasing the potential length, as you said, of the potential length, as you said, of the potential length, as you said, of the muscle, but more so the readiness of the muscle, but more so the readiness of the muscle, but more so the readiness of the muscle to perform. And muscle to perform. And muscle to perform. And increasing, you know, exploring the ends increasing, you know, exploring the ends increasing, you know, exploring the ends of that range of motion in a more of that range of motion in a more of that range of motion in a more dynamic way, so you're not hanging out dynamic way, so you're not hanging out dynamic way, so you're not hanging out there and disrupting that length-tension there and disrupting that length-tension there and disrupting that length-tension relationship, but just sort of touching relationship, but just sort of touching relationship, but just sort of touching the ends of those barriers, so that you the ends of those barriers, so that you the ends of those barriers, so that you when you feel movement again, it feels when you feel movement again, it feels when you feel movement again, it feels looser, it feels more ready. And at looser, it feels more ready. And at looser, it feels more ready. And at obviously at same time, warming up, obviously at same time, warming up, obviously at same time, warming up, blood flow, all the benefits we get from blood flow, all the benefits we get from blood flow, all the benefits we get from just warming up in general. So like, you just warming up in general. So like, you just warming up in general. So like, you know, that's the series you know, that's the series you know, that's the series you probably seen a bunch of times, but probably seen a bunch of times, but probably seen a bunch of times, but like, you know, leg swings and butt like, you know, leg swings and butt like, you know, leg swings and butt kicks and, you know, lunge walking kicks and, you know, lunge walking kicks and, you know, lunge walking lunges and those are the drills that lunges and those are the drills that lunges and those are the drills that people will do prior to training that people will do prior to training that people will do prior to training that are both excitatory in terms of just the are both excitatory in terms of just the are both excitatory in terms of just the nervous system, but also helpful for nervous system, but also helpful for nervous system, but also helpful for just the general warm up the body cuz of just the general warm up the body cuz of just the general warm up the body cuz of the blood flow, but from a muscle the blood flow, but from a muscle the blood flow, but from a muscle readiness standpoint, not impairing the readiness standpoint, not impairing the readiness standpoint, not impairing the performance while at the same time performance while at the same time performance while at the same time exploring the increased ranges. When I exploring the increased ranges. When I exploring the increased ranges. When I was working with Antonio Brown, I was working with Antonio Brown, I was working with Antonio Brown, I remember like he would spend 20 minutes, remember like he would spend 20 minutes, remember like he would spend 20 minutes, 30 minutes on all dynamic work. And I've 30 minutes on all dynamic work. And I've 30 minutes on all dynamic work. And I've never seen anybody spend that long on never seen anybody spend that long on never seen anybody spend that long on their dynamic work, but like their dynamic work, but like their dynamic work, but like he said he just didn't feel right and he said he just didn't feel right and he said he just didn't feel right and ready to go unless he did a lot of that. ready to go unless he did a lot of that. ready to go unless he did a lot of that. And I mean, you know, his dynamic And I mean, you know, his dynamic And I mean, you know, his dynamic stretching routine would be a workout stretching routine would be a workout stretching routine would be a workout for most everybody. There's one exercise for most everybody. There's one exercise for most everybody. There's one exercise and one particular motion that I'd like and one particular motion that I'd like and one particular motion that I'd like to discuss for a moment because I to discuss for a moment because I to discuss for a moment because I believe that believe that believe that learning about this cautionary note from learning about this cautionary note from learning about this cautionary note from you is one of the reasons that I've is one of the reasons that I've is one of the reasons that I've maintained steady training for 30 years maintained steady training for 30 years maintained steady training for 30 years with no major injury, knock on wood. with no major injury, knock on wood. with no major injury, knock on wood. And that's the upright row. I learned And that's the upright row. I learned And that's the upright row. I learned from you that the upright road from you that the upright road from you that the upright road compromises some important aspects of our shoulder some important aspects of our shoulder some important aspects of our shoulder mechanics and could be actually sort of mechanics and could be actually sort of mechanics and could be actually sort of a dangerous movement in some ways. But a dangerous movement in some ways. But a dangerous movement in some ways. But so I've always made it a point now on so I've always made it a point now on so I've always made it a point now on the basis of this advice to really the basis of this advice to really the basis of this advice to really strive for external rotation. Please strive for external rotation. Please strive for external rotation. Please tell us about internal external tell us about internal external tell us about internal external rotation, why this is so important, not rotation, why this is so important, not rotation, why this is so important, not just for weight training, just for weight training, just for weight training, but as in terms of posture and mechanics but as in terms of posture and mechanics but as in terms of posture and mechanics and not looking like a melted candle and not looking like a melted candle and not looking like a melted candle or partially melted candle. The shoulder or partially melted candle. The shoulder or partially melted candle. The shoulder has the most mobility in the body of any has the most mobility in the body of any has the most mobility in the body of any of any joint, but it's also got the of any joint, but it's also got the of any joint, but it's also got the least stability, right? There's always least stability, right? There's always least stability, right? There's always that trade-off of mobility and that trade-off of mobility and that trade-off of mobility and stability. So stability. So stability. So your stability comes from, you know, a your stability comes from, you know, a your stability comes from, you know, a certain muscle groups. And one of the certain muscle groups. And one of the certain muscle groups. And one of the ones that the only muscle group that ones that the only muscle group that ones that the only muscle group that actually externally rotates the shoulder actually externally rotates the shoulder actually externally rotates the shoulder is going to be the rotator cuff, okay? is going to be the rotator cuff, okay? is going to be the rotator cuff, okay? And unless you are devoted to training And unless you are devoted to training And unless you are devoted to training through external rotation and exercises through external rotation and exercises through external rotation and exercises that are going to externally rotate the that are going to externally rotate the that are going to externally rotate the shoulder, you're not training that shoulder, you're not training that shoulder, you're not training that function. And it's so easy for us in function. And it's so easy for us in function. And it's so easy for us in everyday life, especially those that everyday life, especially those that everyday life, especially those that aren't training, to not ever really aren't training, to not ever really aren't training, to not ever really undergo any of those stresses that could undergo any of those stresses that could undergo any of those stresses that could be beneficial to counteracting what be beneficial to counteracting what be beneficial to counteracting what happens freely and naturally, which is happens freely and naturally, which is happens freely and naturally, which is internal rotation. So, when you think internal rotation. So, when you think internal rotation. So, when you think about the imbalance created just by about the imbalance created just by about the imbalance created just by nature and how we live our lives, nature and how we live our lives, nature and how we live our lives, internal rotation far, far internal rotation far, far internal rotation far, far outweighs external rotation. So, you outweighs external rotation. So, you outweighs external rotation. So, you need to address it. And the reason why need to address it. And the reason why need to address it. And the reason why you need to address it is because you need to address it is because you need to address it is because you need to normalize those biomechanics of need to normalize those biomechanics of need to normalize those biomechanics of the shoulder if you want their long-term the shoulder if you want their long-term the shoulder if you want their long-term health. And one of the functions of the health. And one of the functions of the health. And one of the functions of the shoulder is to raise our arm up over our shoulder is to raise our arm up over our shoulder is to raise our arm up over our head. And if we do that from an head. And if we do that from an head. And if we do that from an internally rotated position, internally rotated position, internally rotated position, we're going to have a higher likelihood we're going to have a higher likelihood we're going to have a higher likelihood of creating stress inside that joint. In of creating stress inside that joint. In of creating stress inside that joint. In order to get normal mechanics and free order to get normal mechanics and free order to get normal mechanics and free up the joint maximally inside, you need up the joint maximally inside, you need up the joint maximally inside, you need to externally rotate as you raise the to externally rotate as you raise the to externally rotate as you raise the arm up. So, if your muscles aren't arm up. So, if your muscles aren't arm up. So, if your muscles aren't firing and they're not necessarily, um, firing and they're not necessarily, um, firing and they're not necessarily, um, as strong as the internal rotation bias as strong as the internal rotation bias as strong as the internal rotation bias that pulls them in, you're asking for that pulls them in, you're asking for that pulls them in, you're asking for trouble every time you do that. Well, trouble every time you do that. Well, trouble every time you do that. Well, this exercise is literally putting you this exercise is literally putting you this exercise is literally putting you in elevation and internal rotation. And in elevation and internal rotation. And in elevation and internal rotation. And if you were to walk into a PT office and if you were to walk into a PT office and if you were to walk into a PT office and someone said, "I think he's got someone said, "I think he's got someone said, "I think he's got impingement. Will you diagnose him?" impingement. Will you diagnose him?" impingement. Will you diagnose him?" There's a test called the Hawkins There's a test called the Hawkins There's a test called the Hawkins Kennedy test, and I would put you in the Kennedy test, and I would put you in the Kennedy test, and I would put you in the position I know we're not visible at position I know we're not visible at position I know we're not visible at this point through the podcast, but I'll this point through the podcast, but I'll this point through the podcast, but I'll put you in this position here, where I put you in this position here, where I put you in this position here, where I have your arm elevated and your hand have your arm elevated and your hand have your arm elevated and your hand pretty much under your chin, pushing pretty much under your chin, pushing pretty much under your chin, pushing downward on that to create that internal downward on that to create that internal downward on that to create that internal shoulder rotation. Pretty much the exact shoulder rotation. Pretty much the exact shoulder rotation. Pretty much the exact position that we're in when we're position that we're in when we're position that we're in when we're holding a bar in an upright row. holding a bar in an upright row. holding a bar in an upright row. Some will say, "Well, just don't go so Some will say, "Well, just don't go so Some will say, "Well, just don't go so high. Go only up to the level of the high. Go only up to the level of the high. Go only up to the level of the chest, but you're still in this chest, but you're still in this chest, but you're still in this internally rotated position. internally rotated position. internally rotated position. The thing that I think frustrates me The thing that I think frustrates me The thing that I think frustrates me the most about the exercise is that the most about the exercise is that the most about the exercise is that I have an alternative, and the I have an alternative, and the I have an alternative, and the alternative does the same thing in terms alternative does the same thing in terms alternative does the same thing in terms of helping the muscles grow by simply of helping the muscles grow by simply of helping the muscles grow by simply fixing the biomechanics of the exercise fixing the biomechanics of the exercise fixing the biomechanics of the exercise but just allowing the hands to go higher but just allowing the hands to go higher but just allowing the hands to go higher than the elbows. So, instead of the than the elbows. So, instead of the than the elbows. So, instead of the elbows being higher than the hand, which elbows being higher than the hand, which elbows being higher than the hand, which drives you into internal rotation, if drives you into internal rotation, if drives you into internal rotation, if the elbow is lower than the hand, the elbow is lower than the hand, the elbow is lower than the hand, the hand being higher here, I'm in external hand being higher here, I'm in external hand being higher here, I'm in external rotation. And I could do something rotation. And I could do something rotation. And I could do something called a high pull and still get the called a high pull and still get the called a high pull and still get the same abduction of the arm and still get same abduction of the arm and still get same abduction of the arm and still get the same benefits of the shoulders, the same benefits of the shoulders, the same benefits of the shoulders, the delts, and the traps without having to delts, and the traps without having to delts, and the traps without having to undergo any of the stresses that would undergo any of the stresses that would undergo any of the stresses that would come from the somewhat awkward movement come from the somewhat awkward movement come from the somewhat awkward movement of an upright row. Now, people will of an upright row. Now, people will of an upright row. Now, people will argue, this is the way they argue, that argue, this is the way they argue, that argue, this is the way they argue, that "I've done this for 30 years and I've "I've done this for 30 years and I've "I've done this for 30 years and I've never hurt myself." And I always say, never hurt myself." And I always say, never hurt myself." And I always say, "Yet." Yet. Like I listen, Yet. Like I listen, Yet. Like I listen, &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; the goal is to not hurt yourself ever. &gt;&gt; the goal is to not hurt yourself ever. &gt;&gt; the goal is to not hurt yourself ever. So, even if you It's sort of like, you So, even if you It's sort of like, you So, even if you It's sort of like, you know, the know, the know, the championship game. You know, you might championship game. You know, you might championship game. You know, you might play the game of your life, but if you play the game of your life, but if you play the game of your life, but if you lose, you lost. And when you get into lose, you lost. And when you get into lose, you lost. And when you get into the end of the you know, the record the end of the you know, the record the end of the you know, the record books, you're still lost. So, even if books, you're still lost. So, even if books, you're still lost. So, even if you had the game of your life, you lost. you had the game of your life, you lost. you had the game of your life, you lost. I don't care if you do it for 30 years, I don't care if you do it for 30 years, I don't care if you do it for 30 years, no pain, you're still doing it and no pain, you're still doing it and no pain, you're still doing it and there's no pain. I'm giving you an there's no pain. I'm giving you an there's no pain. I'm giving you an option that's going to give you the same option that's going to give you the same option that's going to give you the same results in the exercise that you're results in the exercise that you're results in the exercise that you're seeking. That's why you're doing the seeking. That's why you're doing the seeking. That's why you're doing the exercise. Without the possibility of having Without the possibility of having Without the possibility of having the you know, the bad outcome the you know, the bad outcome the you know, the bad outcome come from it. The body is like a mirror come from it. The body is like a mirror come from it. The body is like a mirror image. The hip is like the shoulder, image. The hip is like the shoulder, image. The hip is like the shoulder, right? The ankle is the wrist. The foot right? The ankle is the wrist. The foot right? The ankle is the wrist. The foot is the hand. Like they're they is the hand. Like they're they is the hand. Like they're they function The knee is the elbow. They're function The knee is the elbow. They're function The knee is the elbow. They're two hinge joints. They function that two hinge joints. They function that two hinge joints. They function that way. Well, with the shoulder, you've got way. Well, with the shoulder, you've got way. Well, with the shoulder, you've got that mobility that comes from having all that mobility that comes from having all that mobility that comes from having all that freedom of motion, but the that freedom of motion, but the that freedom of motion, but the stability is lacking. Well, the same stability is lacking. Well, the same stability is lacking. Well, the same thing with the hip. Like you've got thing with the hip. Like you've got thing with the hip. Like you've got mobility, but if you don't fully mobility, but if you don't fully mobility, but if you don't fully stabilize it by training all of the stabilize it by training all of the stabilize it by training all of the muscles of the hip, and if you don't muscles of the hip, and if you don't muscles of the hip, and if you don't strengthen the external rotation of the strengthen the external rotation of the strengthen the external rotation of the hip, then, you know, you've you're hip, then, you know, you've you're hip, then, you know, you've you're going to have issues. Like it's you're going to have issues. Like it's you're going to have issues. Like it's not biomechanically going to work the not biomechanically going to work the not biomechanically going to work the same way. If you think of the body as a same way. If you think of the body as a same way. If you think of the body as a series of, you know, bands, you know, series of, you know, bands, you know, series of, you know, bands, you know, pulling in different directions at pulling in different directions at pulling in different directions at different levels of tension, you know, different levels of tension, you know, different levels of tension, you know, you're being pulled into one direction you're being pulled into one direction you're being pulled into one direction or the other just by the balance of or the other just by the balance of or the other just by the balance of tension from one weak area to one tension from one weak area to one tension from one weak area to one dominantly tight area, and you need to dominantly tight area, and you need to dominantly tight area, and you need to make sure that you can sort of balance make sure that you can sort of balance make sure that you can sort of balance this out in order to eliminate some of this out in order to eliminate some of this out in order to eliminate some of the adaptations and compensations that the adaptations and compensations that the adaptations and compensations that happen. One of the great uh tools that I happen. One of the great uh tools that I happen. One of the great uh tools that I picked up from your content, which I picked up from your content, which I picked up from your content, which has benefited uh I know a huge number has benefited uh I know a huge number has benefited uh I know a huge number of people is I think I used to hold uh of people is I think I used to hold uh of people is I think I used to hold uh weights sometimes in the in the tips of weights sometimes in the in the tips of weights sometimes in the in the tips of my fingers as opposed to in the meat of my fingers as opposed to in the meat of my fingers as opposed to in the meat of the palm of my hands, and I had elbow the palm of my hands, and I had elbow the palm of my hands, and I had elbow pain. Turns out towards the end of my pain. Turns out towards the end of my pain. Turns out towards the end of my pull-ups or my bicep work, I was letting pull-ups or my bicep work, I was letting pull-ups or my bicep work, I was letting the weight or the bar drift into my the weight or the bar drift into my the weight or the bar drift into my fingertips. And the mere um fingertips. And the mere um fingertips. And the mere um shift to making sure that my knuckles shift to making sure that my knuckles shift to making sure that my knuckles were well over the bar or that the were well over the bar or that the were well over the bar or that the weight was really in the meat of my weight was really in the meat of my weight was really in the meat of my palms has completely ameliorated that palms has completely ameliorated that palms has completely ameliorated that for reasons that you point out, and for reasons that you point out, and for reasons that you point out, and maybe you could just share with us why maybe you could just share with us why maybe you could just share with us why that is. When you grip a bar, whether it that is. When you grip a bar, whether it that is. When you grip a bar, whether it be through a curl or whether it be through a curl or whether it be through a curl or whether it be through And and this is mostly pulling through And and this is mostly pulling through And and this is mostly pulling exercises because the tendency for the exercises because the tendency for the exercises because the tendency for the bar is going to be to fall out of your bar is going to be to fall out of your bar is going to be to fall out of your hand, not like with a pushing exercise hand, not like with a pushing exercise hand, not like with a pushing exercise where it's kind of, you know, you're where it's kind of, you know, you're where it's kind of, you know, you're pushing your hand into the bar. you're pushing your hand into the bar. you're pushing your hand into the bar. So, on a bench press, say. So, on a bench press, say. So, on a bench press, say. Um that bar can drift Um that bar can drift Um that bar can drift just by gravity, you know, doing its just by gravity, you know, doing its just by gravity, you know, doing its thing, or fatigue of the thing, or fatigue of the thing, or fatigue of the hand grip strength, can start to the hand grip strength, can start to the hand grip strength, can start to drift further away towards the drift further away towards the drift further away towards the distal digits, right? Through those distal digits, right? Through those distal digits, right? Through those through those last couple knuckles that through those last couple knuckles that through those last couple knuckles that we have on our hands. Though our hand we have on our hands. Though our hand we have on our hands. Though our hand can still hold it there, the muscles are can still hold it there, the muscles are can still hold it there, the muscles are not equipped to handle those types of not equipped to handle those types of not equipped to handle those types of loads. And it could start at dumbbell loads. And it could start at dumbbell loads. And it could start at dumbbell weight, you know, 40 lb, 30 lb, you weight, you know, 40 lb, 30 lb, you weight, you know, 40 lb, 30 lb, you know, even 25 lb for some, depending know, even 25 lb for some, depending know, even 25 lb for some, depending upon their overall strength levels. upon their overall strength levels. upon their overall strength levels. But then when you start to apply it to But then when you start to apply it to But then when you start to apply it to something like something like something like your body weight with a chin-up, right? your body weight with a chin-up, right? your body weight with a chin-up, right? Cuz that's natural for the bar to Cuz that's natural for the bar to Cuz that's natural for the bar to somewhat kind of float down towards your somewhat kind of float down towards your somewhat kind of float down towards your fingertips. And it actually is a little fingertips. And it actually is a little fingertips. And it actually is a little bit easier to perform the exercise with bit easier to perform the exercise with bit easier to perform the exercise with that sort of like false grip little hook that sort of like false grip little hook that sort of like false grip little hook grip at the end of because you're not grip at the end of because you're not grip at the end of because you're not going to engage the forearms into the going to engage the forearms into the going to engage the forearms into the exercise. You're not going to start exercise. You're not going to start exercise. You're not going to start pulling down. pulling down. pulling down. But at the same time, while it could But at the same time, while it could But at the same time, while it could help you to perform them better by help you to perform them better by help you to perform them better by getting the back more activated, if you getting the back more activated, if you getting the back more activated, if you have weakness in these muscles cuz it's have weakness in these muscles cuz it's have weakness in these muscles cuz it's not a it's not a thing that happens to not a it's not a thing that happens to not a it's not a thing that happens to every It's not one of those upright row every It's not one of those upright row every It's not one of those upright row type things where I think this is type things where I think this is type things where I think this is happening to everybody. This is happening to everybody. This is happening to everybody. This is happening to people that have these happening to people that have these happening to people that have these inherent weaknesses in this these inherent weaknesses in this these inherent weaknesses in this these muscles. You or haven't done enough muscles. You or haven't done enough muscles. You or haven't done enough of the gripping in the four in the of the gripping in the four in the of the gripping in the four in the meat of the hand, you know, for long meat of the hand, you know, for long meat of the hand, you know, for long enough. But it starts [clears throat] to enough. But it starts [clears throat] to enough. But it starts [clears throat] to put that stress on these muscles that put that stress on these muscles that put that stress on these muscles that are ill equipped to do this and it to are ill equipped to do this and it to are ill equipped to do this and it to handle this and it starts to handle this and it starts to handle this and it starts to particularly on that fourth finger, you particularly on that fourth finger, you particularly on that fourth finger, you know, which is part of the muscle we know, which is part of the muscle we know, which is part of the muscle we call the FDS, the flexor digitorum, that call the FDS, the flexor digitorum, that call the FDS, the flexor digitorum, that is just too much for it to handle. And is just too much for it to handle. And is just too much for it to handle. And that comes all the way down and meets that comes all the way down and meets that comes all the way down and meets right at the medial elbow, right on that right at the medial elbow, right on that right at the medial elbow, right on that spot that you can say feels like spot that you can say feels like spot that you can say feels like someone's knifing you right in the someone's knifing you right in the someone's knifing you right in the middle in that medial elbow. And and middle in that medial elbow. And and middle in that medial elbow. And and medial epicondylitis or they call it medial epicondylitis or they call it medial epicondylitis or they call it golfer's elbow is something that golfer's elbow is something that golfer's elbow is something that a lot of us deal with in the gym. It's a lot of us deal with in the gym. It's a lot of us deal with in the gym. It's one of the most common inflammatory one of the most common inflammatory one of the most common inflammatory conditions people get from the gym and conditions people get from the gym and conditions people get from the gym and it all comes from this positioning of it all comes from this positioning of it all comes from this positioning of the dumbbell or barbell or hand on a the dumbbell or barbell or hand on a the dumbbell or barbell or hand on a pull-up bar over time. So, the easiest pull-up bar over time. So, the easiest pull-up bar over time. So, the easiest thing to do is just grip deeper so that thing to do is just grip deeper so that thing to do is just grip deeper so that what you're doing is you're using you what you're doing is you're using you what you're doing is you're using you know, more leverage from the palm to know, more leverage from the palm to know, more leverage from the palm to encapsulate the bar or the dumbbell or encapsulate the bar or the dumbbell or encapsulate the bar or the dumbbell or whatever and you're not putting that whatever and you're not putting that whatever and you're not putting that pressure really distally right on that pressure really distally right on that pressure really distally right on that last digit because that's where the that last digit because that's where the that last digit because that's where the that FDS muscle is most strained. So, you FDS muscle is most strained. So, you FDS muscle is most strained. So, you you're just almost eliminating that from you're just almost eliminating that from you're just almost eliminating that from the equation. And it's one of the equation. And it's one of the equation. And it's one of those exercises that the load can exceed those exercises that the load can exceed those exercises that the load can exceed its capacity pretty quickly. So, that its capacity pretty quickly. So, that its capacity pretty quickly. So, that like, you know, maybe it's only capable like, you know, maybe it's only capable like, you know, maybe it's only capable of handling 30 lb and then when you're of handling 30 lb and then when you're of handling 30 lb and then when you're doing a chin-up and it goes and it doing a chin-up and it goes and it doing a chin-up and it goes and it drifts so far that it's Now, you have to drifts so far that it's Now, you have to drifts so far that it's Now, you have to say you're a 200-lb guy, you've got say you're a 200-lb guy, you've got say you're a 200-lb guy, you've got let's say 100 lb through one arm and 100 let's say 100 lb through one arm and 100 let's say 100 lb through one arm and 100 lb this is simple simplified math that lb this is simple simplified math that lb this is simple simplified math that obviously is offset by other muscles, obviously is offset by other muscles, obviously is offset by other muscles, but 100 lb through one arm, 100 lb but 100 lb through one arm, 100 lb but 100 lb through one arm, 100 lb through the other one, 100 lb off of a through the other one, 100 lb off of a through the other one, 100 lb off of a muscle that can handle 30 is not going muscle that can handle 30 is not going muscle that can handle 30 is not going to take many repetitions to strain it to take many repetitions to strain it to take many repetitions to strain it and you're going to feel that maybe by and you're going to feel that maybe by and you're going to feel that maybe by the time that set's over or certainly by the time that set's over or certainly by the time that set's over or certainly by the time that workout's over or the next the time that workout's over or the next the time that workout's over or the next day you wake up and you've got that day you wake up and you've got that day you wake up and you've got that notable stabbing pain. Whenever someone notable stabbing pain. Whenever someone notable stabbing pain. Whenever someone feels that, the best thing would be to feels that, the best thing would be to feels that, the best thing would be to determine, okay, what exercises was I determine, okay, what exercises was I determine, okay, what exercises was I doing that were pulling and where the doing that were pulling and where the doing that were pulling and where the bar could have drifted deeper there into bar could have drifted deeper there into bar could have drifted deeper there into further from the meat of my palm into my further from the meat of my palm into my further from the meat of my palm into my fingers and figure out a way to deepen fingers and figure out a way to deepen fingers and figure out a way to deepen that grip. When that happens though, the that grip. When that happens though, the that grip. When that happens though, the best thing to do with most of these best thing to do with most of these best thing to do with most of these inflammatory conditions is not do any of inflammatory conditions is not do any of inflammatory conditions is not do any of that stuff for a little while. There's that stuff for a little while. There's that stuff for a little while. There's so many other options that you can do so many other options that you can do so many other options that you can do that will train similar muscles or even that will train similar muscles or even that will train similar muscles or even the same motion and not cause that the same motion and not cause that the same motion and not cause that stress. So, I mean a cable curl would be stress. So, I mean a cable curl would be stress. So, I mean a cable curl would be much easier to do that on than let's say much easier to do that on than let's say much easier to do that on than let's say a chin-up where you don't have the a chin-up where you don't have the a chin-up where you don't have the control over the weight like you do by control over the weight like you do by control over the weight like you do by moving a pin on a stack. I do have a moving a pin on a stack. I do have a moving a pin on a stack. I do have a question about precision of record question about precision of record question about precision of record keeping. Do you keep a training journal? keeping. Do you keep a training journal? keeping. Do you keep a training journal? Uh do you recommend people keep training Uh do you recommend people keep training Uh do you recommend people keep training journals? I think that anything you can journals? I think that anything you can journals? I think that anything you can do to increase your awareness of your do to increase your awareness of your do to increase your awareness of your performance and also give yourself some performance and also give yourself some performance and also give yourself some objective goal. Whenever we have an objective goal. Whenever we have an objective goal. Whenever we have an objective goal, it's a lot easier to objective goal, it's a lot easier to objective goal, it's a lot easier to actually obtain it. When you're just actually obtain it. When you're just actually obtain it. When you're just there to get a pump and you're just there to get a pump and you're just there to get a pump and you're just there to lift how you feel that day, um there to lift how you feel that day, um there to lift how you feel that day, um you have to be incredibly disciplined in you have to be incredibly disciplined in you have to be incredibly disciplined in all other aspects of your workout in all other aspects of your workout in all other aspects of your workout in order to make that effective. Anything order to make that effective. Anything order to make that effective. Anything you can do to increase your awareness of you can do to increase your awareness of you can do to increase your awareness of it and keep you on track with that is it and keep you on track with that is it and keep you on track with that is like I'm endorsing fully. If we could like I'm endorsing fully. If we could like I'm endorsing fully. If we could talk about principles around nutrition. talk about principles around nutrition. talk about principles around nutrition. What tends to work? What tends not to What tends to work? What tends not to What tends to work? What tends not to work? And um yeah, how should we think work? And um yeah, how should we think work? And um yeah, how should we think about nutrition? My approach is like about nutrition? My approach is like about nutrition? My approach is like I've always been sort of a low sugar I've always been sort of a low sugar I've always been sort of a low sugar lower fat guy. That is the best approach lower fat guy. That is the best approach lower fat guy. That is the best approach for I believe, again, in my opinion for I believe, again, in my opinion for I believe, again, in my opinion personally for the overall big picture personally for the overall big picture personally for the overall big picture because though the people can take because though the people can take because though the people can take exclusionary approaches to nutrition and exclusionary approaches to nutrition and exclusionary approaches to nutrition and taking carbs out or you know, you know, taking carbs out or you know, you know, taking carbs out or you know, you know, eating only fats and proteins or eating only fats and proteins or eating only fats and proteins or again, I'm not saying it doesn't work again, I'm not saying it doesn't work again, I'm not saying it doesn't work for you and if it's the first thing that for you and if it's the first thing that for you and if it's the first thing that actually allowed you to gain control of actually allowed you to gain control of actually allowed you to gain control of your nutrition to the point where you your nutrition to the point where you your nutrition to the point where you actually saw results and got to a actually saw results and got to a actually saw results and got to a healthier weight, then I always say then healthier weight, then I always say then healthier weight, then I always say then do it. Then do it, but just make sure do it. Then do it, but just make sure do it. Then do it, but just make sure it's something you can do forever and it's something you can do forever and it's something you can do forever and doesn't bring upon other repercussions. doesn't bring upon other repercussions. doesn't bring upon other repercussions. I think that non-exclusionary approaches I think that non-exclusionary approaches I think that non-exclusionary approaches to diets are the to diets are the to diets are the most sustainable for the rest of the most sustainable for the rest of the most sustainable for the rest of your life. And when I and all I'm your life. And when I and all I'm your life. And when I and all I'm interested in from a nutrition interested in from a nutrition interested in from a nutrition standpoint is something that's standpoint is something that's standpoint is something that's sustainable. In terms of what you do sustainable. In terms of what you do sustainable. In terms of what you do eat, how do you structure that um in eat, how do you structure that um in eat, how do you structure that um in terms of when you look down at a plate, terms of when you look down at a plate, terms of when you look down at a plate, you've done these described this before, you've done these described this before, you've done these described this before, but I think it's just a beautifully but I think it's just a beautifully but I think it's just a beautifully simple description cuz I think a lot of simple description cuz I think a lot of simple description cuz I think a lot of people don't want to do calorie counting people don't want to do calorie counting people don't want to do calorie counting and all this and I have what I like what and all this and I have what I like what and all this and I have what I like what I call plate method and it's just it's I call plate method and it's just it's I call plate method and it's just it's just simple cuz it works for me. When just simple cuz it works for me. When just simple cuz it works for me. When you have your plate, you just simply you have your plate, you just simply you have your plate, you just simply look at it as like a like a clock, look at it as like a like a clock, look at it as like a like a clock, right? And um if you just make a 9:20 on right? And um if you just make a 9:20 on right? And um if you just make a 9:20 on the clock, so one arm goes over to the clock, so one arm goes over to the clock, so one arm goes over to the nine and one of the arms goes over to nine and one of the arms goes over to nine and one of the arms goes over to 20. Cuz you're going to make a line 20. Cuz you're going to make a line 20. Cuz you're going to make a line towards 12:00, too. And the largest towards 12:00, too. And the largest towards 12:00, too. And the largest portion is going to be your fibrous portion is going to be your fibrous portion is going to be your fibrous carbohydrates. So that's the you carbohydrates. So that's the you carbohydrates. So that's the you know, the green vegetables, all right? know, the green vegetables, all right? know, the green vegetables, all right? So whether it be broccoli or Brussels So whether it be broccoli or Brussels So whether it be broccoli or Brussels sprouts or asparagus. Those are the ones sprouts or asparagus. Those are the ones sprouts or asparagus. Those are the ones that give us a lot of the micronutrients that give us a lot of the micronutrients that give us a lot of the micronutrients we need. They're the ones that are we need. They're the ones that are we need. They're the ones that are generally, you know, accepted as more generally, you know, accepted as more generally, you know, accepted as more healthy. Um and they're also going to healthy. Um and they're also going to healthy. Um and they're also going to provide the fiber that's going to be provide the fiber that's going to be provide the fiber that's going to be both beneficial in terms of its impact both beneficial in terms of its impact both beneficial in terms of its impact on insulin and also just through filling on insulin and also just through filling on insulin and also just through filling you up, right? And then I take the next you up, right? And then I take the next you up, right? And then I take the next largest portion of that and I devote largest portion of that and I devote largest portion of that and I devote that towards protein. And I think it's that towards protein. And I think it's that towards protein. And I think it's really important, especially for anybody really important, especially for anybody really important, especially for anybody active. Um the more active you are, the active. Um the more active you are, the active. Um the more active you are, the more you embark on trying to build more you embark on trying to build more you embark on trying to build muscle, you're going to need to have muscle, you're going to need to have muscle, you're going to need to have protein in every meal. So I have that. protein in every meal. So I have that. protein in every meal. So I have that. And again, And again, And again, you know, we're talking cleaner sources you know, we're talking cleaner sources you know, we're talking cleaner sources of protein. But like I am you'll never of protein. But like I am you'll never of protein. But like I am you'll never find like boiled chicken on my plate. find like boiled chicken on my plate. find like boiled chicken on my plate. I'll have some sort of fish or chicken I'll have some sort of fish or chicken I'll have some sort of fish or chicken and but I they'll it will be it will be and but I they'll it will be it will be and but I they'll it will be it will be cooked in a way that's like, you cooked in a way that's like, you cooked in a way that's like, you know, it's got maybe some sauce on it or know, it's got maybe some sauce on it or know, it's got maybe some sauce on it or it's got some maybe it's tomato sauce or it's got some maybe it's tomato sauce or it's got some maybe it's tomato sauce or it's anything to just make it a little it's anything to just make it a little it's anything to just make it a little bit more palatable and interesting bit more palatable and interesting bit more palatable and interesting without blowing the value of the meal. without blowing the value of the meal. without blowing the value of the meal. And then that last portion is where I And then that last portion is where I And then that last portion is where I put my starchy carbohydrates. And again, put my starchy carbohydrates. And again, put my starchy carbohydrates. And again, that's the part that some people will that's the part that some people will that's the part that some people will say exclude them entirely cuz they're say exclude them entirely cuz they're say exclude them entirely cuz they're not healthy or they don't work for you not healthy or they don't work for you not healthy or they don't work for you or they're not, you know, beneficial or they're not, you know, beneficial or they're not, you know, beneficial long-term. For me, like most people, my long-term. For me, like most people, my long-term. For me, like most people, my body craves those carbohydrates. I body craves those carbohydrates. I body craves those carbohydrates. I choose things like sweet potatoes, which choose things like sweet potatoes, which choose things like sweet potatoes, which is my favorite, you know, or I'll have is my favorite, you know, or I'll have is my favorite, you know, or I'll have rice or I'll have pasta. I will have rice or I'll have pasta. I will have rice or I'll have pasta. I will have those things. I'm not excluding them, those things. I'm not excluding them, those things. I'm not excluding them, but I don't put them in the portions but I don't put them in the portions but I don't put them in the portions that you would generally find. No plan that you would generally find. No plan that you would generally find. No plan is going to work if you're eating stuff is going to work if you're eating stuff is going to work if you're eating stuff you don't like. It's not going to work you don't like. It's not going to work you don't like. It's not going to work forever. Nothing will. You have to forever. Nothing will. You have to forever. Nothing will. You have to really enjoy what you're eating. As long really enjoy what you're eating. As long really enjoy what you're eating. As long as these as these as these uh variations of this meal are something variations of this meal are something variations of this meal are something that you really enjoy and there are that you really enjoy and there are that you really enjoy and there are limited versions of them, the limited versions of them, the limited versions of them, the reproducibility of that is simple. If reproducibility of that is simple. If reproducibility of that is simple. If everyone listening to this podcast can everyone listening to this podcast can everyone listening to this podcast can figure out their nutrition issues, this figure out their nutrition issues, this figure out their nutrition issues, this whole world would be different. That is whole world would be different. That is whole world would be different. That is like one of the largest sources of like one of the largest sources of like one of the largest sources of disease and pain and discomfort disease and pain and discomfort disease and pain and discomfort because people really struggle with because people really struggle with because people really struggle with nutrition. What are your thoughts in nutrition. What are your thoughts in nutrition. What are your thoughts in terms of the nutrition science, the terms of the nutrition science, the terms of the nutrition science, the train the training-related effects of um train the training-related effects of um train the training-related effects of um the post-training meal? Is it something the post-training meal? Is it something the post-training meal? Is it something you think people should pay attention you think people should pay attention you think people should pay attention to? I'm not very dogmatic about what to? I'm not very dogmatic about what to? I'm not very dogmatic about what specifically to eat pre or post, you specifically to eat pre or post, you specifically to eat pre or post, you know, workout, but I do think you should know, workout, but I do think you should know, workout, but I do think you should have protein have protein have protein um surrounding your training, um surrounding your training, um surrounding your training, whether that be ahead of time or after. whether that be ahead of time or after. whether that be ahead of time or after. Protein could be a little bit Protein could be a little bit Protein could be a little bit hard to digest for some people. So, if hard to digest for some people. So, if hard to digest for some people. So, if you do that pre-workout and then you're you do that pre-workout and then you're you do that pre-workout and then you're finding your workouts slogging because finding your workouts slogging because finding your workouts slogging because you don't feel good, then suddenly you don't feel good, then suddenly you don't feel good, then suddenly you put that after your meal. But, this put that after your meal. But, this put that after your meal. But, this whole concept of the urgency of time has whole concept of the urgency of time has whole concept of the urgency of time has thankfully been removed and we can just thankfully been removed and we can just thankfully been removed and we can just learn to eat a little bit more uh learn to eat a little bit more uh learn to eat a little bit more uh you know, responsibly and even as far as you know, responsibly and even as far as you know, responsibly and even as far as pre-workout supplements. a lot of people pre-workout supplements. a lot of people pre-workout supplements. a lot of people don't take them. A lot of people don't take them. A lot of people don't take them. A lot of people don't like them, they don't take them, they like them, they don't take them, they like them, they don't take them, they don't like they're not necessarily even don't like they're not necessarily even don't like they're not necessarily even being used as the new nutritive side of being used as the new nutritive side of being used as the new nutritive side of the pre-workout, they're just more new the pre-workout, they're just more new the pre-workout, they're just more new used to fuel the workout. Um, for used to fuel the workout. Um, for used to fuel the workout. Um, for me it's water and some form of caffeine. me it's water and some form of caffeine. me it's water and some form of caffeine. Yeah, I mean it's whatever, you know, Yeah, I mean it's whatever, you know, Yeah, I mean it's whatever, you know, again, I think it's important, I do again, I think it's important, I do again, I think it's important, I do think it's important to maintain a high think it's important to maintain a high think it's important to maintain a high level of output. So, if your pre-workout level of output. So, if your pre-workout level of output. So, if your pre-workout nutrition requires a stimulant in order nutrition requires a stimulant in order nutrition requires a stimulant in order to help you do that, or if your to help you do that, or if your to help you do that, or if your pre-workout nutrition is pre-workout nutrition is pre-workout nutrition is causing you to have a harder time to causing you to have a harder time to causing you to have a harder time to train because you're feeling full or train because you're feeling full or train because you're feeling full or stomach ache or something else, then stomach ache or something else, then stomach ache or something else, then that that's not achieving what then that that's not achieving what then that that's not achieving what you're trying to do. The ultimate goal you're trying to do. The ultimate goal you're trying to do. The ultimate goal is to still be able to perform at the is to still be able to perform at the is to still be able to perform at the highest level. So, whatever your highest level. So, whatever your highest level. So, whatever your nutrition is required to allow you to nutrition is required to allow you to nutrition is required to allow you to still do that, that is probably the most still do that, that is probably the most still do that, that is probably the most important factor of all of it. I hate to important factor of all of it. I hate to important factor of all of it. I hate to say but it's a lot less scientific than say but it's a lot less scientific than say but it's a lot less scientific than we want to make it, and as it seems to we want to make it, and as it seems to we want to make it, and as it seems to be coming back often times like the be coming back often times like the be coming back often times like the thing that works for you is really the thing that works for you is really the thing that works for you is really the most important thing because ultimately most important thing because ultimately most important thing because ultimately getting your ass in there and doing what getting your ass in there and doing what getting your ass in there and doing what you do is really the thing that you do is really the thing that you do is really the thing that provides the best benefit. I think when provides the best benefit. I think when provides the best benefit. I think when you hear things like this that like, you hear things like this that like, you hear things like this that like, "Hey, that will work and that will work "Hey, that will work and that will work "Hey, that will work and that will work too and that this will work too." You too and that this will work too." You too and that this will work too." You know, rather than the dogmatic one way know, rather than the dogmatic one way know, rather than the dogmatic one way only approach, um, which could be become only approach, um, which could be become only approach, um, which could be become discouraging for people. Um, then I discouraging for people. Um, then I discouraging for people. Um, then I think it becomes a little bit uplifting think it becomes a little bit uplifting think it becomes a little bit uplifting like, "Well, I've never tried that. I've like, "Well, I've never tried that. I've like, "Well, I've never tried that. I've actually never tried a total body split actually never tried a total body split actually never tried a total body split or I've never tried, you know, that or I've never tried, you know, that or I've never tried, you know, that style of eating." Like, style of eating." Like, style of eating." Like, it becomes encouraging that you might it becomes encouraging that you might it becomes encouraging that you might want to explore and then you might want to explore and then you might want to explore and then you might finally get locked in and say, "I really finally get locked in and say, "I really finally get locked in and say, "I really like this." And then you're off and like this." And then you're off and like this." And then you're off and running. On behalf of myself and all the running. On behalf of myself and all the running. On behalf of myself and all the listeners, I really want to thank you. listeners, I really want to thank you. listeners, I really want to thank you. And what I love about all of this And what I love about all of this And what I love about all of this knowledge that you've given us is that knowledge that you've given us is that knowledge that you've given us is that there's a there's a backbone of logic, there's a there's a backbone of logic, there's a there's a backbone of logic, you know, and some consistent themes you know, and some consistent themes you know, and some consistent themes indeed about consistency and but the indeed about consistency and but the indeed about consistency and but the logical backbone I think is what, the logical backbone I think is what, the logical backbone I think is what, um, will enable people to really show up to will enable people to really show up to will enable people to really show up to the table and stay there, uh, for the table and stay there, uh, for the table and stay there, uh, for training consistently over time. training consistently over time. training consistently over time. &gt;&gt; I'm happy I was able to make it work cuz &gt;&gt; I'm happy I was able to make it work cuz &gt;&gt; I'm happy I was able to make it work cuz I really have been watching your stuff I really have been watching your stuff I really have been watching your stuff for a while and I really I love the for a while and I really I love the for a while and I really I love the science of it. I like the way you think. science of it. I like the way you think. science of it. I like the way you think. I'm just really fortunate I was able to I'm just really fortunate I was able to I'm just really fortunate I was able to do it. Well, I feel very gratified in do it. Well, I feel very gratified in do it. Well, I feel very gratified in hearing that and honored to have you hearing that and honored to have you hearing that and honored to have you here. So, thank you [music] so much. here. So, thank you [music] so much. here. So, thank you [music] so much. Thank you.