Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Wendy Suzuki. for my discussion with Dr. Wendy Suzuki. for my discussion with Dr. Wendy Suzuki. Wendy, great to see you again and to Wendy, great to see you again and to Wendy, great to see you again and to have you here. It's been a little while. have you here. It's been a little while. have you here. It's been a little while. It's been a while. So great to be here, It's been a while. So great to be here, It's been a while. So great to be here, Andrew. Thank you so much for having me. Andrew. Thank you so much for having me. Andrew. Thank you so much for having me. &gt;&gt; Yeah, delighted. I'd like to start off &gt;&gt; Yeah, delighted. I'd like to start off &gt;&gt; Yeah, delighted. I'd like to start off by talking about memory generally. And by talking about memory generally. And by talking about memory generally. And then, I'd love to chat about your then, I'd love to chat about your then, I'd love to chat about your incredible work incredible work incredible work discovering how exercise and memory discovering how exercise and memory discovering how exercise and memory interface and what people can do to interface and what people can do to interface and what people can do to improve their memory and brain function improve their memory and brain function improve their memory and brain function generally. &gt;&gt; Yes. Maybe you could just step us &gt;&gt; Yes. Maybe you could just step us &gt;&gt; Yes. Maybe you could just step us through the basic elements of memory. through the basic elements of memory. through the basic elements of memory. Well, I like to say there are four Well, I like to say there are four Well, I like to say there are four things that make things memorable. things that make things memorable. things that make things memorable. Number one is novelty. If it's something Number one is novelty. If it's something Number one is novelty. If it's something new, the very first thing new, the very first thing new, the very first thing uh the very first time we've seen uh the very first time we've seen uh the very first time we've seen something or experienced something, our something or experienced something, our something or experienced something, our brains are drawn to that. Our brains are drawn to that. Our brains are drawn to that. Our attentional systems draw us to that. And attentional systems draw us to that. And attentional systems draw us to that. And when you are paying attention to when you are paying attention to when you are paying attention to something, that's part of what something, that's part of what something, that's part of what makes things memorable. Second is makes things memorable. Second is makes things memorable. Second is repetition. Third is association. repetition. Third is association. repetition. Third is association. So, if you meet somebody new that knows So, if you meet somebody new that knows So, if you meet somebody new that knows lots of people that you know. So, you lots of people that you know. So, you lots of people that you know. So, you and I share many, many and I share many, many and I share many, many people that we both know. It's easy to people that we both know. It's easy to people that we both know. It's easy to remember It's easier to remember you remember It's easier to remember you remember It's easier to remember you especially if you were somebody new that especially if you were somebody new that especially if you were somebody new that I hadn't met before. We have met before. I hadn't met before. We have met before. I hadn't met before. We have met before. Uh so, association. Uh so, association. Uh so, association. Um and then, the fourth one is emotional and then, the fourth one is emotional and then, the fourth one is emotional resonance. So, we remember the happiest resonance. So, we remember the happiest resonance. So, we remember the happiest and the saddest moments of our lives. and the saddest moments of our lives. and the saddest moments of our lives. And that also includes, you know, funny, And that also includes, you know, funny, And that also includes, you know, funny, surprising things. Uh that is the surprising things. Uh that is the surprising things. Uh that is the interaction between two key brain interaction between two key brain interaction between two key brain structures, uh the amygdala, which is structures, uh the amygdala, which is structures, uh the amygdala, which is important for processing uh lots of important for processing uh lots of important for processing uh lots of emotional, particularly threatening emotional, particularly threatening emotional, particularly threatening kinds of situations. But those kinds of situations. But those kinds of situations. But those threatening, surprising kinds of threatening, surprising kinds of threatening, surprising kinds of situations, the amygdala takes that situations, the amygdala takes that situations, the amygdala takes that information and makes another key information and makes another key information and makes another key structure called the hippocampus structure called the hippocampus structure called the hippocampus work better to put new long-term work better to put new long-term work better to put new long-term memories in your brain. So that in fact memories in your brain. So that in fact memories in your brain. So that in fact is the key structure for long-term is the key structure for long-term is the key structure for long-term memory, the structure called the memory, the structure called the memory, the structure called the hippocampus. You know, step us through hippocampus. You know, step us through hippocampus. You know, step us through again what this structure is, what it again what this structure is, what it again what this structure is, what it looks like. looks like. looks like. &gt;&gt; The word hippocampus means seahorse. It &gt;&gt; The word hippocampus means seahorse. It &gt;&gt; The word hippocampus means seahorse. It is visually, anatomically beautiful with is visually, anatomically beautiful with is visually, anatomically beautiful with these kind of intertwining these kind of intertwining these kind of intertwining subregions within it. So that's subregions within it. So that's subregions within it. So that's anatomically. Functionally, what does it anatomically. Functionally, what does it anatomically. Functionally, what does it do? Well, it's easiest to understand do? Well, it's easiest to understand do? Well, it's easiest to understand what it does when you look at what it does when you look at what it does when you look at what happens when you don't have a happens when you don't have a happens when you don't have a hippocampus anymore. We know this from hippocampus anymore. We know this from hippocampus anymore. We know this from the most famous neurological patient of the most famous neurological patient of the most famous neurological patient of all time. His initials were H.M. So all time. His initials were H.M. So all time. His initials were H.M. So all psychology, neuroscience psychology, neuroscience psychology, neuroscience students know him. He was operated in students know him. He was operated in students know him. He was operated in and the paper was published in 1957. and the paper was published in 1957. and the paper was published in 1957. They removed both his hippocampi because They removed both his hippocampi because They removed both his hippocampi because he had very terrible epilepsy. And they he had very terrible epilepsy. And they he had very terrible epilepsy. And they knew that the hippocampus was the knew that the hippocampus was the knew that the hippocampus was the genesis of epilepsy and this was genesis of epilepsy and this was genesis of epilepsy and this was experimental. His epilepsy was so bad experimental. His epilepsy was so bad experimental. His epilepsy was so bad that they decided not just to remove one that they decided not just to remove one that they decided not just to remove one hippocampus, but both. And what happened hippocampus, but both. And what happened hippocampus, but both. And what happened was immediate was immediate was immediate um immediate loss of all ability to form immediate loss of all ability to form immediate loss of all ability to form new memories for facts and events. So new memories for facts and events. So new memories for facts and events. So this hippocampus does something with all this hippocampus does something with all this hippocampus does something with all of these perceptions that are coming at of these perceptions that are coming at of these perceptions that are coming at us every single day, every minute of the us every single day, every minute of the us every single day, every minute of the day and not for all of them, but for day and not for all of them, but for day and not for all of them, but for some of them that have these features some of them that have these features some of them that have these features that we just talked about. Maybe they're that we just talked about. Maybe they're that we just talked about. Maybe they're novel, maybe they have associations, novel, maybe they have associations, novel, maybe they have associations, maybe they're emotionally maybe they're emotionally maybe they're emotionally relevant, maybe uh maybe they've been relevant, maybe uh maybe they've been relevant, maybe uh maybe they've been repeated. Some of those things uh in the realm of Some of those things uh in the realm of Some of those things uh in the realm of facts or events get uh encoded in our facts or events get uh encoded in our facts or events get uh encoded in our long-term memory. The hippocampus and long-term memory. The hippocampus and long-term memory. The hippocampus and what it does really defines our own what it does really defines our own what it does really defines our own personal histories. It means it defines personal histories. It means it defines personal histories. It means it defines who we are because if we can't remember who we are because if we can't remember who we are because if we can't remember what we've done, the information we've what we've done, the information we've what we've done, the information we've learned, and the events of our lives, it and the events of our lives, it and the events of our lives, it changes us. That that's what really changes us. That that's what really changes us. That that's what really defines us. But what people have started defines us. But what people have started defines us. But what people have started to realize that it's not just memory. to realize that it's not just memory. to realize that it's not just memory. It's not just putting together It's not just putting together It's not just putting together associations for what, where, and when associations for what, where, and when associations for what, where, and when of events that happened in our past, of events that happened in our past, of events that happened in our past, but it's putting together information but it's putting together information but it's putting together information that is in our long-term memory banks in that is in our long-term memory banks in that is in our long-term memory banks in interesting new ways. interesting new ways. interesting new ways. I'm talking about imagination. So, I'm talking about imagination. So, I'm talking about imagination. So, without the hippocampus, yes, you can't without the hippocampus, yes, you can't without the hippocampus, yes, you can't remember things, but actually you're not remember things, but actually you're not remember things, but actually you're not able to imagine able to imagine able to imagine uh events or situations that you've uh events or situations that you've uh events or situations that you've never experienced before. So, what that never experienced before. So, what that never experienced before. So, what that says is the hippocampus says is the hippocampus says is the hippocampus is important for memory is a too simple is important for memory is a too simple is important for memory is a too simple a way to think about it. What the a way to think about it. What the a way to think about it. What the hippocampus is important for is what hippocampus is important for is what hippocampus is important for is what we've already talked about, associating we've already talked about, associating we've already talked about, associating things together writ large. Anytime you things together writ large. Anytime you things together writ large. Anytime you need to associate something together, need to associate something together, need to associate something together, either for your past, your present, or either for your past, your present, or either for your past, your present, or your future, your future, your future, you are using your hippocampus. And it you are using your hippocampus. And it you are using your hippocampus. And it takes on this much more important role takes on this much more important role takes on this much more important role in our cognitive lives when we think in our cognitive lives when we think in our cognitive lives when we think about it like that. That is kind of the about it like that. That is kind of the about it like that. That is kind of the new the new hippocampus that new the new hippocampus that new the new hippocampus that neuroscientists are studying these days. neuroscientists are studying these days. neuroscientists are studying these days. There are some memories that There are some memories that There are some memories that can be formed very quickly, so-called can be formed very quickly, so-called can be formed very quickly, so-called one-trial learning. What is it about one-trial learning. What is it about one-trial learning. What is it about very emotionally salient events that very emotionally salient events that very emotionally salient events that allow memories to get stamped in? There allow memories to get stamped in? There allow memories to get stamped in? There is this protective function uh of our is this protective function uh of our is this protective function uh of our brains that has evolved over the last brains that has evolved over the last brains that has evolved over the last 2.5 million years that you need to pay 2.5 million years that you need to pay 2.5 million years that you need to pay attention and remember certain things attention and remember certain things attention and remember certain things for your survival. If something terrible for your survival. If something terrible for your survival. If something terrible happens, if something very scary happens, if something very scary happens, if something very scary happens, you remember that and that fear and you remember that and that fear and you remember that and that fear and that memory of all those things. I mean, that memory of all those things. I mean, that memory of all those things. I mean, I have one when I lived in Washington I have one when I lived in Washington I have one when I lived in Washington D.C. I went to work at NIH on a Sunday D.C. I went to work at NIH on a Sunday D.C. I went to work at NIH on a Sunday afternoon and I came back and when I afternoon and I came back and when I afternoon and I came back and when I rounded the corner to my door of my rounded the corner to my door of my rounded the corner to my door of my apartment, it was crowbarred in. apartment, it was crowbarred in. apartment, it was crowbarred in. Somebody had taken a crowbar, opened up Somebody had taken a crowbar, opened up Somebody had taken a crowbar, opened up my door and stole the nicest things in my door and stole the nicest things in my door and stole the nicest things in my apartment. Ever since then, whenever my apartment. Ever since then, whenever my apartment. Ever since then, whenever I rounded that corner, I still have that I rounded that corner, I still have that I rounded that corner, I still have that memory. It was terrible because, you memory. It was terrible because, you memory. It was terrible because, you know, it put me in a terrible state when know, it put me in a terrible state when know, it put me in a terrible state when I was just coming home. And that that's I was just coming home. And that that's I was just coming home. And that that's a survival mechanism. Do you want to be a survival mechanism. Do you want to be a survival mechanism. Do you want to be alert to possible danger? Absolutely, alert to possible danger? Absolutely, alert to possible danger? Absolutely, yes. So, part of those one-trial yes. So, part of those one-trial yes. So, part of those one-trial memories, I think, is often taking memories, I think, is often taking memories, I think, is often taking advantage of this evolutionarily advantage of this evolutionarily advantage of this evolutionarily developed system to stamp in things that developed system to stamp in things that developed system to stamp in things that could be potentially dangerous to you could be potentially dangerous to you could be potentially dangerous to you into your memory. So, you forever will into your memory. So, you forever will into your memory. So, you forever will remember this particular corner or this remember this particular corner or this remember this particular corner or this hallway because that is where this hallway because that is where this hallway because that is where something really bad happened to you. something really bad happened to you. something really bad happened to you. For people trying to learn information For people trying to learn information For people trying to learn information that they're not that excited about, that they're not that excited about, that they're not that excited about, &gt;&gt; Right. is there something that we can do &gt;&gt; Right. is there something that we can do &gt;&gt; Right. is there something that we can do to let to leverage knowledge of how the to let to leverage knowledge of how the to let to leverage knowledge of how the memory system works naturally to make memory system works naturally to make memory system works naturally to make that a more straightforward process? that a more straightforward process? that a more straightforward process? And maybe we could talk about your story And maybe we could talk about your story And maybe we could talk about your story and how and how and how you came to the place you are at now you came to the place you are at now you came to the place you are at now because I think it provides a number of because I think it provides a number of because I think it provides a number of tools that people could um tools that people could um tools that people could um implement themselves. implement themselves. implement themselves. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. As I was working to get &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. As I was working to get &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. As I was working to get tenure at NYU and as you know, it's tenure at NYU and as you know, it's tenure at NYU and as you know, it's a it's a stress-filled process. They a it's a stress-filled process. They a it's a stress-filled process. They give you 6 years to, you know, show your give you 6 years to, you know, show your give you 6 years to, you know, show your stuff and you are judged in front of all stuff and you are judged in front of all stuff and you are judged in front of all your colleagues and either they say, your colleagues and either they say, your colleagues and either they say, "Okay, you can join the club." or they "Okay, you can join the club." or they "Okay, you can join the club." or they say, "Sorry." And so, my strategy was, say, "Sorry." And so, my strategy was, say, "Sorry." And so, my strategy was, um, I'm just going to not do anything um, I'm just going to not do anything um, I'm just going to not do anything but work. I'm going to, uh, just work as but work. I'm going to, uh, just work as but work. I'm going to, uh, just work as hard as I can for the 6 years. And, um, hard as I can for the 6 years. And, um, hard as I can for the 6 years. And, um, what happens when you work and you don't what happens when you work and you don't what happens when you work and you don't have any sort of life outside of work, have any sort of life outside of work, have any sort of life outside of work, uh, you gain 25 lb, which is exactly uh, you gain 25 lb, which is exactly uh, you gain 25 lb, which is exactly what I did. And you get really, really what I did. And you get really, really what I did. And you get really, really stressed. And so, I decided to go on stressed. And so, I decided to go on stressed. And so, I decided to go on vacation and I did a adventure river vacation and I did a adventure river vacation and I did a adventure river rafting trip in Peru. rafting trip in Peru. rafting trip in Peru. And so, I go by myself and, you know, And so, I go by myself and, you know, And so, I go by myself and, you know, meet other interesting people and, um, meet other interesting people and, um, meet other interesting people and, um, I was the weakest person on this whole I was the weakest person on this whole I was the weakest person on this whole trip. It was embarrassing. And I came trip. It was embarrassing. And I came trip. It was embarrassing. And I came back and I said, "Okay, I cannot be the back and I said, "Okay, I cannot be the back and I said, "Okay, I cannot be the weakest person. I'm in my late 30s. I weakest person. I'm in my late 30s. I weakest person. I'm in my late 30s. I have to do something." So, I went to the have to do something." So, I went to the have to do something." So, I went to the gym. Fast forward a year and a half, gym. Fast forward a year and a half, gym. Fast forward a year and a half, I've lost the 25 lb. So proud of myself. I've lost the 25 lb. So proud of myself. I've lost the 25 lb. So proud of myself. So much happier. And I'm sitting in my So much happier. And I'm sitting in my So much happier. And I'm sitting in my office doing what you and I do a lot, office doing what you and I do a lot, office doing what you and I do a lot, which is writing an NIH grant, which is which is writing an NIH grant, which is which is writing an NIH grant, which is our lifeblood, right? And, um, writing, our lifeblood, right? And, um, writing, our lifeblood, right? And, um, writing, writing and this thought goes writing, writing and this thought goes writing, writing and this thought goes through my mind that had never gone through my mind that had never gone through my mind that had never gone through my mind before, which what through my mind before, which what through my mind before, which what during this 6 years of grant of frantic during this 6 years of grant of frantic during this 6 years of grant of frantic grant writing when I was trying to get grant writing when I was trying to get grant writing when I was trying to get tenure. And that thought was, tenure. And that thought was, tenure. And that thought was, "Grant writing went well today. That "Grant writing went well today. That "Grant writing went well today. That felt good." But, when I thought That felt good." But, when I thought That felt good." But, when I thought about it, I thought, "It's It's not just about it, I thought, "It's It's not just about it, I thought, "It's It's not just today. My grant writing seems to have today. My grant writing seems to have today. My grant writing seems to have been getting smoother. Like, I'm able to been getting smoother. Like, I'm able to been getting smoother. Like, I'm able to focus longer. It The sessions feel focus longer. It The sessions feel focus longer. It The sessions feel better to me." And, you know, at that better to me." And, you know, at that better to me." And, you know, at that point, the only thing that I'd changed point, the only thing that I'd changed point, the only thing that I'd changed in my life, it was a huge thing, but I in my life, it was a huge thing, but I in my life, it was a huge thing, but I had become a gym rat rather than a had become a gym rat rather than a had become a gym rat rather than a workaholic. And that's when my, you workaholic. And that's when my, you workaholic. And that's when my, you know, spidey sense for neuroscientists know, spidey sense for neuroscientists know, spidey sense for neuroscientists popped up. And I said, "What do we know popped up. And I said, "What do we know popped up. And I said, "What do we know about the effects of exercise on your about the effects of exercise on your about the effects of exercise on your brain? Um, because if I think about it, brain? Um, because if I think about it, brain? Um, because if I think about it, what was better about my writing is I what was better about my writing is I what was better about my writing is I could focus longer and deeper, very could focus longer and deeper, very could focus longer and deeper, very important, and I could remember those important, and I could remember those important, and I could remember those little details that you try and pull little details that you try and pull little details that you try and pull together for your million-dollar NIH together for your million-dollar NIH together for your million-dollar NIH grant from, you know, 30 different grant from, you know, 30 different grant from, you know, 30 different articles that you have open on your articles that you have open on your articles that you have open on your screen all at the same time. That's a screen all at the same time. That's a screen all at the same time. That's a hippocampal memory. I was studying that. hippocampal memory. I was studying that. hippocampal memory. I was studying that. I was writing the grants on I was writing the grants on I was writing the grants on hippocampal memory. And uh so that's hippocampal memory. And uh so that's hippocampal memory. And uh so that's when I got really interested in the when I got really interested in the when I got really interested in the effects of exercise on both prefrontal effects of exercise on both prefrontal effects of exercise on both prefrontal focus and attention function and focus and attention function and focus and attention function and hippocampal function because of my own hippocampal function because of my own hippocampal function because of my own observation and this kind of I still observation and this kind of I still observation and this kind of I still remember where I was sitting, remember where I was sitting, remember where I was sitting, which office I was in when I had this which office I was in when I had this which office I was in when I had this revelation. But the thing that really revelation. But the thing that really revelation. But the thing that really sealed it for me is right around that sealed it for me is right around that sealed it for me is right around that time um I got a phone call from my mom time um I got a phone call from my mom time um I got a phone call from my mom um who said that my dad wasn't feeling well who said that my dad wasn't feeling well who said that my dad wasn't feeling well and that he had um told her that he got and that he had um told her that he got and that he had um told her that he got lost driving back from the 7-Eleven, lost driving back from the 7-Eleven, lost driving back from the 7-Eleven, which is literally seven blocks from our which is literally seven blocks from our which is literally seven blocks from our house that I grew up in. And um I knew house that I grew up in. And um I knew house that I grew up in. And um I knew that was that was hippocampal function. that was that was hippocampal function. that was that was hippocampal function. I suspected dementia. I suspected, I suspected dementia. I suspected, I suspected dementia. I suspected, though didn't want to admit, Alzheimer's though didn't want to admit, Alzheimer's though didn't want to admit, Alzheimer's dementia, which he which he had. My dad dementia, which he which he had. My dad dementia, which he which he had. My dad is the engineer, not so active all his is the engineer, not so active all his is the engineer, not so active all his life, but would loved and sit and life, but would loved and sit and life, but would loved and sit and read books all day. My mom was the read books all day. My mom was the read books all day. My mom was the athlete. She she played tennis, team athlete. She she played tennis, team athlete. She she played tennis, team tennis into her 80s, and it started to tennis into her 80s, and it started to tennis into her 80s, and it started to show at that point. I noticed that all show at that point. I noticed that all show at that point. I noticed that all the things that were improving in my the things that were improving in my the things that were improving in my brain suddenly went away in my dad's brain suddenly went away in my dad's brain suddenly went away in my dad's brain, and I started thinking, "This brain, and I started thinking, "This brain, and I started thinking, "This isn't just something to help, you know, isn't just something to help, you know, isn't just something to help, you know, somebody who wants to get tenure. somebody who wants to get tenure. somebody who wants to get tenure. Um this is something that could help Um this is something that could help Um this is something that could help millions and millions of people, most millions and millions of people, most millions and millions of people, most importantly our aging population. What importantly our aging population. What importantly our aging population. What if, you know, what's happening? And so if, you know, what's happening? And so if, you know, what's happening? And so the thing that makes me wake up in the thing that makes me wake up in the thing that makes me wake up in the morning is when I realized that every morning is when I realized that every morning is when I realized that every single time you move your body, single time you move your body, single time you move your body, um you are um releasing a whole bunch of um you are um releasing a whole bunch of um you are um releasing a whole bunch of neurochemicals. And some of them we've neurochemicals. And some of them we've neurochemicals. And some of them we've talked about that the good mood comes talked about that the good mood comes talked about that the good mood comes from dopamine and serotonin and from dopamine and serotonin and from dopamine and serotonin and noradrenaline. But the thing that gets noradrenaline. But the thing that gets noradrenaline. But the thing that gets released also, particularly with aerobic released also, particularly with aerobic released also, particularly with aerobic exercise, is a growth factor called um exercise, is a growth factor called um exercise, is a growth factor called um brain-derived neurotrophic factor or brain-derived neurotrophic factor or brain-derived neurotrophic factor or BDNF. And that is so important because what it And that is so important because what it And that is so important because what it does is it goes directly to your does is it goes directly to your does is it goes directly to your hippocampus and it helps brand new brain hippocampus and it helps brand new brain hippocampus and it helps brand new brain cells grow in your hippocampus. We all cells grow in your hippocampus. We all cells grow in your hippocampus. We all have that, even if you're a couch have that, even if you're a couch have that, even if you're a couch potato, you can get new brain cells in potato, you can get new brain cells in potato, you can get new brain cells in your hippocampus to grow. But it's like your hippocampus to grow. But it's like your hippocampus to grow. But it's like giving your hippocampus uh um a boost giving your hippocampus uh um a boost giving your hippocampus uh um a boost with this regular BDNF if you are with this regular BDNF if you are with this regular BDNF if you are exercising, which means that we all have exercising, which means that we all have exercising, which means that we all have the capacity to grow a bigger, fatter, the capacity to grow a bigger, fatter, the capacity to grow a bigger, fatter, fluffier hippocampus. And so what I like fluffier hippocampus. And so what I like fluffier hippocampus. And so what I like to give people is this image of every to give people is this image of every to give people is this image of every single time you move your body, it's single time you move your body, it's single time you move your body, it's like giving your brain this wonderful like giving your brain this wonderful like giving your brain this wonderful bubble bath of neurochemicals. What's bubble bath of neurochemicals. What's bubble bath of neurochemicals. What's going on? I need my bubble bath of going on? I need my bubble bath of going on? I need my bubble bath of noradrenaline and dopamine and serotonin noradrenaline and dopamine and serotonin noradrenaline and dopamine and serotonin and growth factors. And with regular and growth factors. And with regular and growth factors. And with regular bubble baths, what am I doing? I'm bubble baths, what am I doing? I'm bubble baths, what am I doing? I'm growing a big, fat, fluffy hippocampus. growing a big, fat, fluffy hippocampus. growing a big, fat, fluffy hippocampus. And I'm not going to cure my father's And I'm not going to cure my father's And I'm not going to cure my father's dementia, Alzheimer's dementia. But you dementia, Alzheimer's dementia. But you dementia, Alzheimer's dementia. But you know what? If I go into my 70s with a know what? If I go into my 70s with a know what? If I go into my 70s with a big, fat, fluffy hippocampus, even if I big, fat, fluffy hippocampus, even if I big, fat, fluffy hippocampus, even if I have that in my genes and it starts to have that in my genes and it starts to have that in my genes and it starts to uh kick in, it's going to take longer uh kick in, it's going to take longer uh kick in, it's going to take longer for that disease to start to affect my for that disease to start to affect my for that disease to start to affect my ability to form and retain new long-term ability to form and retain new long-term ability to form and retain new long-term memories for facts and events, which is memories for facts and events, which is memories for facts and events, which is my motivation for getting up and doing my motivation for getting up and doing my motivation for getting up and doing my 30 to 45 minutes of aerobic my 30 to 45 minutes of aerobic my 30 to 45 minutes of aerobic exercise every day. Tell us your exercise every day. Tell us your exercise every day. Tell us your routine. Your routine is 30 to 45 routine. Your routine is 30 to 45 routine. Your routine is 30 to 45 minutes of Are you a Peloton cycler? Are minutes of Are you a Peloton cycler? Are minutes of Are you a Peloton cycler? Are you Does it matter? The data suggests you Does it matter? The data suggests you Does it matter? The data suggests that as long as your heart rate is that as long as your heart rate is that as long as your heart rate is getting up for these long-term effects getting up for these long-term effects getting up for these long-term effects on your hippocampus and prefrontal on your hippocampus and prefrontal on your hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. You also cortex. You also cortex. You also get better at get better at get better at shifting and focusing your attention. Um shifting and focusing your attention. Um shifting and focusing your attention. Um for that you need cardiovascular. And for that you need cardiovascular. And for that you need cardiovascular. And what I use is a video workout. They are what I use is a video workout. They are what I use is a video workout. They are 30 minutes that I sometimes add on a 10 30 minutes that I sometimes add on a 10 30 minutes that I sometimes add on a 10 to 15 minute stretch at the beginning or to 15 minute stretch at the beginning or to 15 minute stretch at the beginning or at the end, but I love the variety. at the end, but I love the variety. at the end, but I love the variety. Sometimes I do it with weights, Sometimes I do it with weights, Sometimes I do it with weights, sometimes I do it without weights. sometimes I do it without weights. sometimes I do it without weights. I love kickboxing, so they have a lot of I love kickboxing, so they have a lot of I love kickboxing, so they have a lot of kickboxing in there. It just fits my kickboxing in there. It just fits my kickboxing in there. It just fits my fits my fits my routine and it's always fits my fits my routine and it's always fits my fits my routine and it's always there and I don't have to get all there and I don't have to get all there and I don't have to get all dressed up to go to the gym to dressed up to go to the gym to dressed up to go to the gym to work out. So that's what I to work out. So that's what I to work out. So that's what I do. So let's imagine your morning do. So let's imagine your morning do. So let's imagine your morning routine. You you your cardiovascular routine. You you your cardiovascular routine. You you your cardiovascular exercise. Okay, so you're pumping more exercise. Okay, so you're pumping more exercise. Okay, so you're pumping more blood. That's the definition of a higher blood. That's the definition of a higher blood. That's the definition of a higher heart rate. Stroke volume of the of the heart rate. Stroke volume of the of the heart rate. Stroke volume of the of the of the heart goes up over time. You're of the heart goes up over time. You're of the heart goes up over time. You're getting fitter. So blood flow to the getting fitter. So blood flow to the getting fitter. So blood flow to the brain is increasing. Do we know brain is increasing. Do we know brain is increasing. Do we know how that gets translated into a signal how that gets translated into a signal how that gets translated into a signal to release more BDNF? to release more BDNF? to release more BDNF? &gt;&gt; Yeah, um before I go into the aerobic &gt;&gt; Yeah, um before I go into the aerobic &gt;&gt; Yeah, um before I go into the aerobic thing, I always like to start with the thing, I always like to start with the thing, I always like to start with the least amount of exercise to get least amount of exercise to get least amount of exercise to get something really useful because I don't something really useful because I don't something really useful because I don't want people to say, "Oh God, I hate, you want people to say, "Oh God, I hate, you want people to say, "Oh God, I hate, you know, sweating. I don't want to listen know, sweating. I don't want to listen know, sweating. I don't want to listen anymore." So so I always like to start anymore." So so I always like to start anymore." So so I always like to start with um studies have shown that just 10 with um studies have shown that just 10 with um studies have shown that just 10 minutes of walking outside can shift minutes of walking outside can shift minutes of walking outside can shift your mood. That is part of that your mood. That is part of that your mood. That is part of that neurochemical bubble bath that you're neurochemical bubble bath that you're neurochemical bubble bath that you're getting dopamine, serotonin, getting dopamine, serotonin, getting dopamine, serotonin, noradrenaline. And 10 minutes and anybody can walk for And 10 minutes and anybody can walk for And 10 minutes and anybody can walk for 10 minutes. 10 minutes. 10 minutes. Um and so that is Um and so that is Um and so that is for all of you thinking that out there, for all of you thinking that out there, for all of you thinking that out there, what is the minimum that I could get what is the minimum that I could get what is the minimum that I could get some of these brain effects? 10 minutes some of these brain effects? 10 minutes some of these brain effects? 10 minutes of walking. That minimum amount of walking. That minimum amount of walking. That minimum amount of movement in your body can get you the movement in your body can get you the movement in your body can get you the those mood effects. But what about the those mood effects. But what about the those mood effects. But what about the big fat fluffy hippocampus? What about big fat fluffy hippocampus? What about big fat fluffy hippocampus? What about the better performing prefrontal cortex? the better performing prefrontal cortex? the better performing prefrontal cortex? That's where you start to need the That's where you start to need the That's where you start to need the cardio workout. And from my cardio workout. And from my cardio workout. And from my reading of the literature, there haven't reading of the literature, there haven't reading of the literature, there haven't been enough studies, you know, been enough studies, you know, been enough studies, you know, um uh directly comparing contrasting uh directly comparing contrasting uh directly comparing contrasting kickboxing with running with um whatever kickboxing with running with um whatever kickboxing with running with um whatever other cardio that you need to whatever other cardio that you need to whatever other cardio that you need to do, but any cardio workout that is done do, but any cardio workout that is done do, but any cardio workout that is done has these positive effects. So, I'm has these positive effects. So, I'm has these positive effects. So, I'm going to say my interpretation of that going to say my interpretation of that going to say my interpretation of that is that whatever way you get your heart is that whatever way you get your heart is that whatever way you get your heart rate up, including a power walk. A power rate up, including a power walk. A power rate up, including a power walk. A power walk can get your heart rate up. That walk can get your heart rate up. That walk can get your heart rate up. That that is beneficial. And what is that is beneficial. And what is that is beneficial. And what is happening, there are two pathways that happening, there are two pathways that happening, there are two pathways that have been studied about how you go from have been studied about how you go from have been studied about how you go from moving your body to more BDNF that moving your body to more BDNF that moving your body to more BDNF that neurotrophin that's uh that's um neurotrophin that's uh that's um neurotrophin that's uh that's um increasing the growth of new hippocampal increasing the growth of new hippocampal increasing the growth of new hippocampal brain cells. The two pathways are the brain cells. The two pathways are the brain cells. The two pathways are the following. One is a myokine, which is a following. One is a myokine, which is a following. One is a myokine, which is a protein released by the muscles. So, and protein released by the muscles. So, and protein released by the muscles. So, and not your heart. These are striated not your heart. These are striated not your heart. These are striated muscles um in your body. And so, by muscles um in your body. And so, by muscles um in your body. And so, by running, this These were studies done in running, this These were studies done in running, this These were studies done in rats on running wheels. They showed that rats on running wheels. They showed that rats on running wheels. They showed that the running rats had um more of this the running rats had um more of this the running rats had um more of this myokine released. The myokine passed the myokine released. The myokine passed the myokine released. The myokine passed the blood-brain barrier, so it got into the blood-brain barrier, so it got into the blood-brain barrier, so it got into the uh rarefied very protected the uh rarefied very protected the uh rarefied very protected bloodstream of inside the brain. And bloodstream of inside the brain. And bloodstream of inside the brain. And that myokine stimulated the release of that myokine stimulated the release of that myokine stimulated the release of BDNF in the brain. BDNF in the brain. BDNF in the brain. That's pathway number one. Pathway That's pathway number one. Pathway That's pathway number one. Pathway number two comes through the liver uh number two comes through the liver uh number two comes through the liver uh because exercise is a stress on because exercise is a stress on because exercise is a stress on generally. Uh how do we know that? Well, generally. Uh how do we know that? Well, generally. Uh how do we know that? Well, cortisol's released whenever we cortisol's released whenever we cortisol's released whenever we exercise. It we need we need uh that exercise. It we need we need uh that exercise. It we need we need uh that sugar uh in our blood, and so that's sugar uh in our blood, and so that's sugar uh in our blood, and so that's how the physiological um how the physiological um how the physiological um mechanisms work. And so, um there is a mechanisms work. And so, um there is a mechanisms work. And so, um there is a uh ketone um uh beta-hydroxybutyrate uh ketone um uh beta-hydroxybutyrate uh ketone um uh beta-hydroxybutyrate that we've known for a very long time that we've known for a very long time that we've known for a very long time that gets released by the liver during that gets released by the liver during that gets released by the liver during exercise. And we also know that exercise. And we also know that exercise. And we also know that particular ketone passes that particular ketone passes that particular ketone passes that blood-brain barrier and it's another blood-brain barrier and it's another blood-brain barrier and it's another stimulant for BDNF. So, kind of the stimulant for BDNF. So, kind of the stimulant for BDNF. So, kind of the final common pathway seems to be um final common pathway seems to be um final common pathway seems to be um BDNF stimulation in the hippocampus. Is BDNF stimulation in the hippocampus. Is BDNF stimulation in the hippocampus. Is it the only one? Probably not, but it the only one? Probably not, but it the only one? Probably not, but that's the one that has been studied that's the one that has been studied that's the one that has been studied most clearly. So, it's you know, it most clearly. So, it's you know, it most clearly. So, it's you know, it comes from [clears throat] all of our comes from [clears throat] all of our comes from [clears throat] all of our physiological systems, our muscles physiological systems, our muscles physiological systems, our muscles working, our liver um responding to the working, our liver um responding to the working, our liver um responding to the stress of exercise. And what is it stress of exercise. And what is it stress of exercise. And what is it doing? It is making our uh you know, doing? It is making our uh you know, doing? It is making our uh you know, giving more BDNF precursors to get into giving more BDNF precursors to get into giving more BDNF precursors to get into our brain to cause the up spike of BDNF our brain to cause the up spike of BDNF our brain to cause the up spike of BDNF um which is part of your bubble bath um which is part of your bubble bath um which is part of your bubble bath that you're getting every time you move. that you're getting every time you move. that you're getting every time you move. This issue of new neurons This issue of new neurons This issue of new neurons &gt;&gt; Mhm. is one that you hear a lot. You &gt;&gt; Mhm. is one that you hear a lot. You &gt;&gt; Mhm. is one that you hear a lot. You know, neurogenesis. You're going to grow know, neurogenesis. You're going to grow know, neurogenesis. You're going to grow new neurons, new neurons. And and my new neurons, new neurons. And and my new neurons, new neurons. And and my understanding is that the rodent understanding is that the rodent understanding is that the rodent literature is very clear. Running more literature is very clear. Running more literature is very clear. Running more on a wheel can trigger neurogenesis. on a wheel can trigger neurogenesis. on a wheel can trigger neurogenesis. That literally that the birth of new That literally that the birth of new That literally that the birth of new neurons and the addition of new neurons and the addition of new neurons and the addition of new neurons to the hippocampus. And in humans, I to the hippocampus. And in humans, I to the hippocampus. And in humans, I think it's been a bit controversial. think it's been a bit controversial. think it's been a bit controversial. Some people say absolutely yes, other Some people say absolutely yes, other Some people say absolutely yes, other people say absolutely no, there are no people say absolutely no, there are no people say absolutely no, there are no neurons added to the adult brain. I neurons added to the adult brain. I neurons added to the adult brain. I haven't followed that literature down to haven't followed that literature down to haven't followed that literature down to the detail. Yeah. Um but I do remember the detail. Yeah. Um but I do remember the detail. Yeah. Um but I do remember one study that I don't think is one study that I don't think is one study that I don't think is contested, which is the work of Rusty contested, which is the work of Rusty contested, which is the work of Rusty Gage at the Salk Institute, where they Gage at the Salk Institute, where they Gage at the Salk Institute, where they actually injected a sort of dye type actually injected a sort of dye type actually injected a sort of dye type marker into the brains of terminally ill marker into the brains of terminally ill marker into the brains of terminally ill humans &gt;&gt; Yeah. who very graciously offered to &gt;&gt; Yeah. who very graciously offered to &gt;&gt; Yeah. who very graciously offered to have their brains removed and dissected have their brains removed and dissected have their brains removed and dissected after death. after death. after death. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And in these very in some cases &gt;&gt; Yeah. And in these very in some cases &gt;&gt; Yeah. And in these very in some cases very old very old very old &gt;&gt; Mhm. terminally ill humans, they did see &gt;&gt; Mhm. terminally ill humans, they did see &gt;&gt; Mhm. terminally ill humans, they did see evidence for new neurons being born in evidence for new neurons being born in evidence for new neurons being born in the hippocampus. Can I the hippocampus. Can I the hippocampus. Can I trust that idea still? Is that generally trust that idea still? Is that generally trust that idea still? Is that generally accepted? &gt;&gt; Well, so after that study, which was &gt;&gt; Well, so after that study, which was &gt;&gt; Well, so after that study, which was quite a while ago, uh there are more quite a while ago, uh there are more quite a while ago, uh there are more recent studies, still controversial, but recent studies, still controversial, but recent studies, still controversial, but um showing and demonstrating using even um showing and demonstrating using even um showing and demonstrating using even new and better techniques than were used new and better techniques than were used new and better techniques than were used in that original Rusty Gage study, in that original Rusty Gage study, in that original Rusty Gage study, which was groundbreaking at the time, which was groundbreaking at the time, which was groundbreaking at the time, that um that suggest and I think show that um that suggest and I think show that um that suggest and I think show that there are new neurons born in a that there are new neurons born in a that there are new neurons born in a adult human brains into the ninth decade adult human brains into the ninth decade adult human brains into the ninth decade of life. So, they not only did this I of life. So, they not only did this I of life. So, they not only did this I think those patients were in their think those patients were in their think those patients were in their 60s, then they died of cancer. Um 60s, then they died of cancer. Um 60s, then they died of cancer. Um but these new studies uh looking but these new studies uh looking but these new studies uh looking across the timeline, can we see because across the timeline, can we see because across the timeline, can we see because the other thing was yeah, maybe you have the other thing was yeah, maybe you have the other thing was yeah, maybe you have some when you're 20, but by the time some when you're 20, but by the time some when you're 20, but by the time you're older and you might need these you're older and you might need these you're older and you might need these new neurons, you have no new neuron new neurons, you have no new neuron new neurons, you have no new neuron growth. And so, these studies seem to uh growth. And so, these studies seem to uh growth. And so, these studies seem to uh suggest that yes yes, you did. Yes, you suggest that yes yes, you did. Yes, you suggest that yes yes, you did. Yes, you do and we all do even into old age. If do and we all do even into old age. If do and we all do even into old age. If you would, could you tell us about some you would, could you tell us about some you would, could you tell us about some of the more specific effects of the more specific effects of the more specific effects of exercise on memory? Absolutely. Let of exercise on memory? Absolutely. Let of exercise on memory? Absolutely. Let me start with um kind of the immediate me start with um kind of the immediate me start with um kind of the immediate effects, acute effects as they're effects, acute effects as they're effects, acute effects as they're called, of exercise on the brain. So, called, of exercise on the brain. So, called, of exercise on the brain. So, this is asking what does a one-off this is asking what does a one-off this is asking what does a one-off exercise session do for your brain? And exercise session do for your brain? And exercise session do for your brain? And there um there um there um there are three major effects that have there are three major effects that have there are three major effects that have been reproduced. I've seen it in my lab, been reproduced. I've seen it in my lab, been reproduced. I've seen it in my lab, many labs have reproduced this. This is many labs have reproduced this. This is many labs have reproduced this. This is usually an aerobic type exercise usually an aerobic type exercise usually an aerobic type exercise session, 30 to 45 minutes. What you session, 30 to 45 minutes. What you session, 30 to 45 minutes. What you get is that mood boost, very get is that mood boost, very get is that mood boost, very consistent. You get um consistent. You get um consistent. You get um you get you get you get improved prefrontal function, typically improved prefrontal function, typically improved prefrontal function, typically tested with a Stroop test, which is a tested with a Stroop test, which is a tested with a Stroop test, which is a test that asks you to shift and focus test that asks you to shift and focus test that asks you to shift and focus your attention in specific ways. Um it's your attention in specific ways. Um it's your attention in specific ways. Um it's a challenging task and clearly dependent a challenging task and clearly dependent a challenging task and clearly dependent on the prefrontal cortex largely. And um on the prefrontal cortex largely. And um on the prefrontal cortex largely. And um significant improvements in reaction significant improvements in reaction significant improvements in reaction time. So, your speed at responding, time. So, your speed at responding, time. So, your speed at responding, often a motor kind of but cognitive often a motor kind of but cognitive often a motor kind of but cognitive motor response is improved. One of motor response is improved. One of motor response is improved. One of the unpublished studies that I did the unpublished studies that I did the unpublished studies that I did looking at the effects of 30 minutes of looking at the effects of 30 minutes of looking at the effects of 30 minutes of age-appropriate workout um in subjects age-appropriate workout um in subjects age-appropriate workout um in subjects ranging in age from their 20s all the ranging in age from their 20s all the ranging in age from their 20s all the way up to their 90s. So what are the way up to their 90s. So what are the way up to their 90s. So what are the things that I saw most consistently? the things that I saw most consistently? the things that I saw most consistently? Irrespective of your age, everybody got Irrespective of your age, everybody got Irrespective of your age, everybody got a decreased anxiety and depression and a decreased anxiety and depression and a decreased anxiety and depression and hostility score, which is very hostility score, which is very hostility score, which is very important. You know, so it's not important. You know, so it's not important. You know, so it's not just decreasing your anxiety and just decreasing your anxiety and just decreasing your anxiety and depression but decreasing your hostility depression but decreasing your hostility depression but decreasing your hostility levels. We all want to make the world a levels. We all want to make the world a levels. We all want to make the world a better place. Making the world a better place. Making the world a better place. Making the world a better place. better place. better place. &gt;&gt; Energy, the feeling of energy went up. &gt;&gt; Energy, the feeling of energy went up. &gt;&gt; Energy, the feeling of energy went up. And what we found is in the older And what we found is in the older And what we found is in the older population, even more than in the population, even more than in the population, even more than in the younger population, we saw improved younger population, we saw improved younger population, we saw improved performance on both Stroop and performance on both Stroop and performance on both Stroop and Eriksen Flanker task, which are which is Eriksen Flanker task, which are which is Eriksen Flanker task, which are which is another task dependent on another task dependent on another task dependent on really focusing in on different letters really focusing in on different letters really focusing in on different letters and paying attention to what letter is and paying attention to what letter is and paying attention to what letter is being shown. being shown. being shown. So so these are consistent effects. How So so these are consistent effects. How So so these are consistent effects. How long do they last? One of the studies long do they last? One of the studies long do they last? One of the studies that I did publish in my lab showed that I did publish in my lab showed that I did publish in my lab showed that the immediate effects of exercise lasted the immediate effects of exercise lasted the immediate effects of exercise lasted up to two hours. Unfortunately, that was up to two hours. Unfortunately, that was up to two hours. Unfortunately, that was the longest that we lasted. We were the longest that we lasted. We were the longest that we lasted. We were still there at two hours. Um so that's still there at two hours. Um so that's still there at two hours. Um so that's you know, that's a pretty big you know, that's a pretty big you know, that's a pretty big bang for your buck. bang for your buck. bang for your buck. &gt;&gt; That is. 1 30-minute So what this tells &gt;&gt; That is. 1 30-minute So what this tells &gt;&gt; That is. 1 30-minute So what this tells me is that me is that me is that exercising early in the day exercising early in the day exercising early in the day may have a special effect. may have a special effect. may have a special effect. &gt;&gt; Right. I know there are moms and &gt;&gt; Right. I know there are moms and &gt;&gt; Right. I know there are moms and dads out there and they just say, "Look, dads out there and they just say, "Look, dads out there and they just say, "Look, I have a kid that the kids more I have a kid that the kids more I have a kid that the kids more important than my doing my exercise." So important than my doing my exercise." So important than my doing my exercise." So you will get benefits you will get benefits you will get benefits if you if you do it whenever if you if you do it whenever if you if you do it whenever you can. So that's great. More power to you can. So that's great. More power to you can. So that's great. More power to you. But what all the neuroscience data But what all the neuroscience data But what all the neuroscience data suggests is the best time to do your suggests is the best time to do your suggests is the best time to do your exercise is right before you need to use exercise is right before you need to use exercise is right before you need to use your brain in the most important way your brain in the most important way your brain in the most important way that you need to use it every day. And that you need to use it every day. And that you need to use it every day. And so, that is why the morning, for most of so, that is why the morning, for most of so, that is why the morning, for most of us, is beneficial. That's why I do it in us, is beneficial. That's why I do it in us, is beneficial. That's why I do it in the morning. I'm lucky enough to be able the morning. I'm lucky enough to be able the morning. I'm lucky enough to be able to do that. to do that. to do that. &gt;&gt; I also want to emphasize I'd love to get &gt;&gt; I also want to emphasize I'd love to get &gt;&gt; I also want to emphasize I'd love to get your thoughts on just memory and memory your thoughts on just memory and memory your thoughts on just memory and memory loss in general. loss in general. loss in general. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, my understanding of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, my understanding of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, my understanding of the literature is that somewhere in our 50s literature is that somewhere in our 50s literature is that somewhere in our 50s or 60s, we start noticing little hiccups or 60s, we start noticing little hiccups or 60s, we start noticing little hiccups in memory. in memory. in memory. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, I have to imagine that doing &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, I have to imagine that doing &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, I have to imagine that doing the exercise throughout one's entire the exercise throughout one's entire the exercise throughout one's entire life is going to help offset some of life is going to help offset some of life is going to help offset some of this, simply because of your of the BDNF this, simply because of your of the BDNF this, simply because of your of the BDNF and other downstream effects. and other downstream effects. and other downstream effects. &gt;&gt; Yeah. First, I want to share uh one of &gt;&gt; Yeah. First, I want to share uh one of &gt;&gt; Yeah. First, I want to share uh one of my favorite studies, which is a my favorite studies, which is a my favorite studies, which is a longitudinal study um done in Swedish longitudinal study um done in Swedish longitudinal study um done in Swedish women. And this was published in 2018. women. And this was published in 2018. women. And this was published in 2018. And uh what they did was, back in the And uh what they did was, back in the And uh what they did was, back in the 1960s, they found um Swedish women 300 1960s, they found um Swedish women 300 1960s, they found um Swedish women 300 Swedish women in their 40s. And they Swedish women in their 40s. And they Swedish women in their 40s. And they characterized them as low fit, mid fit, characterized them as low fit, mid fit, characterized them as low fit, mid fit, high fit, okay? And then, 40 years high fit, okay? And then, 40 years high fit, okay? And then, 40 years later, they came back and found these later, they came back and found these later, they came back and found these women. They let them do live their women. They let them do live their women. They let them do live their lives. And they asked, what happened to lives. And they asked, what happened to lives. And they asked, what happened to these women as a function of whether these women as a function of whether these women as a function of whether they were low fit, mid fit, high fit in they were low fit, mid fit, high fit in they were low fit, mid fit, high fit in their 40s. They're now in their 80s. Um their 40s. They're now in their 80s. Um their 40s. They're now in their 80s. Um and what they found was that um relative and what they found was that um relative and what they found was that um relative to the low fit or mid fit women, the to the low fit or mid fit women, the to the low fit or mid fit women, the women that were high fit gained nine women that were high fit gained nine women that were high fit gained nine more years of good cognition more years of good cognition more years of good cognition later in life. Now, this is not a later in life. Now, this is not a later in life. Now, this is not a randomized controlled study. Um this is randomized controlled study. Um this is randomized controlled study. Um this is a correlational study. But, does it a correlational study. But, does it a correlational study. But, does it agree with everything that we've been agree with everything that we've been agree with everything that we've been talking about today? Yes. Does it agree talking about today? Yes. Does it agree talking about today? Yes. Does it agree with this idea that, you know, the women with this idea that, you know, the women with this idea that, you know, the women that were high fit were giving their that were high fit were giving their that were high fit were giving their brains this bubble bath very, very brains this bubble bath very, very brains this bubble bath very, very regularly for entire 40 years? And regularly for entire 40 years? And regularly for entire 40 years? And that built up their big, fat, beautiful that built up their big, fat, beautiful that built up their big, fat, beautiful hippocampi. Yes, it does. So, um it's hippocampi. Yes, it does. So, um it's hippocampi. Yes, it does. So, um it's one of my favorite studies. Yeah, one of my favorite studies. Yeah, one of my favorite studies. Yeah, another cause for getting the exercise another cause for getting the exercise another cause for getting the exercise in consistently. Yes. So, when I jumped in consistently. Yes. So, when I jumped in consistently. Yes. So, when I jumped into the exercise work, um everybody was into the exercise work, um everybody was into the exercise work, um everybody was studying people 65 or older because studying people 65 or older because studying people 65 or older because that's when cognitive decline begins. that's when cognitive decline begins. that's when cognitive decline begins. And if the idea is exercise can help you And if the idea is exercise can help you And if the idea is exercise can help you with your cognition, then makes sense. with your cognition, then makes sense. with your cognition, then makes sense. However, I thought, well, However, I thought, well, However, I thought, well, you know, that it's great there's lots you know, that it's great there's lots you know, that it's great there's lots of work there. I wanted to know what of work there. I wanted to know what of work there. I wanted to know what happens in happens in happens in people in their 40s and their 50s, maybe people in their 40s and their 50s, maybe people in their 40s and their 50s, maybe even their 30s and their 20s. Why? even their 30s and their 20s. Why? even their 30s and their 20s. Why? Because that's when we as humans are Because that's when we as humans are Because that's when we as humans are able ready willing and able to able ready willing and able to able ready willing and able to increase our exercise and um increase our exercise and um increase our exercise and um gets us set up to, you know, build gets us set up to, you know, build gets us set up to, you know, build our brains as we go into our 60s. And our brains as we go into our 60s. And our brains as we go into our 60s. And so, um the first study that I did look so, um the first study that I did look so, um the first study that I did look at low fit participants from their 30s to low fit participants from their 30s to low fit participants from their 30s to mid-50s. And we wanted to ask this question, you And we wanted to ask this question, you And we wanted to ask this question, you know, how much exercise do you really need to how much exercise do you really need to how much exercise do you really need to start seeing benefits? Do you see start seeing benefits? Do you see start seeing benefits? Do you see benefits? Or maybe you have to wait benefits? Or maybe you have to wait benefits? Or maybe you have to wait until you start seeing cognitive decline until you start seeing cognitive decline until you start seeing cognitive decline to get benefits. That was one of the to get benefits. That was one of the to get benefits. That was one of the theories out there. And so, that's what theories out there. And so, that's what theories out there. And so, that's what I wanted to do. And so, what we did was I wanted to do. And so, what we did was I wanted to do. And so, what we did was 3 months of two to three times a week 3 months of two to three times a week 3 months of two to three times a week cardio. It was a spin class. So, cardio. It was a spin class. So, cardio. It was a spin class. So, you know, spin classes are great cardio. you know, spin classes are great cardio. you know, spin classes are great cardio. And the comparison group was two to And the comparison group was two to And the comparison group was two to three times a week of competitive video three times a week of competitive video three times a week of competitive video Scrabble. So, no heart rate uh change, Scrabble. So, no heart rate uh change, Scrabble. So, no heart rate uh change, but they had to come into my lab and but they had to come into my lab and but they had to come into my lab and be in a group just like they were in and be in a group just like they were in and be in a group just like they were in a group for the for the um spin a group for the for the um spin a group for the for the um spin class. Uh we tested them cognitively Uh we tested them cognitively Uh we tested them cognitively at the beginning and the end cognitively at the beginning and the end cognitively at the beginning and the end of the session. What we found was two to of the session. What we found was two to of the session. What we found was two to three times a week of cardio In these three times a week of cardio In these three times a week of cardio In these people they were low fit, which means people they were low fit, which means people they were low fit, which means specifically that they were exercising specifically that they were exercising specifically that they were exercising less than 30 minutes a week for the 3 less than 30 minutes a week for the 3 less than 30 minutes a week for the 3 months previous to the experiment. So months previous to the experiment. So months previous to the experiment. So they went from that to two to three they went from that to two to three they went from that to two to three times a week of spin class. What we times a week of spin class. What we times a week of spin class. What we found was um changes in baseline rates found was um changes in baseline rates found was um changes in baseline rates of their positive mood states went up of their positive mood states went up of their positive mood states went up relative to the video Scrabble group. Um relative to the video Scrabble group. Um relative to the video Scrabble group. Um their uh body image got more positive their uh body image got more positive their uh body image got more positive because they were exercising, which is because they were exercising, which is because they were exercising, which is great. And really important, their great. And really important, their great. And really important, their motivation to exercise went up motivation to exercise went up motivation to exercise went up significantly compared to the video significantly compared to the video significantly compared to the video Scrabble group, which is which is great. Scrabble group, which is which is great. Scrabble group, which is which is great. So the more you exercise, the more So the more you exercise, the more So the more you exercise, the more motivated you are to exercise. What motivated you are to exercise. What motivated you are to exercise. What about cognition? What changed in the about cognition? What changed in the about cognition? What changed in the cognitive circuits of their brain? cognitive circuits of their brain? cognitive circuits of their brain? Number one, we got improved performance Number one, we got improved performance Number one, we got improved performance on the Stroop task. But uh on the Stroop task. But uh on the Stroop task. But uh we're headed towards my favorite we're headed towards my favorite we're headed towards my favorite structure, which is the hippocampus. structure, which is the hippocampus. structure, which is the hippocampus. What we found was improved performance What we found was improved performance What we found was improved performance on both a recognition memory task, which on both a recognition memory task, which on both a recognition memory task, which was a um memory encoding task, um and uh was a um memory encoding task, um and uh was a um memory encoding task, um and uh that is can you can you differentiate uh that is can you can you differentiate uh that is can you can you differentiate uh similar items that we're asking you to similar items that we're asking you to similar items that we're asking you to remember? And and spatial episodic memory task, And and spatial episodic memory task, And and spatial episodic memory task, where we had them play one of those where we had them play one of those where we had them play one of those Doom-like games when they went into this Doom-like games when they went into this Doom-like games when they went into this spatial maze and they had to do things spatial maze and they had to do things spatial maze and they had to do things in a virtual city. Their performance in a virtual city. Their performance in a virtual city. Their performance there got better, which is very there got better, which is very there got better, which is very classically dependent on the classically dependent on the classically dependent on the hippocampus. So it was so satisfying to hippocampus. So it was so satisfying to hippocampus. So it was so satisfying to do this study because um to do this study because um to do this study because um uh I've been wanting to answer this uh I've been wanting to answer this uh I've been wanting to answer this question. What is a minimum amount or question. What is a minimum amount or question. What is a minimum amount or doable amount of exercise that will get doable amount of exercise that will get doable amount of exercise that will get you these cognitive benefits? And now I you these cognitive benefits? And now I you these cognitive benefits? And now I can say in 30-to-50-year-olds can say in 30-to-50-year-olds can say in 30-to-50-year-olds that are low fit, that are low fit, that are low fit, two to three times a week. Is doable? two to three times a week. Is doable? two to three times a week. Is doable? Absolutely. Will it be hard if you're Absolutely. Will it be hard if you're Absolutely. Will it be hard if you're low fit? Yeah, it's going to be low fit? Yeah, it's going to be low fit? Yeah, it's going to be challenging, but absolutely doable. This challenging, but absolutely doable. This challenging, but absolutely doable. This is not like you have to become marathon is not like you have to become marathon is not like you have to become marathon runner to get any of these benefits. runner to get any of these benefits. runner to get any of these benefits. This is you have to start moving your This is you have to start moving your This is you have to start moving your body on a regular basis, two to three body on a regular basis, two to three body on a regular basis, two to three times a week. How long are those times a week. How long are those times a week. How long are those sessions again? sessions again? sessions again? &gt;&gt; 45 minutes. &gt;&gt; 45 minutes. &gt;&gt; 45 minutes. &gt;&gt; 45 minutes. &gt;&gt; 45 minutes. &gt;&gt; 45 minutes. &gt;&gt; minutes warm up for 5 minutes and a cool &gt;&gt; minutes warm up for 5 minutes and a cool &gt;&gt; minutes warm up for 5 minutes and a cool down for 5 minutes, so it's really 35 down for 5 minutes, so it's really 35 down for 5 minutes, so it's really 35 minutes. 35 minutes of, you know, minutes. 35 minutes of, you know, minutes. 35 minutes of, you know, they're really pushing you. they're really pushing you. they're really pushing you. Yeah. The second study that I wanted to Yeah. The second study that I wanted to Yeah. The second study that I wanted to share is part two of that study that I share is part two of that study that I share is part two of that study that I just described, which was the low fit just described, which was the low fit just described, which was the low fit people. Next we move to mid fit people. Like, Next we move to mid fit people. Like, Next we move to mid fit people. Like, what about us? You know, we're already what about us? You know, we're already what about us? You know, we're already exercising. How how am I going to benefit from How how am I going to benefit from How how am I going to benefit from increasing my exercise? So here again we increasing my exercise? So here again we increasing my exercise? So here again we collaborated with a great collaborated with a great collaborated with a great spin studio that had a whole bunch of spin studio that had a whole bunch of spin studio that had a whole bunch of mid fit people that by our mid fit people that by our mid fit people that by our definition were exercising two to three definition were exercising two to three definition were exercising two to three times a week on a regular basis. That's times a week on a regular basis. That's times a week on a regular basis. That's great. All you people out there that are great. All you people out there that are great. All you people out there that are doing that, you should know you're doing that, you should know you're doing that, you should know you're already benefiting your brain. But our already benefiting your brain. But our already benefiting your brain. But our question was, what if we invited them to question was, what if we invited them to question was, what if we invited them to exercise as much as they wanted at the exercise as much as they wanted at the exercise as much as they wanted at the spin studio for 3 months, from you know, spin studio for 3 months, from you know, spin studio for 3 months, from you know, two to three times all the way up to two to three times all the way up to two to three times all the way up to seven times a week? And let's just see seven times a week? And let's just see seven times a week? And let's just see what happened. And the control group what happened. And the control group what happened. And the control group we asked them not to change their we asked them not to change their we asked them not to change their exercise. And so what we ended up with was a nice And so what we ended up with was a nice And so what we ended up with was a nice big array of big array of big array of starting with mid fit people that starting with mid fit people that starting with mid fit people that exercise between staying at two to three exercise between staying at two to three exercise between staying at two to three times a week all the way up to seven times a week all the way up to seven times a week all the way up to seven times a week. And the bottom line from times a week. And the bottom line from times a week. And the bottom line from that study is that study is that study is every drop of sweat counted. That is the every drop of sweat counted. That is the every drop of sweat counted. That is the more you change and you increase your more you change and you increase your more you change and you increase your workout up to seven times a week, the workout up to seven times a week, the workout up to seven times a week, the better your mood was. You had lower better your mood was. You had lower better your mood was. You had lower amounts of depression and anxiety, lower amounts of depression and anxiety, lower amounts of depression and anxiety, higher amounts of good um, uh, higher amounts of good um, uh, higher amounts of good um, uh, good affect, and the better your good affect, and the better your good affect, and the better your hippocampal memory was with the more you hippocampal memory was with the more you hippocampal memory was with the more you worked out. Again, this was for 3 worked out. Again, this was for 3 worked out. Again, this was for 3 months. So, I love that, too, because it months. So, I love that, too, because it months. So, I love that, too, because it gives power to those of us that are, gives power to those of us that are, gives power to those of us that are, you know, regularly exercising and you know, regularly exercising and you know, regularly exercising and wondering, do I really need to I mean, wondering, do I really need to I mean, wondering, do I really need to I mean, is it really going to help me? And the is it really going to help me? And the is it really going to help me? And the answer is yes. I mean, not all of us can answer is yes. I mean, not all of us can answer is yes. I mean, not all of us can exercise go to a spin class seven exercise go to a spin class seven exercise go to a spin class seven times a week. But, um, I love the times a week. But, um, I love the times a week. But, um, I love the message that our body is responsive to message that our body is responsive to message that our body is responsive to that, and you can get better that, and you can get better that, and you can get better hippocampal function, better overall hippocampal function, better overall hippocampal function, better overall baseline mood affect with a higher baseline mood affect with a higher baseline mood affect with a higher level. So, it works for uh, the mid-fit level. So, it works for uh, the mid-fit level. So, it works for uh, the mid-fit uh, people, as well. What is, if any, uh, people, as well. What is, if any, uh, people, as well. What is, if any, the value of affirmation, of telling the value of affirmation, of telling the value of affirmation, of telling yourself something positive about yourself something positive about yourself something positive about yourself, or of exercise on not the yourself, or of exercise on not the yourself, or of exercise on not the exercise itself, but on mood, exercise itself, but on mood, exercise itself, but on mood, self-image, memory, and brain function? self-image, memory, and brain function? self-image, memory, and brain function? Yeah. I looked into this because I am Yeah. I looked into this because I am Yeah. I looked into this because I am also a certified exercise instructor, also a certified exercise instructor, also a certified exercise instructor, and the form of exercise that I teach is and the form of exercise that I teach is and the form of exercise that I teach is called IntenSati. That it's a form of called IntenSati. That it's a form of called IntenSati. That it's a form of exercise that was developed by this exercise that was developed by this exercise that was developed by this amazing, um, fitness instructor, amazing, um, fitness instructor, amazing, um, fitness instructor, Patricia Moreno, um, and she combined Patricia Moreno, um, and she combined Patricia Moreno, um, and she combined physical movements from kickbox and physical movements from kickbox and physical movements from kickbox and dance and yoga and martial arts with dance and yoga and martial arts with dance and yoga and martial arts with positive spoken affirmation. So, each positive spoken affirmation. So, each positive spoken affirmation. So, each move, if you're punching back and forth move, if you're punching back and forth move, if you're punching back and forth as you would do in a kickbox class, you as you would do in a kickbox class, you as you would do in a kickbox class, you don't just punch, you say something don't just punch, you say something don't just punch, you say something like, "I am strong." Now, which every like, "I am strong." Now, which every like, "I am strong." Now, which every punch is associated with the word, and, punch is associated with the word, and, punch is associated with the word, and, you know, you can, um, create your you know, you can, um, create your you know, you can, um, create your own series of affirmations with the own series of affirmations with the own series of affirmations with the moves that you put together. There's moves that you put together. There's moves that you put together. There's something about the declaration, using something about the declaration, using something about the declaration, using your own voice, of saying things that your own voice, of saying things that your own voice, of saying things that you, you know, don't often say to you, you know, don't often say to you, you know, don't often say to yourself, like, "I'm strong. I'm yourself, like, "I'm strong. I'm yourself, like, "I'm strong. I'm inspired. I believe I will succeed." are inspired. I believe I will succeed." are inspired. I believe I will succeed." are all the kinds of affirmations you say. all the kinds of affirmations you say. all the kinds of affirmations you say. And so, I started to look into what was And so, I started to look into what was And so, I started to look into what was known about affirmations, and it was known about affirmations, and it was known about affirmations, and it was clear that there was a literature clear that there was a literature clear that there was a literature showing that positive affirmations, showing that positive affirmations, showing that positive affirmations, saying them or reading them, saying them or reading them, saying them or reading them, could change mood. It really gets you could change mood. It really gets you could change mood. It really gets you into a habit of into a habit of into a habit of saying good things about yourself, and saying good things about yourself, and saying good things about yourself, and then you start to remember start to then you start to remember start to then you start to remember start to realize, "Oh my god, I'm so mean to realize, "Oh my god, I'm so mean to realize, "Oh my god, I'm so mean to myself. I have lots of negative thoughts going I have lots of negative thoughts going I have lots of negative thoughts going on about myself in my head." on about myself in my head." on about myself in my head." And which was part of the other reason And which was part of the other reason And which was part of the other reason why I loved this particular form of why I loved this particular form of why I loved this particular form of exercise. So, what you get in exercise. So, what you get in exercise. So, what you get in IntenSati is the mood boost from the IntenSati is the mood boost from the IntenSati is the mood boost from the positive spoken affirmations together positive spoken affirmations together positive spoken affirmations together with all the other brain and affect with all the other brain and affect with all the other brain and affect boost that we've been talking about for boost that we've been talking about for boost that we've been talking about for this whole this whole this whole podcast from the exercise because it's a podcast from the exercise because it's a podcast from the exercise because it's a sweaty workout as well. So. Interesting. sweaty workout as well. So. Interesting. sweaty workout as well. So. Interesting. I'd like to touch on meditation. I'd like to touch on meditation. I'd like to touch on meditation. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Sounds like you've discovered a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Sounds like you've discovered a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Sounds like you've discovered a minimum a close to minimum threshold of minimum a close to minimum threshold of minimum a close to minimum threshold of meditation that can really benefit us. meditation that can really benefit us. meditation that can really benefit us. So, maybe you can tell us about that maybe you can tell us about that maybe you can tell us about that study. &gt;&gt; very practical study. &gt;&gt; very practical study. &gt;&gt; very practical study. Just 10 minutes. Not 30 minutes, not an Just 10 minutes. Not 30 minutes, not an Just 10 minutes. Not 30 minutes, not an hour meditation, that's too hard. 10 hour meditation, that's too hard. 10 hour meditation, that's too hard. 10 minutes guided meditation. A It's a body minutes guided meditation. A It's a body minutes guided meditation. A It's a body scan, very basic but easy to follow kind scan, very basic but easy to follow kind scan, very basic but easy to follow kind of meditation. We looked at cognitive of meditation. We looked at cognitive of meditation. We looked at cognitive effects before and after this It was eight weeks before and after this It was eight weeks before and after this It was eight weeks of daily It was actually 12-minute of daily It was actually 12-minute of daily It was actually 12-minute meditation. 12 minutes of body scan meditation. 12 minutes of body scan meditation. 12 minutes of body scan meditation. And meditation. And meditation. And what we found was significant decreases what we found was significant decreases what we found was significant decreases in stress response. So, we did the in stress response. So, we did the in stress response. So, we did the stress test to see how you responded stress test to see how you responded stress test to see how you responded to a unexpected stressful situation. The to a unexpected stressful situation. The to a unexpected stressful situation. The meditators did much better. Their mood meditators did much better. Their mood meditators did much better. Their mood was better, and their was better, and their was better, and their cognitive performance was also their cognitive performance was also their cognitive performance was also better. &gt;&gt; there's so much evidence that meditation &gt;&gt; there's so much evidence that meditation &gt;&gt; there's so much evidence that meditation is beneficial. is beneficial. is beneficial. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. How do you think it's working or what it How do you think it's working or what it How do you think it's working or what it What do you think it's doing? I think What do you think it's doing? I think What do you think it's doing? I think that one of the most important things that one of the most important things that one of the most important things that gets that gets that gets um worked when we are doing a simple um worked when we are doing a simple um worked when we are doing a simple 10-minute or 12-minute body scan 10-minute or 12-minute body scan 10-minute or 12-minute body scan um meditation regularly, that's 10 um meditation regularly, that's 10 um meditation regularly, that's 10 minutes a day, 12 minutes a day, is um minutes a day, 12 minutes a day, is um minutes a day, 12 minutes a day, is um the habit building and the practice of the habit building and the practice of the habit building and the practice of focusing on focusing on focusing on the present moment. I think that is very the present moment. I think that is very the present moment. I think that is very hard for us modern humans to do. If you hard for us modern humans to do. If you hard for us modern humans to do. If you know how to do that, that gives you this know how to do that, that gives you this know how to do that, that gives you this powerful tool for the rest of your day. powerful tool for the rest of your day. powerful tool for the rest of your day. You're not locked into that fearful You're not locked into that fearful You're not locked into that fearful future thinking that so many of us have future thinking that so many of us have future thinking that so many of us have or that uh just reliving of or that uh just reliving of or that uh just reliving of the terrible past, but you could enjoy the terrible past, but you could enjoy the terrible past, but you could enjoy the present moment. enjoy the present moment. enjoy the present moment. &gt;&gt; Are there any other things besides &gt;&gt; Are there any other things besides &gt;&gt; Are there any other things besides exercise and meditation that you would exercise and meditation that you would exercise and meditation that you would like to see people do in terms of trying like to see people do in terms of trying like to see people do in terms of trying to increase their powers of attention? to increase their powers of attention? to increase their powers of attention? So, I would say the top three uh tools So, I would say the top three uh tools So, I would say the top three uh tools that everybody right this minute today that everybody right this minute today that everybody right this minute today can use to up their capacity to attend can use to up their capacity to attend can use to up their capacity to attend where they want to uh include exercise where they want to uh include exercise where they want to uh include exercise for the reasons we've talked about. It for the reasons we've talked about. It for the reasons we've talked about. It has a direct effect on functioning of has a direct effect on functioning of has a direct effect on functioning of the prefrontal cortex. Meditation also the prefrontal cortex. Meditation also the prefrontal cortex. Meditation also clear clinical studies showing improved clear clinical studies showing improved clear clinical studies showing improved ability to focus and ability to focus and ability to focus and particularly focus on the present particularly focus on the present particularly focus on the present moment. Um and the third has to be moment. Um and the third has to be moment. Um and the third has to be sleep. It is so important for sleep. It is so important for sleep. It is so important for all core cognitive functions uh including core cognitive functions uh including core cognitive functions uh including attention, including creativity, attention, including creativity, attention, including creativity, including uh um just good basic brain function. uh um just good basic brain function. uh um just good basic brain function. So, exercise, meditation, sleep can help So, exercise, meditation, sleep can help So, exercise, meditation, sleep can help you learn, retain, and perform better you learn, retain, and perform better you learn, retain, and perform better than if you do not have these three than if you do not have these three than if you do not have these three things in your life. Wendy, thank you so things in your life. Wendy, thank you so things in your life. Wendy, thank you so much for your leadership in the much for your leadership in the much for your leadership in the university system, for your leadership university system, for your leadership university system, for your leadership in public education, for the decades of in public education, for the decades of in public education, for the decades of important work on memory and neural important work on memory and neural important work on memory and neural circuitry, which circuitry, which circuitry, which we got to learn about today as well. we got to learn about today as well. we got to learn about today as well. Thank you ever so much. Thank you, Thank you ever so much. Thank you, Thank you ever so much. Thank you, Andrew. Fun conversation.