Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are talking all about food and Today, we are talking all about food and Today, we are talking all about food and the brain. We are going to talk about the brain. We are going to talk about the brain. We are going to talk about foods that are good for your brain in foods that are good for your brain in foods that are good for your brain in terms of focus, in terms of brain health terms of focus, in terms of brain health terms of focus, in terms of brain health generally, and the longevity of your generally, and the longevity of your generally, and the longevity of your brain, your ability to maintain pain, brain, your ability to maintain pain, brain, your ability to maintain pain, cognition, and clear thinking over time. cognition, and clear thinking over time. cognition, and clear thinking over time. We are also going to talk about why and We are also going to talk about why and We are also going to talk about why and how you prefer certain foods to others. how you prefer certain foods to others. how you prefer certain foods to others. And I'm going to talk about the three And I'm going to talk about the three And I'm going to talk about the three major signals that combine major signals that combine major signals that combine to drive your food choices. One of those to drive your food choices. One of those to drive your food choices. One of those signals comes from your gut and is signals comes from your gut and is signals comes from your gut and is completely subconscious. These are completely subconscious. These are completely subconscious. These are neurons in your gut that are sending neurons in your gut that are sending neurons in your gut that are sending signals to your brain that you are signals to your brain that you are signals to your brain that you are unaware of about the nutrient contents unaware of about the nutrient contents unaware of about the nutrient contents of the foods that you are eating. The of the foods that you are eating. The of the foods that you are eating. The second signal is how metabolically second signal is how metabolically second signal is how metabolically accessible a given food is, meaning how accessible a given food is, meaning how accessible a given food is, meaning how readily that food can be converted into readily that food can be converted into readily that food can be converted into energy that your brain, not your body, energy that your brain, not your body, energy that your brain, not your body, but that your brain can use. but that your brain can use. but that your brain can use. And the third signal is perhaps the most And the third signal is perhaps the most And the third signal is perhaps the most interesting one. It's the signal of interesting one. It's the signal of interesting one. It's the signal of belief. It's the signal of what you belief. It's the signal of what you belief. It's the signal of what you perceive and believe the food that perceive and believe the food that perceive and believe the food that you're eating to contain and what you you're eating to contain and what you you're eating to contain and what you think it can do for you health-wise and think it can do for you health-wise and think it can do for you health-wise and energy-wise. What are the things that energy-wise. What are the things that energy-wise. What are the things that directly impact brain health, and what directly impact brain health, and what directly impact brain health, and what are the foods that we can eat that will are the foods that we can eat that will are the foods that we can eat that will support brain health? Generally, when we support brain health? Generally, when we support brain health? Generally, when we think about neuron function and brain think about neuron function and brain think about neuron function and brain function, we default to a discussion about fuel, we default to a discussion about fuel, we default to a discussion about fuel, the fact that neurons use glucose, which the fact that neurons use glucose, which the fact that neurons use glucose, which is blood sugar, in order and that they is blood sugar, in order and that they is blood sugar, in order and that they require a lot of it. But, before we can require a lot of it. But, before we can require a lot of it. But, before we can even consider the fuels that neurons use even consider the fuels that neurons use even consider the fuels that neurons use in order to function, we have to talk in order to function, we have to talk in order to function, we have to talk about the elements that actually allow about the elements that actually allow about the elements that actually allow those neurons to be there and to stay those neurons to be there and to stay those neurons to be there and to stay healthy. What actually makes up those healthy. What actually makes up those healthy. What actually makes up those neurons? And that brings us to what I neurons? And that brings us to what I neurons? And that brings us to what I would argue is the most important food would argue is the most important food would argue is the most important food element for brain function, and that is element for brain function, and that is element for brain function, and that is fat. And that may come as a surprise, but And that may come as a surprise, but And that may come as a surprise, but unless one considers the water content unless one considers the water content unless one considers the water content of the brain, which is very high, of the brain, which is very high, of the brain, which is very high, a lot of our brain and a lot of the a lot of our brain and a lot of the a lot of our brain and a lot of the integrity of the nerve cells, the integrity of the nerve cells, the integrity of the nerve cells, the so-called neurons in our brain, and the so-called neurons in our brain, and the so-called neurons in our brain, and the other types of cells comes from fat. And other types of cells comes from fat. And other types of cells comes from fat. And that's because nerve cells and other that's because nerve cells and other that's because nerve cells and other cells in the brain have a external cells in the brain have a external cells in the brain have a external layer. It's layer. It's layer. It's what's sometimes called a double-layered what's sometimes called a double-layered what's sometimes called a double-layered membrane. It's essentially two thin membrane. It's essentially two thin membrane. It's essentially two thin layers that serve as a boundary between layers that serve as a boundary between layers that serve as a boundary between those cells, and that boundary is very those cells, and that boundary is very those cells, and that boundary is very important because how things pass across important because how things pass across important because how things pass across that boundary actually regulates the that boundary actually regulates the that boundary actually regulates the electrical activity of neurons, which is electrical activity of neurons, which is electrical activity of neurons, which is the way that neurons fire and the way that neurons fire and the way that neurons fire and communicate and keep you thinking and communicate and keep you thinking and communicate and keep you thinking and acting and doing all the good things acting and doing all the good things acting and doing all the good things that those neurons allow us to do. And that those neurons allow us to do. And that those neurons allow us to do. And those membranes are made up of fats, but those membranes are made up of fats, but those membranes are made up of fats, but they're not made up of the fats that are they're not made up of the fats that are they're not made up of the fats that are around our belly, around our belly, around our belly, around the other organs of our body. around the other organs of our body. around the other organs of our body. They're not made up of storage fat, they They're not made up of storage fat, they They're not made up of storage fat, they are made up of structural fat. And are made up of structural fat. And are made up of structural fat. And maintaining the so-called integrity of maintaining the so-called integrity of maintaining the so-called integrity of that structural fat, meaning the health that structural fat, meaning the health that structural fat, meaning the health of those neurons, is going to come in of those neurons, is going to come in of those neurons, is going to come in large part from the foods that we eat. large part from the foods that we eat. large part from the foods that we eat. So, what type of fat is it, and what So, what type of fat is it, and what So, what type of fat is it, and what should we eat in order to support that should we eat in order to support that should we eat in order to support that fat and those neurons? And the answer is fat and those neurons? And the answer is fat and those neurons? And the answer is the so-called essential fatty acids and the so-called essential fatty acids and the so-called essential fatty acids and phospholipids. Now, those are more or phospholipids. Now, those are more or phospholipids. Now, those are more or less the same thing, but I just want to less the same thing, but I just want to less the same thing, but I just want to make a very large literature very make a very large literature very make a very large literature very crystal clear. crystal clear. crystal clear. Essential fatty acids can include the Essential fatty acids can include the Essential fatty acids can include the so-called EPA variety or DHA variety. so-called EPA variety or DHA variety. so-called EPA variety or DHA variety. You hear about omega-3s and omega-6s. You hear about omega-3s and omega-6s. You hear about omega-3s and omega-6s. Most people are getting enough omega-6s Most people are getting enough omega-6s Most people are getting enough omega-6s from their diet. However, most people from their diet. However, most people from their diet. However, most people are not getting enough omega-3s in their are not getting enough omega-3s in their are not getting enough omega-3s in their diet to support healthy brain function diet to support healthy brain function diet to support healthy brain function in the short and long term. What are in the short and long term. What are in the short and long term. What are foods that are high in omega-3s that we foods that are high in omega-3s that we foods that are high in omega-3s that we should all probably be consuming at should all probably be consuming at should all probably be consuming at least on a daily basis. least on a daily basis. least on a daily basis. The number one The number one The number one is fish. Now, I don't know about you, is fish. Now, I don't know about you, is fish. Now, I don't know about you, but I'm not eating a lot of fish. I will but I'm not eating a lot of fish. I will but I'm not eating a lot of fish. I will from time to time, but that's one reason from time to time, but that's one reason from time to time, but that's one reason why one might want to supplement with why one might want to supplement with why one might want to supplement with EPAs from another source. EPAs from another source. EPAs from another source. But, also EPAs are found in chia seeds, in also EPAs are found in chia seeds, in also EPAs are found in chia seeds, in walnuts, in soybeans, and other walnuts, in soybeans, and other walnuts, in soybeans, and other plant-based foods. You can look these up plant-based foods. You can look these up plant-based foods. You can look these up online, and you'll immediately see that online, and you'll immediately see that online, and you'll immediately see that there are a lot of sources of EPAs. there are a lot of sources of EPAs. there are a lot of sources of EPAs. And many of the foods that I listed off And many of the foods that I listed off And many of the foods that I listed off might be appetizing to you. Some of them might be appetizing to you. Some of them might be appetizing to you. Some of them might be unappetizing to you, or some of might be unappetizing to you, or some of might be unappetizing to you, or some of them you might be sort of neutral about. them you might be sort of neutral about. them you might be sort of neutral about. But, it's very clear that eating foods But, it's very clear that eating foods But, it's very clear that eating foods that are rich in omega-3s and/or that are rich in omega-3s and/or that are rich in omega-3s and/or supplementing with omega-3s to get above supplementing with omega-3s to get above supplementing with omega-3s to get above that 1.5 g and ideally up to 2 or even 3 that 1.5 g and ideally up to 2 or even 3 that 1.5 g and ideally up to 2 or even 3 g per day of EPA can be very beneficial g per day of EPA can be very beneficial g per day of EPA can be very beneficial for cognitive function in the short and for cognitive function in the short and for cognitive function in the short and long term. The other compound that has long term. The other compound that has long term. The other compound that has been shown to be directly supportive of been shown to be directly supportive of been shown to be directly supportive of neuronal function is phosphatidylserine, neuronal function is phosphatidylserine, neuronal function is phosphatidylserine, which is abundant in meats and in fish. which is abundant in meats and in fish. which is abundant in meats and in fish. So, for those of you that do consume So, for those of you that do consume So, for those of you that do consume meat and fish, meat and fish, meat and fish, provided you're getting enough fish, provided you're getting enough fish, provided you're getting enough fish, you're probably getting enough you're probably getting enough you're probably getting enough phosphatidylserine. For those of you phosphatidylserine. For those of you phosphatidylserine. For those of you that are interested in supplementing that are interested in supplementing that are interested in supplementing with phosphatidylserine, it's a with phosphatidylserine, it's a with phosphatidylserine, it's a relatively inexpensive supplement that, relatively inexpensive supplement that, relatively inexpensive supplement that, again, is lipid-like. So, it's mimicking again, is lipid-like. So, it's mimicking again, is lipid-like. So, it's mimicking some of the same things that you would some of the same things that you would some of the same things that you would get from food, but in higher get from food, but in higher get from food, but in higher concentration. Now, after EPA fatty acids and Now, after EPA fatty acids and Now, after EPA fatty acids and phosphatidylserine, I would say third on phosphatidylserine, I would say third on phosphatidylserine, I would say third on the list of things that come from food the list of things that come from food the list of things that come from food that can readily support brain function that can readily support brain function that can readily support brain function would be choline. And that's because of would be choline. And that's because of would be choline. And that's because of the relationship to choline in the relationship to choline in the relationship to choline in the biosynthesis pathway for acetylcholine. biosynthesis pathway for acetylcholine. biosynthesis pathway for acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator, not a Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator, not a Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator, not a neurotransmitter, but a neuromodulator neurotransmitter, but a neuromodulator neurotransmitter, but a neuromodulator in the brain. So, it's kind of a in the brain. So, it's kind of a in the brain. So, it's kind of a electrical highlighter pen, if you will, electrical highlighter pen, if you will, electrical highlighter pen, if you will, by analogy. by analogy. by analogy. That is the basis of much of what we That is the basis of much of what we That is the basis of much of what we call focus or our ability to call focus or our ability to call focus or our ability to concentrate on a particular batch of concentrate on a particular batch of concentrate on a particular batch of information that's coming in through our information that's coming in through our information that's coming in through our eyes, our ears, our nose, or even things eyes, our ears, our nose, or even things eyes, our ears, our nose, or even things that we're just thinking in our head. that we're just thinking in our head. that we're just thinking in our head. And not surprisingly then, many of the And not surprisingly then, many of the And not surprisingly then, many of the treatments for Alzheimer's disease, treatments for Alzheimer's disease, treatments for Alzheimer's disease, which is an inability or challenges with which is an inability or challenges with which is an inability or challenges with remembering things and focusing, remembering things and focusing, remembering things and focusing, are drugs that impact the acetylcholine are drugs that impact the acetylcholine are drugs that impact the acetylcholine pathway and pathway and pathway and are aimed at enhancing the amount of are aimed at enhancing the amount of are aimed at enhancing the amount of acetylcholine that's available to acetylcholine that's available to acetylcholine that's available to neurons. And the primary source for neurons. And the primary source for neurons. And the primary source for dietary choline would be eggs and in dietary choline would be eggs and in dietary choline would be eggs and in particular egg yolks. particular egg yolks. particular egg yolks. Eggs are an incredibly rich source of Eggs are an incredibly rich source of Eggs are an incredibly rich source of nutrients for the brain. nutrients for the brain. nutrients for the brain. And that's because the egg actually, if And that's because the egg actually, if And that's because the egg actually, if you think about it, contains all the you think about it, contains all the you think about it, contains all the nutrients that are required in order for nutrients that are required in order for nutrients that are required in order for an organism an organism an organism to grow. So, if you're somebody who to grow. So, if you're somebody who to grow. So, if you're somebody who doesn't eat eggs or doesn't want to eat doesn't eat eggs or doesn't want to eat doesn't eat eggs or doesn't want to eat eggs, things like potatoes, nuts, and eggs, things like potatoes, nuts, and eggs, things like potatoes, nuts, and seeds, and grains, and fruit, they don't seeds, and grains, and fruit, they don't seeds, and grains, and fruit, they don't have as much choline as eggs, but they have as much choline as eggs, but they have as much choline as eggs, but they do contain cholines. In general, most do contain cholines. In general, most do contain cholines. In general, most people should probably strive to get people should probably strive to get people should probably strive to get somewhere between 500 mg and a gram of somewhere between 500 mg and a gram of somewhere between 500 mg and a gram of choline per day, so 1,000 mg. Next on my choline per day, so 1,000 mg. Next on my choline per day, so 1,000 mg. Next on my list of compounds that have been shown list of compounds that have been shown list of compounds that have been shown in peer-reviewed research to improve in peer-reviewed research to improve in peer-reviewed research to improve neuronal and brain function is creatine. neuronal and brain function is creatine. neuronal and brain function is creatine. Creatine can be derived from meat Creatine can be derived from meat Creatine can be derived from meat sources. It can also be supplemented. sources. It can also be supplemented. sources. It can also be supplemented. Creatine can actually be used as a fuel Creatine can actually be used as a fuel Creatine can actually be used as a fuel source in the brain. source in the brain. source in the brain. And it there's some evidence that it can it there's some evidence that it can it there's some evidence that it can enhance the function of certain frontal enhance the function of certain frontal enhance the function of certain frontal cortical circuits that feed down onto or cortical circuits that feed down onto or cortical circuits that feed down onto or rather connect to areas of the brain rather connect to areas of the brain rather connect to areas of the brain that are involved in mood regulation and that are involved in mood regulation and that are involved in mood regulation and motivation. What is the threshold level motivation. What is the threshold level motivation. What is the threshold level of creatine to supplement in order to of creatine to supplement in order to of creatine to supplement in order to get the cognitive benefit? Appears to be get the cognitive benefit? Appears to be get the cognitive benefit? Appears to be at least 5 g per day. Now, the most at least 5 g per day. Now, the most at least 5 g per day. Now, the most typical form of creatine is so-called typical form of creatine is so-called typical form of creatine is so-called creatine monohydrate. Think it's creatine monohydrate. Think it's creatine monohydrate. Think it's interesting that creatine interesting that creatine interesting that creatine supplementation of 5 g per day, that's supplementation of 5 g per day, that's supplementation of 5 g per day, that's creatine monohydrate, has been shown to creatine monohydrate, has been shown to creatine monohydrate, has been shown to improve cognition in people that aren't improve cognition in people that aren't improve cognition in people that aren't getting creatine from animal sources. getting creatine from animal sources. getting creatine from animal sources. So, I personally take creatine, 5 g per So, I personally take creatine, 5 g per So, I personally take creatine, 5 g per day, and have for a very long time. I day, and have for a very long time. I day, and have for a very long time. I can't say that I've noticed a tremendous can't say that I've noticed a tremendous can't say that I've noticed a tremendous benefit because I've actually never benefit because I've actually never benefit because I've actually never really come off it. And so I've never really come off it. And so I've never really come off it. And so I've never done the control experiment. I take it done the control experiment. I take it done the control experiment. I take it more as kind of a baseline insurance more as kind of a baseline insurance more as kind of a baseline insurance policy for me. But what I can say is policy for me. But what I can say is policy for me. But what I can say is that I generally consume these things like I generally consume these things like I generally consume these things like EPAs, creatine, EPAs, creatine, EPAs, creatine, alpha GPC to set a general context of alpha GPC to set a general context of alpha GPC to set a general context of support for my neurons, for my brain. support for my neurons, for my brain. support for my neurons, for my brain. And of course I do also pay attention to And of course I do also pay attention to And of course I do also pay attention to the foods that contain these various the foods that contain these various the foods that contain these various compounds. So I don't actively eat compounds. So I don't actively eat compounds. So I don't actively eat additional meat just to obtain creatine. additional meat just to obtain creatine. additional meat just to obtain creatine. I eat a fairly limited amount of meat. I eat a fairly limited amount of meat. I eat a fairly limited amount of meat. I don't restrict it, but I and I do eat don't restrict it, but I and I do eat don't restrict it, but I and I do eat meat. But meat. But meat. But I don't actively seek out creatine in my I don't actively seek out creatine in my I don't actively seek out creatine in my diet. Rather I use supplementation in diet. Rather I use supplementation in diet. Rather I use supplementation in order to hit that 5 g per day threshold. order to hit that 5 g per day threshold. order to hit that 5 g per day threshold. Next on the list of foods that are Next on the list of foods that are Next on the list of foods that are beneficial for brain health is one that beneficial for brain health is one that beneficial for brain health is one that you've probably seen pictures of online you've probably seen pictures of online you've probably seen pictures of online because there seems to be a practice of because there seems to be a practice of because there seems to be a practice of putting pictures of blueberries and putting pictures of blueberries and putting pictures of blueberries and other dark berries next to any title other dark berries next to any title other dark berries next to any title that says foods that benefit your brain. that says foods that benefit your brain. that says foods that benefit your brain. There are a lot of foods out there that There are a lot of foods out there that There are a lot of foods out there that have been purported to improve brain have been purported to improve brain have been purported to improve brain function. The interesting thing about blueberries The interesting thing about blueberries The interesting thing about blueberries and other berries, blackberries, and other berries, blackberries, and other berries, blackberries, dark currants, any of these thin-skinned dark currants, any of these thin-skinned dark currants, any of these thin-skinned berries that are purplish in color berries that are purplish in color berries that are purplish in color is that they contain what are called is that they contain what are called is that they contain what are called anthocyanins. Anthocyanins actually have some really Anthocyanins actually have some really Anthocyanins actually have some really nice data to support the fact that they nice data to support the fact that they nice data to support the fact that they improve brain function. Now whether or improve brain function. Now whether or improve brain function. Now whether or not it is not it is not it is direct effects on neurons or whether or direct effects on neurons or whether or direct effects on neurons or whether or not it is by lowering inflammation or not it is by lowering inflammation or not it is by lowering inflammation or some other modulatory effect isn't quite some other modulatory effect isn't quite some other modulatory effect isn't quite clear. But I think by now clear. But I think by now clear. But I think by now there's enough data to support the fact there's enough data to support the fact there's enough data to support the fact that eating a cup or two of blueberries that eating a cup or two of blueberries that eating a cup or two of blueberries pretty often every day or pretty often every day or pretty often every day or maybe you have blackberries or maybe you have blackberries or maybe you have blackberries or maybe it's black currants, that these it's black currants, that these it's black currants, that these anthocyanins are good for us. That anthocyanins are good for us. That anthocyanins are good for us. That they are enhancing our overall they are enhancing our overall they are enhancing our overall well-being at a number of different well-being at a number of different well-being at a number of different levels. So, we've got EPA fatty acids, levels. So, we've got EPA fatty acids, levels. So, we've got EPA fatty acids, we've got phosphatidylserine, we've got we've got phosphatidylserine, we've got we've got phosphatidylserine, we've got choline, we've got creatine, and we have choline, we've got creatine, and we have choline, we've got creatine, and we have the anthocyanins, and the anthocyanins, and the anthocyanins, and the last item that I'd like to place in this last item that I'd like to place in this last item that I'd like to place in this list of food-derived things that can list of food-derived things that can list of food-derived things that can enhance brain function enhance brain function enhance brain function is glutamine. Glutamine is a very is glutamine. Glutamine is a very is glutamine. Glutamine is a very interesting amino acid. I've talked interesting amino acid. I've talked interesting amino acid. I've talked about glutamine on here before. There's about glutamine on here before. There's about glutamine on here before. There's some evidence, although somewhat scant, some evidence, although somewhat scant, some evidence, although somewhat scant, there's some evidence that glutamine there's some evidence that glutamine there's some evidence that glutamine can enhance immune system function. So, can enhance immune system function. So, can enhance immune system function. So, people will supplement with glutamine, people will supplement with glutamine, people will supplement with glutamine, or people can get glutamine from foods. or people can get glutamine from foods. or people can get glutamine from foods. Foods that contain a lot of glutamine Foods that contain a lot of glutamine Foods that contain a lot of glutamine are things like cottage cheese. There are things like cottage cheese. There are things like cottage cheese. There are also other sources of glutamine. are also other sources of glutamine. are also other sources of glutamine. Glutamine is rich in protein-rich foods, Glutamine is rich in protein-rich foods, Glutamine is rich in protein-rich foods, things like beef, chicken, fish, dairy things like beef, chicken, fish, dairy things like beef, chicken, fish, dairy products, eggs, but also for you non um products, eggs, but also for you non um products, eggs, but also for you non um animal-food uh consuming people out animal-food uh consuming people out animal-food uh consuming people out there, um there, um there, um vegetables, including beans, cabbage vegetables, including beans, cabbage vegetables, including beans, cabbage once again, spinach, once again, spinach, once again, spinach, parsley, things of that sort. So, those parsley, things of that sort. So, those parsley, things of that sort. So, those foods contain glutamine. foods contain glutamine. foods contain glutamine. For people that supplement with For people that supplement with For people that supplement with glutamine, generally they will take glutamine, generally they will take glutamine, generally they will take anywhere from a gram as much as 10 g per anywhere from a gram as much as 10 g per anywhere from a gram as much as 10 g per day. Why would they want to do that? Well, Why would they want to do that? Well, Why would they want to do that? Well, there's also some evidence starting to there's also some evidence starting to there's also some evidence starting to emerge that glutamine can help offset emerge that glutamine can help offset emerge that glutamine can help offset sugar cravings. In brief, sugar cravings. In brief, sugar cravings. In brief, we all have neurons in our gut that we all have neurons in our gut that we all have neurons in our gut that sense the amino acid content, the fat sense the amino acid content, the fat sense the amino acid content, the fat content, and the sugar content of the content, and the sugar content of the content, and the sugar content of the foods that we eat, and signal in a foods that we eat, and signal in a foods that we eat, and signal in a subconscious way to our brain whether or subconscious way to our brain whether or subconscious way to our brain whether or not the foods that we're we are eating not the foods that we're we are eating not the foods that we're we are eating contain certain levels of certain amino acids. certain levels of certain amino acids. certain levels of certain amino acids. And so, we actually have And so, we actually have And so, we actually have glutamine-sensing neurons in our gut glutamine-sensing neurons in our gut glutamine-sensing neurons in our gut that actually have their little that actually have their little that actually have their little processes, their little um axons and processes, their little um axons and processes, their little um axons and dendrites, as we call them, in the dendrites, as we call them, in the dendrites, as we call them, in the mucosal lining of the gut. They're not mucosal lining of the gut. They're not mucosal lining of the gut. They're not just sensing glutamine, but when they do just sensing glutamine, but when they do just sensing glutamine, but when they do sense glutamine, they respond, and they sense glutamine, they respond, and they sense glutamine, they respond, and they send signals to the brain that are send signals to the brain that are send signals to the brain that are signals of satiation, of satisfaction, signals of satiation, of satisfaction, signals of satiation, of satisfaction, and in doing so can offset some of the and in doing so can offset some of the and in doing so can offset some of the sugar cravings that many people suffer sugar cravings that many people suffer sugar cravings that many people suffer from. So, that more or less completes from. So, that more or less completes from. So, that more or less completes the list of things that, at least by my the list of things that, at least by my the list of things that, at least by my read of the literature, read of the literature, read of the literature, are things that are supported by at are things that are supported by at are things that are supported by at least three and, in some cases, as many least three and, in some cases, as many least three and, in some cases, as many as hundreds of studies as hundreds of studies as hundreds of studies in various populations that have been in various populations that have been in various populations that have been explored in mouse studies, often, but explored in mouse studies, often, but explored in mouse studies, often, but also in a number of human studies. also in a number of human studies. also in a number of human studies. I want to emphasize again that all of I want to emphasize again that all of I want to emphasize again that all of the things I listed out, whether or not the things I listed out, whether or not the things I listed out, whether or not it's EPAs, whether or not it's EPAs, whether or not it's EPAs, whether or not it's phosphatidyl serine, whether or not it's phosphatidyl serine, whether or not it's phosphatidyl serine, whether or not it's choline, whether or not choline, whether or not choline, whether or not it's the various compounds that are in the various compounds that are in the various compounds that are in berries, etc., all of those can be berries, etc., all of those can be berries, etc., all of those can be extracted from food. There is not any extracted from food. There is not any extracted from food. There is not any law that says that you have to get them law that says that you have to get them law that says that you have to get them from supplementation. Supplementation from supplementation. Supplementation from supplementation. Supplementation can help you get to the very high levels can help you get to the very high levels can help you get to the very high levels of those things if you want to work on of those things if you want to work on of those things if you want to work on the higher end, if that's right for you. the higher end, if that's right for you. the higher end, if that's right for you. Obviously, check with your doctor before Obviously, check with your doctor before Obviously, check with your doctor before taking anything or removing anything taking anything or removing anything taking anything or removing anything from your diet or supplement regime. from your diet or supplement regime. from your diet or supplement regime. But, in general, in general, in general, you can get these things from foods. It you can get these things from foods. It you can get these things from foods. It just so happens that for some of these just so happens that for some of these just so happens that for some of these compounds, the foods that they're compounds, the foods that they're compounds, the foods that they're contained in, like fish, are not foods contained in, like fish, are not foods contained in, like fish, are not foods that I particularly enjoy. And so, I that I particularly enjoy. And so, I that I particularly enjoy. And so, I rely on Excuse me, I rely on supplements rely on Excuse me, I rely on supplements rely on Excuse me, I rely on supplements in order to get sufficient levels for in order to get sufficient levels for in order to get sufficient levels for me. But, again, you can get these levels me. But, again, you can get these levels me. But, again, you can get these levels from food. And the reason I made this from food. And the reason I made this from food. And the reason I made this list, the reason that I emphasize these things the reason that I emphasize these things the reason that I emphasize these things in this particular order is that in this particular order is that in this particular order is that they support the structure of neurons, they support the structure of neurons, they support the structure of neurons, they support the structure of the other they support the structure of the other they support the structure of the other cells of the brain that make up our cells of the brain that make up our cells of the brain that make up our cognition and that are important for our cognition and that are important for our cognition and that are important for our focus and our ability to remember things focus and our ability to remember things focus and our ability to remember things and so forth. And they are less so in and so forth. And they are less so in and so forth. And they are less so in the category of so-called modulatory the category of so-called modulatory the category of so-called modulatory effects. They will also have modulatory effects. They will also have modulatory effects. They will also have modulatory effects on sleep, on inflammation, or effects on sleep, on inflammation, or effects on sleep, on inflammation, or reducing inflammation throughout the reducing inflammation throughout the reducing inflammation throughout the body, on cardiovascular function, all of body, on cardiovascular function, all of body, on cardiovascular function, all of which, I believe, are positive which, I believe, are positive which, I believe, are positive effects. At least, what the literature effects. At least, what the literature effects. At least, what the literature tells us is that none of these compounds tells us is that none of these compounds tells us is that none of these compounds are harming other systems of the body, are harming other systems of the body, are harming other systems of the body, provided they are taken at reasonable provided they are taken at reasonable provided they are taken at reasonable levels. But, everything in this list is directed everything in this list is directed everything in this list is directed towards answering the question, "What can I eat? answering the question, "What can I eat? answering the question, "What can I eat? What can I ingest by way of food and or What can I ingest by way of food and or What can I ingest by way of food and or food supplement that can support brain food supplement that can support brain food supplement that can support brain function in the short-term and in the function in the short-term and in the function in the short-term and in the long-term?" So, I hope you find that long-term?" So, I hope you find that long-term?" So, I hope you find that list beneficial for you, if not for use, list beneficial for you, if not for use, list beneficial for you, if not for use, at least for consideration. So, now at least for consideration. So, now at least for consideration. So, now having talked about some of the foods having talked about some of the foods having talked about some of the foods and micronutrients that are beneficial and micronutrients that are beneficial and micronutrients that are beneficial to our immediate and long-term brain to our immediate and long-term brain to our immediate and long-term brain health, I'd like to shift gears somewhat and I'd like to shift gears somewhat and I'd like to shift gears somewhat and talk about why it is that we like the talk about why it is that we like the talk about why it is that we like the foods that we like. foods that we like. foods that we like. We've all heard before that we are We've all heard before that we are We've all heard before that we are hardwired to pursue sugar and to like hardwired to pursue sugar and to like hardwired to pursue sugar and to like fatty foods and that calorie-rich foods fatty foods and that calorie-rich foods fatty foods and that calorie-rich foods are attractive to us for all sorts of are attractive to us for all sorts of are attractive to us for all sorts of reasons, you know, surviving famines and reasons, you know, surviving famines and reasons, you know, surviving famines and things of that sort. things of that sort. things of that sort. And while that is true, And while that is true, And while that is true, the actual mechanisms that underlie the actual mechanisms that underlie the actual mechanisms that underlie food-seeking and food preference are far food-seeking and food preference are far food-seeking and food preference are far more interesting than that. There are more interesting than that. There are more interesting than that. There are basically three channels in our body and basically three channels in our body and basically three channels in our body and nervous system nervous system nervous system by which we decide what foods to pursue, by which we decide what foods to pursue, by which we decide what foods to pursue, how much to eat, and whether or not we how much to eat, and whether or not we how much to eat, and whether or not we will find a particular food will find a particular food will find a particular food attractive, whether or not we will want attractive, whether or not we will want attractive, whether or not we will want to consume more of it, to consume more of it, to consume more of it, whether or not we want to avoid it, or whether or not we want to avoid it, or whether or not we want to avoid it, or whether or not it's just sort of so-so, whether or not it's just sort of so-so, whether or not it's just sort of so-so, what I refer to as the yum, yuck, or meh what I refer to as the yum, yuck, or meh what I refer to as the yum, yuck, or meh analysis. And indeed, that's what our nervous And indeed, that's what our nervous And indeed, that's what our nervous system is doing with respect to food. system is doing with respect to food. system is doing with respect to food. So, let's talk about what these three So, let's talk about what these three So, let's talk about what these three channels for food preference are. channels for food preference are. channels for food preference are. The first one is an obvious one. It's The first one is an obvious one. It's The first one is an obvious one. It's taste on the mouth. It is the sensation taste on the mouth. It is the sensation taste on the mouth. It is the sensation that we have of the foods that we eat that we have of the foods that we eat that we have of the foods that we eat while we're chewing them, and those while we're chewing them, and those while we're chewing them, and those sensations, which are literally just sensations, which are literally just sensations, which are literally just somatosensory touch sensations, you somatosensory touch sensations, you somatosensory touch sensations, you know, the know, the know, the palatability of food as it relates the palatability of food as it relates the palatability of food as it relates to the consistency of food. to the consistency of food. to the consistency of food. That's important. And as you've all That's important. And as you've all That's important. And as you've all heard before, we have sensors on our heard before, we have sensors on our heard before, we have sensors on our tongue and elsewhere in our mouth that tongue and elsewhere in our mouth that tongue and elsewhere in our mouth that detect the various chemicals contained detect the various chemicals contained detect the various chemicals contained within food and lead to the senses of within food and lead to the senses of within food and lead to the senses of taste, which we call bitter, sweet, taste, which we call bitter, sweet, taste, which we call bitter, sweet, umami, salty, and sour. The umami umami, salty, and sour. The umami umami, salty, and sour. The umami receptor is a receptor that responds to the is a receptor that responds to the is a receptor that responds to the savory taste of things. So, that's savory taste of things. So, that's savory taste of things. So, that's uh what you might find in a really uh what you might find in a really uh what you might find in a really wonderfully rich tomato sauce. For those wonderfully rich tomato sauce. For those wonderfully rich tomato sauce. For those of you that eat meat and like meat, um a of you that eat meat and like meat, um a of you that eat meat and like meat, um a really well-cooked, not necessarily really well-cooked, not necessarily really well-cooked, not necessarily well-done, but properly cooked, I should well-done, but properly cooked, I should well-done, but properly cooked, I should say, steak, uh if that's your thing. And say, steak, uh if that's your thing. And say, steak, uh if that's your thing. And umami is present in both plant and umami is present in both plant and umami is present in both plant and animal foods and gives us that sensation animal foods and gives us that sensation animal foods and gives us that sensation of savoriness. So, we have those five of savoriness. So, we have those five of savoriness. So, we have those five basic tastes. Those are chemical sensors basic tastes. Those are chemical sensors basic tastes. Those are chemical sensors on the tongue that what we call on the tongue that what we call on the tongue that what we call transduce those chemicals. Those transduce those chemicals. Those transduce those chemicals. Those chemicals literally in food bind to chemicals literally in food bind to chemicals literally in food bind to those receptors and it is transduced, those receptors and it is transduced, those receptors and it is transduced, meaning the binding of those chemicals meaning the binding of those chemicals meaning the binding of those chemicals to the receptors is converted into an to the receptors is converted into an to the receptors is converted into an electrical signal that travels in from electrical signal that travels in from electrical signal that travels in from the tongue along what's called the tongue along what's called the tongue along what's called the gustatory nerve, then synapses, meaning gustatory nerve, then synapses, meaning gustatory nerve, then synapses, meaning it makes connections in our meaning it makes connections in our meaning it makes connections in our brainstem, in the so-called nucleus of the solitary in the so-called nucleus of the solitary in the so-called nucleus of the solitary tract. There are other nuclei back tract. There are other nuclei back tract. There are other nuclei back there. Nuclei are just aggregates of there. Nuclei are just aggregates of there. Nuclei are just aggregates of neurons. And then it sends information neurons. And then it sends information neurons. And then it sends information up to the so-called insular cortex. The up to the so-called insular cortex. The up to the so-called insular cortex. The insular cortex is a insular cortex is a insular cortex is a incredible structure that we all have incredible structure that we all have incredible structure that we all have that mainly is concerned with so-called that mainly is concerned with so-called that mainly is concerned with so-called interoception, or our perception of interoception, or our perception of interoception, or our perception of what's going on inside our body. So, it what's going on inside our body. So, it what's going on inside our body. So, it could be the amount of pressure in our could be the amount of pressure in our could be the amount of pressure in our gut because of how much food we've gut because of how much food we've gut because of how much food we've eaten. It could be the acidity of our eaten. It could be the acidity of our eaten. It could be the acidity of our gut if we're having a little bit of gut if we're having a little bit of gut if we're having a little bit of indigestion, for instance. And not indigestion, for instance. And not indigestion, for instance. And not surprisingly, the taste system sends surprisingly, the taste system sends surprisingly, the taste system sends information up to the insular cortex to information up to the insular cortex to information up to the insular cortex to give us a sense, literally, give us a sense, literally, give us a sense, literally, of what we've ingested, whether or not what we've ingested, whether or not what we've ingested, whether or not what we're tasting tastes good or not. What we're tasting tastes good or not. What we're tasting tastes good or not. What this means is that your perception of this means is that your perception of this means is that your perception of what you like is a central, meaning what you like is a central, meaning what you like is a central, meaning within deep within the brain, within deep within the brain, within deep within the brain, phenomenon. It's not about how things phenomenon. It's not about how things phenomenon. It's not about how things taste on your mouth. But as we'll see in taste on your mouth. But as we'll see in taste on your mouth. But as we'll see in a few minutes, a few minutes, a few minutes, turns out that is not a direct turns out that is not a direct turns out that is not a direct relationship that is hardwired. You can relationship that is hardwired. You can relationship that is hardwired. You can actually uncouple the preference for actually uncouple the preference for actually uncouple the preference for particular tastes with the reward particular tastes with the reward particular tastes with the reward systems in the brain. It's actually systems in the brain. It's actually systems in the brain. It's actually possible to rewire one's sense of taste possible to rewire one's sense of taste possible to rewire one's sense of taste and preference for particular foods. But and preference for particular foods. But and preference for particular foods. But the most important thing to understand the most important thing to understand the most important thing to understand is that is that is that like with our hearing, like with vision, like with our hearing, like with vision, like with our hearing, like with vision, like with smell, like with smell, like with smell, taste is an internal representation taste is an internal representation taste is an internal representation that has particular goals for you. that has particular goals for you. that has particular goals for you. Your sense of what tastes good is Your sense of what tastes good is Your sense of what tastes good is related to particular things that are related to particular things that are related to particular things that are occurring in your brain and body and occurring in your brain and body and occurring in your brain and body and that are likely to give your brain and that are likely to give your brain and that are likely to give your brain and body the things that it needs. body the things that it needs. body the things that it needs. It is not simply a matter of what you It is not simply a matter of what you It is not simply a matter of what you {quote} like or what tastes good or what {quote} like or what tastes good or what {quote} like or what tastes good or what doesn't taste good. Let me give you a doesn't taste good. Let me give you a doesn't taste good. Let me give you a relatively simple example relatively simple example relatively simple example of how your body and your brain are of how your body and your brain are of how your body and your brain are acting in a coordinated way to make you acting in a coordinated way to make you acting in a coordinated way to make you prefer certain foods and indeed to prefer certain foods and indeed to prefer certain foods and indeed to pursue certain foods more. pursue certain foods more. pursue certain foods more. So I just mentioned you have neurons on So I just mentioned you have neurons on So I just mentioned you have neurons on your tongue that respond to different your tongue that respond to different your tongue that respond to different tastes. But of course your digestive tastes. But of course your digestive tastes. But of course your digestive tract isn't just your tongue, it's also tract isn't just your tongue, it's also tract isn't just your tongue, it's also your throat. Goes all the way down to your throat. Goes all the way down to your throat. Goes all the way down to your stomach and of course your stomach and of course your stomach and of course your intestines. Here's a long tube of digestion. Here's a long tube of digestion. Here's a long tube of digestion. All along that tube there are neurons. All along that tube there are neurons. All along that tube there are neurons. Some of the neurons are responding to Some of the neurons are responding to Some of the neurons are responding to the mechanical size of the mechanical size of the mechanical size of whatever portion of the digestive tract whatever portion of the digestive tract whatever portion of the digestive tract it happens to be. So for instance, how it happens to be. So for instance, how it happens to be. So for instance, how distended or empty or full rather, it distended or empty or full rather, it distended or empty or full rather, it doesn't have to be distended. How doesn't have to be distended. How doesn't have to be distended. How depends on how much you ate, but how depends on how much you ate, but how depends on how much you ate, but how full or empty your gut happens to be. full or empty your gut happens to be. full or empty your gut happens to be. Whether or not something you just ate is Whether or not something you just ate is Whether or not something you just ate is temperature hot, you know, is hot in the temperature hot, you know, is hot in the temperature hot, you know, is hot in the sense of hot to the touch or whether or sense of hot to the touch or whether or sense of hot to the touch or whether or not it's spicy hot, whether or not it's not it's spicy hot, whether or not it's not it's spicy hot, whether or not it's soothing, whether or not it's soothing, whether or not it's soothing, whether or not it's kind of hard to swallow, this kind of kind of hard to swallow, this kind of kind of hard to swallow, this kind of thing. So, you have neurons all along thing. So, you have neurons all along thing. So, you have neurons all along your gut that are responding to the your gut that are responding to the your gut that are responding to the mechanics related to food and digestion, mechanics related to food and digestion, mechanics related to food and digestion, and that are related to the chemistry of and that are related to the chemistry of and that are related to the chemistry of food and digestion. food and digestion. food and digestion. There's a population of neurons, nerve There's a population of neurons, nerve There's a population of neurons, nerve cells, in your gut that are exquisitely cells, in your gut that are exquisitely cells, in your gut that are exquisitely tuned to the chemistry of whatever it is tuned to the chemistry of whatever it is tuned to the chemistry of whatever it is in your gut. in your gut. in your gut. And these are neurons called neuropod And these are neurons called neuropod And these are neurons called neuropod cells. They respond to cells. They respond to cells. They respond to amino acids, sugars, amino acids, sugars, amino acids, sugars, and fatty acids. and fatty acids. and fatty acids. So, as your food is digested, as food So, as your food is digested, as food So, as your food is digested, as food lands within your gut, neurons there are lands within your gut, neurons there are lands within your gut, neurons there are sensing what types of foods are sensing what types of foods are sensing what types of foods are available, and what types of things are available, and what types of things are available, and what types of things are making their way through the gut making their way through the gut making their way through the gut environment. And these particular environment. And these particular environment. And these particular neurons send electrical signals up into neurons send electrical signals up into neurons send electrical signals up into the brain the brain the brain through a little passage that we call through a little passage that we call through a little passage that we call the nodose ganglion. The nodose ganglion the nodose ganglion. The nodose ganglion the nodose ganglion. The nodose ganglion is a cluster of neurons that then go is a cluster of neurons that then go is a cluster of neurons that then go for send up their own processes into the for send up their own processes into the for send up their own processes into the brain and trigger the release of brain and trigger the release of brain and trigger the release of dopamine, which is a molecule that dopamine, which is a molecule that dopamine, which is a molecule that inspires motivation, reward, and more inspires motivation, reward, and more inspires motivation, reward, and more seeking for whatever it is led to their seeking for whatever it is led to their seeking for whatever it is led to their activation. These are super interesting neurons, These are super interesting neurons, These are super interesting neurons, because what they're essentially doing because what they're essentially doing because what they're essentially doing is they are providing a subconscious is they are providing a subconscious is they are providing a subconscious signal about the quality of the food signal about the quality of the food signal about the quality of the food that you're eating, what it contains, that you're eating, what it contains, that you're eating, what it contains, and then triggering the release of a and then triggering the release of a and then triggering the release of a molecule within your brain, dopamine, molecule within your brain, dopamine, molecule within your brain, dopamine, that leads you to go seek more of those that leads you to go seek more of those that leads you to go seek more of those foods. So, now I've mentioned two of the three So, now I've mentioned two of the three So, now I've mentioned two of the three mechanisms by which we prefer certain mechanisms by which we prefer certain mechanisms by which we prefer certain foods. One is from the actual taste that foods. One is from the actual taste that foods. One is from the actual taste that we're familiar with, the taste on our we're familiar with, the taste on our we're familiar with, the taste on our tongue and in our mouth, and the tongue and in our mouth, and the tongue and in our mouth, and the sensations that make us go sensations that make us go sensations that make us go or uh or uh or uh the yum yuck meh responses as I referred the yum yuck meh responses as I referred the yum yuck meh responses as I referred to them earlier. And then there's this to them earlier. And then there's this to them earlier. And then there's this subconscious signaling coming from the subconscious signaling coming from the subconscious signaling coming from the gut that's really based on the nutrient gut that's really based on the nutrient gut that's really based on the nutrient content of the foods. There's a third pathway, There's a third pathway, There's a third pathway, which is the learned association which is the learned association which is the learned association of a particular taste with the of a particular taste with the of a particular taste with the particular quality or value that a food has. And quality or value that a food has. And quality or value that a food has. And this is where things get really this is where things get really this is where things get really interesting and where there's actually a interesting and where there's actually a interesting and where there's actually a leverage point for you to rewire leverage point for you to rewire leverage point for you to rewire what it is that you find tasty and that what it is that you find tasty and that what it is that you find tasty and that you want to seek more of. We are driven, you want to seek more of. We are driven, you want to seek more of. We are driven, meaning we have mechanisms in our brain meaning we have mechanisms in our brain meaning we have mechanisms in our brain that make us motivated to pursue more of that make us motivated to pursue more of that make us motivated to pursue more of what brings both a taste of sweetness, what brings both a taste of sweetness, what brings both a taste of sweetness, but also that brings actual changes in but also that brings actual changes in but also that brings actual changes in blood glucose levels up. Okay, so we are blood glucose levels up. Okay, so we are blood glucose levels up. Okay, so we are motivated to eat sweet things not just motivated to eat sweet things not just motivated to eat sweet things not just because they taste good, but because they taste good, but because they taste good, but because they change our blood sugar level. They they change our blood sugar level. They they change our blood sugar level. They increase our blood sugar level. What increase our blood sugar level. What increase our blood sugar level. What your brain, meaning what you are seeking your brain, meaning what you are seeking your brain, meaning what you are seeking when you eat is not taste, is not when you eat is not taste, is not when you eat is not taste, is not dopamine, is not even a rise in blood glucose. is not even a rise in blood glucose. is not even a rise in blood glucose. What you're seeking, even though you What you're seeking, even though you What you're seeking, even though you don't realize it because it's don't realize it because it's don't realize it because it's subconscious, is you are seeking things that allow is you are seeking things that allow is you are seeking things that allow your neurons to be metabolically active. your neurons to be metabolically active. your neurons to be metabolically active. And this is fundamentally important for And this is fundamentally important for And this is fundamentally important for understanding why you eat, why you eat understanding why you eat, why you eat understanding why you eat, why you eat particular foods, particular foods, particular foods, and how you can change your relationship and how you can change your relationship and how you can change your relationship to those foods. Now, earlier I referred to those foods. Now, earlier I referred to those foods. Now, earlier I referred to these circuits as wired to do to these circuits as wired to do to these circuits as wired to do something. And in biology and in particular And in biology and in particular And in biology and in particular neuroscience, we talk about something neuroscience, we talk about something neuroscience, we talk about something being hardwired or soft-wired. Hardwired being hardwired or soft-wired. Hardwired being hardwired or soft-wired. Hardwired meaning that it's there and it's meaning that it's there and it's meaning that it's there and it's immutable, it cannot be changed. immutable, it cannot be changed. immutable, it cannot be changed. Soft-wired meaning it's very amenable to Soft-wired meaning it's very amenable to Soft-wired meaning it's very amenable to change. The taste system and this change. The taste system and this change. The taste system and this general system of seeking particular general system of seeking particular general system of seeking particular foods, similarly, is hardwired to obtain foods, similarly, is hardwired to obtain foods, similarly, is hardwired to obtain certain types of nutrients. It tends to certain types of nutrients. It tends to certain types of nutrients. It tends to like sweet things. Most children like sweet things. Most children like sweet things. Most children naturally like sweet things, some more naturally like sweet things, some more naturally like sweet things, some more than others. So, there's some hardwiring than others. So, there's some hardwiring than others. So, there's some hardwiring of preference, but there's also some of preference, but there's also some of preference, but there's also some soft-wiring in the system that allows it soft-wiring in the system that allows it soft-wiring in the system that allows it to change. to change. to change. So, the experiments that were done So, the experiments that were done So, the experiments that were done that beautifully illustrate that you that beautifully illustrate that you that beautifully illustrate that you seek out particular foods because of the seek out particular foods because of the seek out particular foods because of the way they taste, because of their impact way they taste, because of their impact way they taste, because of their impact on blood glucose levels, but also on blood glucose levels, but also on blood glucose levels, but also on their impact on the dopamine system, on their impact on the dopamine system, on their impact on the dopamine system, even if your blood glucose levels don't even if your blood glucose levels don't even if your blood glucose levels don't change. So, here's the experiment. change. So, here's the experiment. change. So, here's the experiment. One group of subjects is given a sweet One group of subjects is given a sweet One group of subjects is given a sweet taste of a substance that also raises taste of a substance that also raises taste of a substance that also raises blood glucose levels, blood sugar, and blood glucose levels, blood sugar, and blood glucose levels, blood sugar, and dopamine goes up, not surprisingly. dopamine goes up, not surprisingly. dopamine goes up, not surprisingly. Second condition, separate subjects Second condition, separate subjects Second condition, separate subjects consume an artificial sweetener or a consume an artificial sweetener or a consume an artificial sweetener or a non-caloric sweetener. It is not non-caloric sweetener. It is not non-caloric sweetener. It is not preferred much over other substances, preferred much over other substances, preferred much over other substances, but it is sweet, so it's preferred but it is sweet, so it's preferred but it is sweet, so it's preferred somewhat, and it does not cause an somewhat, and it does not cause an somewhat, and it does not cause an increase in blood glucose levels. increase in blood glucose levels. increase in blood glucose levels. And not surprisingly, dopamine levels And not surprisingly, dopamine levels And not surprisingly, dopamine levels don't go up. don't go up. don't go up. So, initially, we don't tend to like So, initially, we don't tend to like So, initially, we don't tend to like artificial sweeteners that much. artificial sweeteners that much. artificial sweeteners that much. However, if subjects continue to ingest However, if subjects continue to ingest However, if subjects continue to ingest artificial sweeteners, artificial sweeteners, artificial sweeteners, even though there's no increase in blood even though there's no increase in blood even though there's no increase in blood glucose level and therefore no increase glucose level and therefore no increase glucose level and therefore no increase in brain metabolism, in brain metabolism, in brain metabolism, dopamine levels eventually start to dopamine levels eventually start to dopamine levels eventually start to rise. And when those dopamine levels And when those dopamine levels And when those dopamine levels eventually start to rise, you've eventually start to rise, you've eventually start to rise, you've essentially conditioned or reinforced essentially conditioned or reinforced essentially conditioned or reinforced that artificial or non-caloric sweetener, and artificial or non-caloric sweetener, and artificial or non-caloric sweetener, and then subjects start to consume more of then subjects start to consume more of then subjects start to consume more of it and they actually get a dopamine it and they actually get a dopamine it and they actually get a dopamine increase from it. increase from it. increase from it. So, that's interesting. It says that So, that's interesting. It says that So, that's interesting. It says that consuming more of these artificial consuming more of these artificial consuming more of these artificial sweeteners can start to tap into the sweeteners can start to tap into the sweeteners can start to tap into the dopamine system and lead us to seek out dopamine system and lead us to seek out dopamine system and lead us to seek out or consume more of these artificial or consume more of these artificial or consume more of these artificial sweeteners. Now, there's another sweeteners. Now, there's another sweeteners. Now, there's another condition that's been explored, condition that's been explored, condition that's been explored, and that's the really interesting and that's the really interesting and that's the really interesting condition, and it's the condition where condition, and it's the condition where condition, and it's the condition where an artificial sweetener is paired with a an artificial sweetener is paired with a an artificial sweetener is paired with a substance that can increase blood sugar, substance that can increase blood sugar, substance that can increase blood sugar, but not because it tastes sugary like a but not because it tastes sugary like a but not because it tastes sugary like a normal sweet substance. The natural normal sweet substance. The natural normal sweet substance. The natural world scenario where this would happen world scenario where this would happen world scenario where this would happen would be drinking a diet soda, which would be drinking a diet soda, which would be drinking a diet soda, which contains no calories and therefore would contains no calories and therefore would contains no calories and therefore would not increase blood glucose, but is not increase blood glucose, but is not increase blood glucose, but is sweet, with a food that increases blood sweet, with a food that increases blood sweet, with a food that increases blood glucose. And when that happens, And when that happens, And when that happens, what you're essentially doing is tapping what you're essentially doing is tapping what you're essentially doing is tapping into the dopamine system. This into the dopamine system. This into the dopamine system. This non-caloric sweet that sweet taste is non-caloric sweet that sweet taste is non-caloric sweet that sweet taste is paired with it, paired with it, paired with it, and there's an increase in neuron and there's an increase in neuron and there's an increase in neuron metabolism. So, you have all of the components for So, you have all of the components for So, you have all of the components for reinforcement, and as a consequence, reinforcement, and as a consequence, reinforcement, and as a consequence, you get in a sort of Pavlovian you get in a sort of Pavlovian you get in a sort of Pavlovian conditioning way conditioning way conditioning way a situation where later, when you ingest a situation where later, when you ingest a situation where later, when you ingest that artificial sweetener, that artificial sweetener, that artificial sweetener, you actually get not only the increase you actually get not only the increase you actually get not only the increase in dopamine, but you get alterations in dopamine, but you get alterations in dopamine, but you get alterations in blood sugar management. I'll make this blood sugar management. I'll make this blood sugar management. I'll make this in the natural world context. If you in the natural world context. If you in the natural world context. If you ingest an artificial sweetener, say ingest an artificial sweetener, say ingest an artificial sweetener, say drink diet soda while consuming foods drink diet soda while consuming foods drink diet soda while consuming foods that increase blood glucose, that increase blood glucose, that increase blood glucose, then later, even if you just drink the diet later, even if you just drink the diet later, even if you just drink the diet soda, it's been shown that it's been shown that it's been shown that you secrete much more insulin, the you secrete much more insulin, the you secrete much more insulin, the hormone that regulates blood glucose, in hormone that regulates blood glucose, in hormone that regulates blood glucose, in response to that diet soda. response to that diet soda. response to that diet soda. And the simple extractor tool from this And the simple extractor tool from this And the simple extractor tool from this is if you're going to consume artificial is if you're going to consume artificial is if you're going to consume artificial sweeteners, it's very likely best to consume those away very likely best to consume those away very likely best to consume those away from any food that raises blood glucose from any food that raises blood glucose from any food that raises blood glucose levels. So, if you're going to enjoy levels. So, if you're going to enjoy levels. So, if you're going to enjoy diet soda, be my guest, diet soda, be my guest, diet soda, be my guest, but do it while not while consuming but do it while not while consuming but do it while not while consuming food. In particular, foods that raise food. In particular, foods that raise food. In particular, foods that raise blood glucose because what these studies blood glucose because what these studies blood glucose because what these studies show is that they can disrupt blood show is that they can disrupt blood show is that they can disrupt blood sugar management by way of the insulin sugar management by way of the insulin sugar management by way of the insulin glucose system. Studies by my colleague glucose system. Studies by my colleague glucose system. Studies by my colleague Alia Crum in the psychology department Alia Crum in the psychology department Alia Crum in the psychology department at Stanford have explored at Stanford have explored at Stanford have explored the bodily response in terms of insulin the bodily response in terms of insulin the bodily response in terms of insulin release and the release of other food release and the release of other food release and the release of other food and eating-related hormones, and eating-related hormones, and eating-related hormones, as well as overall feelings of as well as overall feelings of as well as overall feelings of satisfaction, etc., satisfaction, etc., satisfaction, etc., in groups of people that in groups of people that in groups of people that drink a milkshake drink a milkshake drink a milkshake and are either told that it's a and are either told that it's a and are either told that it's a low-calorie shake that contains uh low-calorie shake that contains uh low-calorie shake that contains uh various nutrients that are good for them various nutrients that are good for them various nutrients that are good for them or a higher calorie shake that has a lot or a higher calorie shake that has a lot or a higher calorie shake that has a lot of nutrients, etc. of nutrients, etc. of nutrients, etc. And what they found was that the And what they found was that the And what they found was that the different groups, and here again I'm different groups, and here again I'm different groups, and here again I'm being very general with my description being very general with my description being very general with my description of these studies, but what they found is of these studies, but what they found is of these studies, but what they found is that the physiological response, the that the physiological response, the that the physiological response, the insulin response, the blood glucose insulin response, the blood glucose insulin response, the blood glucose response, and the subjective measures of response, and the subjective measures of response, and the subjective measures of whether or not people enjoyed something whether or not people enjoyed something whether or not people enjoyed something or not or not or not were heavily influenced by what they were heavily influenced by what they were heavily influenced by what they were told were in these milkshakes. So, were told were in these milkshakes. So, were told were in these milkshakes. So, blood glucose would go up, insulin would blood glucose would go up, insulin would blood glucose would go up, insulin would go up when people were told it was a go up when people were told it was a go up when people were told it was a high-calorie shake with lots of high-calorie shake with lots of high-calorie shake with lots of nutrients, less so when people ingested nutrients, less so when people ingested nutrients, less so when people ingested a shake that was uh you know, that they a shake that was uh you know, that they a shake that was uh you know, that they were told had less nutrients and so were told had less nutrients and so were told had less nutrients and so forth. When in reality, it was the forth. When in reality, it was the forth. When in reality, it was the identical shake. identical shake. identical shake. This is incredible. This is a belief This is incredible. This is a belief This is incredible. This is a belief effect. This is not placebo, right? A effect. This is not placebo, right? A effect. This is not placebo, right? A placebo effect is different. Placebo placebo effect is different. Placebo placebo effect is different. Placebo effect is in comparison, it's where the effect is in comparison, it's where the effect is in comparison, it's where the control condition actually control condition actually control condition actually influences outcomes influences outcomes influences outcomes to a same or to some degree just like to a same or to some degree just like to a same or to some degree just like the experimental condition. This is a the experimental condition. This is a the experimental condition. This is a belief effect where the belief and the belief effect where the belief and the belief effect where the belief and the subjective thoughts about what a given subjective thoughts about what a given subjective thoughts about what a given food will do has a direct impact on a food will do has a direct impact on a food will do has a direct impact on a physiological measure like blood sugar physiological measure like blood sugar physiological measure like blood sugar and blood glucose. Okay. So, let's zoom and blood glucose. Okay. So, let's zoom and blood glucose. Okay. So, let's zoom out from this for a second and think out from this for a second and think out from this for a second and think about how we can incorporate this into about how we can incorporate this into about how we can incorporate this into adopting consumption of healthy foods adopting consumption of healthy foods adopting consumption of healthy foods that serve our brain health in the that serve our brain health in the that serve our brain health in the immediate and long term. What this means immediate and long term. What this means immediate and long term. What this means is obviously you want to consume foods is obviously you want to consume foods is obviously you want to consume foods that you like, but because brain health that you like, but because brain health that you like, but because brain health is very important and many of the foods is very important and many of the foods is very important and many of the foods that promote brain health that promote brain health that promote brain health perhaps are not the most palatable to perhaps are not the most palatable to perhaps are not the most palatable to you or desirable to you. If you want to you or desirable to you. If you want to you or desirable to you. If you want to eat more of a particular food because eat more of a particular food because eat more of a particular food because it's good for you, pair it with that it's good for you, pair it with that it's good for you, pair it with that other food that provides you a shift in other food that provides you a shift in other food that provides you a shift in brain metabolism, because that's really brain metabolism, because that's really brain metabolism, because that's really what your brain and you are seeking even what your brain and you are seeking even what your brain and you are seeking even though you don't realize it. How long though you don't realize it. How long though you don't realize it. How long will this take? Well, the data really will this take? Well, the data really will this take? Well, the data really point to the fact that even within a point to the fact that even within a point to the fact that even within a short period of time of about 7 days, short period of time of about 7 days, short period of time of about 7 days, but certainly within 14 days, that food but certainly within 14 days, that food but certainly within 14 days, that food will take on a subjective experience of will take on a subjective experience of will take on a subjective experience of tasting at least better to you if not tasting at least better to you if not tasting at least better to you if not good to you. Now, I believe this has good to you. Now, I believe this has good to you. Now, I believe this has important implications for much of the important implications for much of the important implications for much of the controversy and food wars that we see controversy and food wars that we see controversy and food wars that we see out there. out there. out there. Food wars being of course Food wars being of course Food wars being of course these groups that ardently these groups that ardently these groups that ardently subscribe to the idea that their diet subscribe to the idea that their diet subscribe to the idea that their diet and the things that they are eating are and the things that they are eating are and the things that they are eating are the foods that are good for us and that the foods that are good for us and that the foods that are good for us and that are the most pleasurable and the things are the most pleasurable and the things are the most pleasurable and the things that everyone should be eating. that everyone should be eating. that everyone should be eating. We see this with We see this with We see this with every community within the nutrition every community within the nutrition every community within the nutrition realm. What's very clear, however, is realm. What's very clear, however, is realm. What's very clear, however, is that what we consume on a regular basis that what we consume on a regular basis that what we consume on a regular basis and what leads to increases in brain and what leads to increases in brain and what leads to increases in brain metabolism, leads to increases in dopamine and leads to increases in dopamine and leads to increases in dopamine and thereby our motivation to eat them. thereby our motivation to eat them. thereby our motivation to eat them. So, what this really says is that what So, what this really says is that what So, what this really says is that what we tend to do regularly becomes we tend to do regularly becomes we tend to do regularly becomes reinforcing in and of itself and I think reinforcing in and of itself and I think reinforcing in and of itself and I think in large part can explain the fact that, in large part can explain the fact that, in large part can explain the fact that, yes, indeed, for certain people a given yes, indeed, for certain people a given yes, indeed, for certain people a given diet not only feels good, but they diet not only feels good, but they diet not only feels good, but they heavily subscribe to the nutrient and heavily subscribe to the nutrient and heavily subscribe to the nutrient and kind of health beneficial effects of kind of health beneficial effects of kind of health beneficial effects of that diet. that diet. that diet. What this emphasizes is that foods What this emphasizes is that foods What this emphasizes is that foods impact our brain and its health, but impact our brain and its health, but impact our brain and its health, but that they also impact that they also impact that they also impact how our brain functions and responds to how our brain functions and responds to how our brain functions and responds to food. And that is largely a learned food. And that is largely a learned food. And that is largely a learned response. We can't completely override, response. We can't completely override, response. We can't completely override, for instance, that certain foods evoke a for instance, that certain foods evoke a for instance, that certain foods evoke a strong yuck component. Certain foods are truly yuck component. Certain foods are truly yuck component. Certain foods are truly putrid to us, but it's also true that if putrid to us, but it's also true that if putrid to us, but it's also true that if we continue to eat foods that are we continue to eat foods that are we continue to eat foods that are progressively sweeter and sweeter and progressively sweeter and sweeter and progressively sweeter and sweeter and highly palatable, highly palatable, highly palatable, it shifts our dopamine system because it shifts our dopamine system because it shifts our dopamine system because it activates our dopamine system to make us activates our dopamine system to make us activates our dopamine system to make us believe that those foods are the only believe that those foods are the only believe that those foods are the only foods that can trigger this reward foods that can trigger this reward foods that can trigger this reward system and make us feel good and taste system and make us feel good and taste system and make us feel good and taste and that they taste good. But after and that they taste good. But after and that they taste good. But after consuming foods that perhaps are less consuming foods that perhaps are less consuming foods that perhaps are less sweet or even less savory that are not sweet or even less savory that are not sweet or even less savory that are not what we would call highly or I would say what we would call highly or I would say what we would call highly or I would say nowadays it's super palatable foods, we nowadays it's super palatable foods, we nowadays it's super palatable foods, we can adjust can adjust can adjust our sense, literally, of what we our sense, literally, of what we our sense, literally, of what we perceive as an attractive and rewarding perceive as an attractive and rewarding perceive as an attractive and rewarding food. And indeed the dopamine system food. And indeed the dopamine system food. And indeed the dopamine system will reward those foods accordingly. Put will reward those foods accordingly. Put will reward those foods accordingly. Put simply, we don't just like sweet foods simply, we don't just like sweet foods simply, we don't just like sweet foods because they taste good. We like them because they taste good. We like them because they taste good. We like them because they predict a certain kind of because they predict a certain kind of because they predict a certain kind of metabolic response. metabolic response. metabolic response. If you want to learn If you want to learn If you want to learn more about food reward more about food reward more about food reward and food reinforcement, cuz it turns out and food reinforcement, cuz it turns out and food reinforcement, cuz it turns out those are slightly different things, those are slightly different things, those are slightly different things, there's a wonderful review written by there's a wonderful review written by there's a wonderful review written by Ivan de Araujo, they have a middle Ivan de Araujo, they have a middle Ivan de Araujo, they have a middle author Mark Shaker, and Dana Small. It's author Mark Shaker, and Dana Small. It's author Mark Shaker, and Dana Small. It's called Rethinking Food Reward and it was called Rethinking Food Reward and it was called Rethinking Food Reward and it was published in the Annual Reviews of published in the Annual Reviews of published in the Annual Reviews of Psychology. You can find it very easily online. It You can find it very easily online. It You can find it very easily online. It was published in 2019. And it's a was published in 2019. And it's a was published in 2019. And it's a beautiful deep dive, although quite beautiful deep dive, although quite beautiful deep dive, although quite accessible to most people, about how accessible to most people, about how accessible to most people, about how different foods and the way that we different foods and the way that we different foods and the way that we perceive them perceive them perceive them impacts our brain and body and why we impacts our brain and body and why we impacts our brain and body and why we like the things we like and how to like the things we like and how to like the things we like and how to reshape what we like. So once again, reshape what we like. So once again, reshape what we like. So once again, we've done a fairly extensive deep dive we've done a fairly extensive deep dive we've done a fairly extensive deep dive into food and your brain. Came up with a into food and your brain. Came up with a into food and your brain. Came up with a relatively short list of what I would relatively short list of what I would relatively short list of what I would call superfoods. And we also talked call superfoods. And we also talked call superfoods. And we also talked about food preference and why particular about food preference and why particular about food preference and why particular tastes and particular events within the tastes and particular events within the tastes and particular events within the gut and particular events within the gut and particular events within the gut and particular events within the brain combine to lead us to pursue brain combine to lead us to pursue brain combine to lead us to pursue particular foods and to avoid other particular foods and to avoid other particular foods and to avoid other foods and how you can leverage those foods and how you can leverage those foods and how you can leverage those pathways in order to pursue more of the pathways in order to pursue more of the pathways in order to pursue more of the foods that are going to be good for you foods that are going to be good for you foods that are going to be good for you and good not just for your brain, but and good not just for your brain, but and good not just for your brain, but for your overall body health and to for your overall body health and to for your overall body health and to enjoy them along the way.