Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an ask-me-anything episode, or AMA. This is ask-me-anything episode, or AMA. This is ask-me-anything episode, or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber channel. part of our premium subscriber channel. part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel was Our premium subscriber channel was Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support for started in order to provide support for started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which comes out every Monday and is available comes out every Monday and is available comes out every Monday and is available at zero cost to everybody on all at zero cost to everybody on all at zero cost to everybody on all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started the and elsewhere. We also started the and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate premium channel as a way to generate premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm physical health, and performance. I'm physical health, and performance. I'm also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match that amount. So, now we are able to that amount. So, now we are able to that amount. So, now we are able to double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical health, and human performance. If you'd health, and human performance. If you'd health, and human performance. If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, please go to podcast premium channel, please go to podcast premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one-time payment, and model that is a one-time payment, and model that is a one-time payment, and again, you can find that option at again, you can find that option at again, you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already For those of you that are already For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not Huberman Lab podcast premium Huberman Lab podcast premium Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. Without premium subscriber is for you. Without premium subscriber is for you. Without further ado, let's get to answering your further ado, let's get to answering your further ado, let's get to answering your questions. The first question asks, is questions. The first question asks, is questions. The first question asks, is it possible to get a cold or to get sick it possible to get a cold or to get sick it possible to get a cold or to get sick from deliberate cold exposure? And I from deliberate cold exposure? And I from deliberate cold exposure? And I suppose a related question is, should suppose a related question is, should suppose a related question is, should you even do deliberate cold exposure if you even do deliberate cold exposure if you even do deliberate cold exposure if you have a sniffle, a cold, or a flu? I you have a sniffle, a cold, or a flu? I you have a sniffle, a cold, or a flu? I get that question all the time as well. get that question all the time as well. get that question all the time as well. So, I answer both of those questions, So, I answer both of those questions, So, I answer both of those questions, and I will also touch on some of the and I will also touch on some of the and I will also touch on some of the immune-enhancing effects of deliberate immune-enhancing effects of deliberate immune-enhancing effects of deliberate cold exposure. But, just to make sure cold exposure. But, just to make sure cold exposure. But, just to make sure that we answer the specific question that we answer the specific question that we answer the specific question asked here right off the bat, is it asked here right off the bat, is it asked here right off the bat, is it possible to get a cold or to get sick possible to get a cold or to get sick possible to get a cold or to get sick from deliberate cold exposure? from deliberate cold exposure? from deliberate cold exposure? Well, assuming that you're not doing the Well, assuming that you're not doing the Well, assuming that you're not doing the deliberate cold exposure for more than, deliberate cold exposure for more than, deliberate cold exposure for more than, say, 5 or 6 minutes at one stretch, say, 5 or 6 minutes at one stretch, say, 5 or 6 minutes at one stretch, probably not directly from the probably not directly from the probably not directly from the deliberate cold exposure. deliberate cold exposure. deliberate cold exposure. I mention that because most people are I mention that because most people are I mention that because most people are doing anywhere from about a minute to 3 doing anywhere from about a minute to 3 doing anywhere from about a minute to 3 minutes, sometimes 5 or 6 minutes, and minutes, sometimes 5 or 6 minutes, and minutes, sometimes 5 or 6 minutes, and maybe, for those of you that are really maybe, for those of you that are really maybe, for those of you that are really pushing it, 10 minutes of deliberate pushing it, 10 minutes of deliberate pushing it, 10 minutes of deliberate cold exposure. And most often, after cold exposure. And most often, after cold exposure. And most often, after doing that deliberate cold exposure, doing that deliberate cold exposure, doing that deliberate cold exposure, people are either getting clothed or people are either getting clothed or people are either getting clothed or they're getting into a sauna or they're getting into a sauna or they're getting into a sauna or they're taking a hot shower and then getting taking a hot shower and then getting taking a hot shower and then getting clothed and heading off into their day clothed and heading off into their day clothed and heading off into their day or off to sleep, depending on what time or off to sleep, depending on what time or off to sleep, depending on what time of day or night you happen to do your of day or night you happen to do your of day or night you happen to do your deliberate cold exposure. deliberate cold exposure. deliberate cold exposure. We can safely say that if you warm up We can safely say that if you warm up We can safely say that if you warm up after a relatively brief, meaning 1 after a relatively brief, meaning 1 after a relatively brief, meaning 1 minute to let's extend it out to 10 minute to let's extend it out to 10 minute to let's extend it out to 10 minutes, 10-minute deliberate cold minutes, 10-minute deliberate cold minutes, 10-minute deliberate cold exposure, although I really want to exposure, although I really want to exposure, although I really want to caution people to not do 10-minute caution people to not do 10-minute caution people to not do 10-minute deliberate cold exposure right off the deliberate cold exposure right off the deliberate cold exposure right off the bat. If you are somebody who's not bat. If you are somebody who's not bat. If you are somebody who's not accustomed to it, don't jump right up to accustomed to it, don't jump right up to accustomed to it, don't jump right up to that uh long that uh long that uh long exposure to cold water. Start with exposure to cold water. Start with exposure to cold water. Start with shorter exposures. shorter exposures. shorter exposures. But, if you're doing that 1 to 10-minute But, if you're doing that 1 to 10-minute But, if you're doing that 1 to 10-minute deliberate cold exposure and then you're deliberate cold exposure and then you're deliberate cold exposure and then you're getting warm afterwards and heading getting warm afterwards and heading getting warm afterwards and heading about your day, I can't see how the about your day, I can't see how the about your day, I can't see how the deliberate cold exposure itself would deliberate cold exposure itself would deliberate cold exposure itself would enhance your susceptibility to getting enhance your susceptibility to getting enhance your susceptibility to getting sick. That said, we know from an enormous That said, we know from an enormous That said, we know from an enormous number of studies that have looked at number of studies that have looked at number of studies that have looked at cold virus transmission and other forms cold virus transmission and other forms cold virus transmission and other forms of viral and bacterial transmission of viral and bacterial transmission of viral and bacterial transmission that the environment that you happen to that the environment that you happen to that the environment that you happen to be in does impact your susceptibility to be in does impact your susceptibility to be in does impact your susceptibility to colds and other types of viruses and to colds and other types of viruses and to colds and other types of viruses and to bacterial infections bacterial infections bacterial infections in the following way. in the following way. in the following way. There've been controlled studies in There've been controlled studies in There've been controlled studies in which people go into laboratories. which people go into laboratories. which people go into laboratories. Those laboratories have rooms in which Those laboratories have rooms in which Those laboratories have rooms in which they can very tightly control the they can very tightly control the they can very tightly control the humidity. So, essentially the water humidity. So, essentially the water humidity. So, essentially the water content in the air, as well as the content in the air, as well as the content in the air, as well as the temperature in the room. And if you look temperature in the room. And if you look temperature in the room. And if you look at the total mass of those data, we can at the total mass of those data, we can at the total mass of those data, we can say a couple of specific things in kind say a couple of specific things in kind say a couple of specific things in kind of bullet point fashion. First off, of bullet point fashion. First off, of bullet point fashion. First off, cold, dry air does seem to increase our cold, dry air does seem to increase our cold, dry air does seem to increase our susceptibility to viral and bacterial susceptibility to viral and bacterial susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections because infections because infections because whether or not you're a mouth breather whether or not you're a mouth breather whether or not you're a mouth breather or a nose breather, and by the way, I or a nose breather, and by the way, I or a nose breather, and by the way, I suggest everyone be a nose breather suggest everyone be a nose breather suggest everyone be a nose breather unless you're exercising hard enough unless you're exercising hard enough unless you're exercising hard enough that you have to breathe through your that you have to breathe through your that you have to breathe through your mouth, or you're talking, or something mouth, or you're talking, or something mouth, or you're talking, or something of that sort. of that sort. of that sort. But if you're a nose breather or a mouth But if you're a nose breather or a mouth But if you're a nose breather or a mouth breather or both, breather or both, breather or both, viruses and bacteria enter through your viruses and bacteria enter through your viruses and bacteria enter through your nose and mouth. Sometimes through your nose and mouth. Sometimes through your nose and mouth. Sometimes through your eyes, but your nose and mouth are going eyes, but your nose and mouth are going eyes, but your nose and mouth are going to be the main sites of entry and your to be the main sites of entry and your to be the main sites of entry and your main barriers to viral and bacterial main barriers to viral and bacterial main barriers to viral and bacterial infections. In fact, one of the ways you infections. In fact, one of the ways you infections. In fact, one of the ways you are constantly fighting off bacterial are constantly fighting off bacterial are constantly fighting off bacterial and viral infections that you're exposed and viral infections that you're exposed and viral infections that you're exposed to all the time to all the time to all the time is by way of those viruses and bacteria is by way of those viruses and bacteria is by way of those viruses and bacteria getting trapped in the mucus lining of getting trapped in the mucus lining of getting trapped in the mucus lining of your nose or your mouth, most notably in your nose or your mouth, most notably in your nose or your mouth, most notably in the back of your throat. So, if you the back of your throat. So, if you the back of your throat. So, if you spend time in cold, dry environments, spend time in cold, dry environments, spend time in cold, dry environments, there is a tendency for that mucosal there is a tendency for that mucosal there is a tendency for that mucosal lining to be thinner. There is a lining to be thinner. There is a lining to be thinner. There is a tendency for that mucosal lining to not tendency for that mucosal lining to not tendency for that mucosal lining to not be as robust in general. When I say be as robust in general. When I say be as robust in general. When I say robust, what I mean is that if you're robust, what I mean is that if you're robust, what I mean is that if you're mouth breathing, for instance, in a mouth breathing, for instance, in a mouth breathing, for instance, in a cold, dry environment, I'm thinking from cold, dry environment, I'm thinking from cold, dry environment, I'm thinking from the time I spent in Cambridge, the time I spent in Cambridge, the time I spent in Cambridge, Massachusetts in winter at the T Massachusetts in winter at the T Massachusetts in winter at the T station, you know, if you're I'm just station, you know, if you're I'm just station, you know, if you're I'm just imagining myself cuz it was so darn cold imagining myself cuz it was so darn cold imagining myself cuz it was so darn cold back there, you know, breathing back there, you know, breathing back there, you know, breathing through your mouth or having gone for a through your mouth or having gone for a through your mouth or having gone for a run, and your mouth isn't covered, or run, and your mouth isn't covered, or run, and your mouth isn't covered, or even if you're deliberately nasal even if you're deliberately nasal even if you're deliberately nasal breathing, you are drying out your nasal breathing, you are drying out your nasal breathing, you are drying out your nasal passages and making them more passages and making them more passages and making them more susceptible to infections. Does that susceptible to infections. Does that susceptible to infections. Does that necessarily mean that every time you go necessarily mean that every time you go necessarily mean that every time you go out in cold, dry air that you're going out in cold, dry air that you're going out in cold, dry air that you're going to get an infection? No, of Of it to get an infection? No, of Of it to get an infection? No, of Of it doesn't. But to relate this back to the doesn't. But to relate this back to the doesn't. But to relate this back to the question we had before, question we had before, question we had before, there are a lot of data pointing to the there are a lot of data pointing to the there are a lot of data pointing to the fact that more humid, warm environments fact that more humid, warm environments fact that more humid, warm environments are going to make your mucosal lining are going to make your mucosal lining are going to make your mucosal lining and the general upper respiratory area and the general upper respiratory area and the general upper respiratory area more I don't want to say immune cuz I more I don't want to say immune cuz I more I don't want to say immune cuz I don't want to conflate that word with don't want to conflate that word with don't want to conflate that word with the other meaning of immune. It's going the other meaning of immune. It's going the other meaning of immune. It's going to make it more robust against to make it more robust against to make it more robust against bacterial and viral infections. Okay? bacterial and viral infections. Okay? bacterial and viral infections. Okay? So, if you get into a cold shower So, if you get into a cold shower So, if you get into a cold shower or a cold plunge or a cold ocean or a or a cold plunge or a cold ocean or a or a cold plunge or a cold ocean or a cold lake and then you get out and cold lake and then you get out and cold lake and then you get out and you're out there, you know, shivering you're out there, you know, shivering you're out there, you know, shivering and shaking trying to boost your and shaking trying to boost your and shaking trying to boost your metabolism or whatever it is that you're metabolism or whatever it is that you're metabolism or whatever it is that you're doing it for doing it for doing it for and it's cold dry air and especially if and it's cold dry air and especially if and it's cold dry air and especially if you're mouth breathing in that cold dry you're mouth breathing in that cold dry you're mouth breathing in that cold dry air, yes, I could see how that might lead to yes, I could see how that might lead to yes, I could see how that might lead to a higher probability of getting a cold a higher probability of getting a cold a higher probability of getting a cold or other type of infection. But, there's or other type of infection. But, there's or other type of infection. But, there's nothing specific about the deliberate nothing specific about the deliberate nothing specific about the deliberate cold exposure itself cold exposure itself cold exposure itself that can induce a cold or other type of that can induce a cold or other type of that can induce a cold or other type of infection assuming that the water is infection assuming that the water is infection assuming that the water is clean, right? We're not talking about clean, right? We're not talking about clean, right? We're not talking about bacterial infections of cuts on the bacterial infections of cuts on the bacterial infections of cuts on the skin, etc. We're talking about colds and skin, etc. We're talking about colds and skin, etc. We're talking about colds and other forms of being sick other forms of being sick other forms of being sick namely upper respiratory infections. namely upper respiratory infections. namely upper respiratory infections. Okay? Now, with that said, I often get Okay? Now, with that said, I often get Okay? Now, with that said, I often get asked whether or not for people who asked whether or not for people who asked whether or not for people who already have a little sniffle, they're already have a little sniffle, they're already have a little sniffle, they're feeling a little run down or perhaps a feeling a little run down or perhaps a feeling a little run down or perhaps a lot run down, should they do deliberate lot run down, should they do deliberate lot run down, should they do deliberate cold exposure? cold exposure? cold exposure? And what's a little tricky to give a And what's a little tricky to give a And what's a little tricky to give a one-size-fits-all answer, but I think we one-size-fits-all answer, but I think we one-size-fits-all answer, but I think we can safely say that if you are feeling can safely say that if you are feeling can safely say that if you are feeling malaise, you're feeling like you have to malaise, you're feeling like you have to malaise, you're feeling like you have to rest, you're tired, you're not feeling rest, you're tired, you're not feeling rest, you're tired, you're not feeling good because of a cold or because of a good because of a cold or because of a good because of a cold or because of a flu or because of a bacterial infection. flu or because of a bacterial infection. flu or because of a bacterial infection. Okay? Now, I'm not saying just feeling Okay? Now, I'm not saying just feeling Okay? Now, I'm not saying just feeling not good, I'm saying feeling not good not good, I'm saying feeling not good not good, I'm saying feeling not good due to a cold or other form of virus or due to a cold or other form of virus or due to a cold or other form of virus or bacterial infection, then I would say bacterial infection, then I would say bacterial infection, then I would say stay out of deliberate cold exposure. stay out of deliberate cold exposure. stay out of deliberate cold exposure. Don't use it. Now, why would I say that Don't use it. Now, why would I say that Don't use it. Now, why would I say that given the data I'll talk about in a few given the data I'll talk about in a few given the data I'll talk about in a few minutes showing that minutes showing that minutes showing that regular deliberate cold exposure, if regular deliberate cold exposure, if regular deliberate cold exposure, if done correctly, can in fact increase done correctly, can in fact increase done correctly, can in fact increase immune system markers and perhaps even immune system markers and perhaps even immune system markers and perhaps even can make you much more robust to can make you much more robust to can make you much more robust to combating different types of infection combating different types of infection combating different types of infection through the release of adrenaline. We'll through the release of adrenaline. We'll through the release of adrenaline. We'll talk about what all that looks like in a talk about what all that looks like in a talk about what all that looks like in a moment in terms of protocols and some of moment in terms of protocols and some of moment in terms of protocols and some of the science. But, the science. But, the science. But, to just be very clear and very direct, to just be very clear and very direct, to just be very clear and very direct, if you're sick, stay out of deliberate if you're sick, stay out of deliberate if you're sick, stay out of deliberate cold exposure. cold exposure. cold exposure. There I would instead recommend warmer There I would instead recommend warmer There I would instead recommend warmer hot baths, warmer hot showers, the hot baths, warmer hot showers, the hot baths, warmer hot showers, the sauna, etc. But, I also would caution sauna, etc. But, I also would caution sauna, etc. But, I also would caution that if you are getting into saunas that if you are getting into saunas that if you are getting into saunas that are too hot, you know, saunas that are too hot, you know, saunas that are too hot, you know, saunas that are so hot that it's stressful for you. And so hot that it's stressful for you. And so hot that it's stressful for you. And again, a lot of people use deliberate again, a lot of people use deliberate again, a lot of people use deliberate heat exposure because of the stress it heat exposure because of the stress it heat exposure because of the stress it induces. They're doing um some induces. They're doing um some induces. They're doing um some heat-induced, for instance, heat shock heat-induced, for instance, heat shock heat-induced, for instance, heat shock proteins and different ways of proteins and different ways of proteins and different ways of increasing heart rate. That's a increasing heart rate. That's a increasing heart rate. That's a different sort of thing. That's hard, different sort of thing. That's hard, different sort of thing. That's hard, stressful in order to generate an stressful in order to generate an stressful in order to generate an adaptation. I don't recommend doing that. In fact, I don't recommend doing that. In fact, I don't recommend doing that. In fact, I don't recommend doing deliberate cold don't recommend doing deliberate cold don't recommend doing deliberate cold exposure, exercise, or deliberate heat exposure, exercise, or deliberate heat exposure, exercise, or deliberate heat exposure if you're feeling really not exposure if you're feeling really not exposure if you're feeling really not well. Now, if you're feeling just a well. Now, if you're feeling just a well. Now, if you're feeling just a little bit not well, you're feeling a little bit not well, you're feeling a little bit not well, you're feeling a little bit run down, little bit of little bit run down, little bit of little bit run down, little bit of sniffle, little bit of malaise, little bit of malaise, little bit of malaise, well, then it's kind of an edge case well, then it's kind of an edge case well, then it's kind of an edge case where we could say, all right, you know where we could say, all right, you know where we could say, all right, you know what, just take a hot shower and go to what, just take a hot shower and go to what, just take a hot shower and go to sleep. That's probably the best advice, sleep. That's probably the best advice, sleep. That's probably the best advice, right? That good old-fashioned advice. right? That good old-fashioned advice. right? That good old-fashioned advice. But, if you are determined to do your But, if you are determined to do your But, if you are determined to do your deliberate cold exposure anyway, deliberate cold exposure anyway, deliberate cold exposure anyway, then I would say definitely get warm or then I would say definitely get warm or then I would say definitely get warm or take a hot shower afterwards, hot bath, take a hot shower afterwards, hot bath, take a hot shower afterwards, hot bath, or a hot sauna, but not too hot that or a hot sauna, but not too hot that or a hot sauna, but not too hot that it's stressful, of course. And keep in it's stressful, of course. And keep in it's stressful, of course. And keep in mind that one of the variables that's mind that one of the variables that's mind that one of the variables that's been measured quite a lot in laboratory been measured quite a lot in laboratory been measured quite a lot in laboratory studies of deliberate cold exposure is studies of deliberate cold exposure is studies of deliberate cold exposure is the increase in immune system markers. the increase in immune system markers. the increase in immune system markers. So, I'll provide a few links to some of So, I'll provide a few links to some of So, I'll provide a few links to some of these studies, um although nowadays these studies, um although nowadays these studies, um although nowadays there are many, many of them. there are many, many of them. there are many, many of them. But, it's very clear that deliberate But, it's very clear that deliberate But, it's very clear that deliberate cold exposure can increase cold exposure can increase cold exposure can increase the release and the production of the release and the production of the release and the production of different immune molecules and immune different immune molecules and immune different immune molecules and immune cells. One slightly older study, but cells. One slightly older study, but cells. One slightly older study, but nevertheless a good study that has nevertheless a good study that has nevertheless a good study that has relevance here is entitled Immune System relevance here is entitled Immune System relevance here is entitled Immune System of Cold Exposed and Cold Adapted Humans. of Cold Exposed and Cold Adapted Humans. of Cold Exposed and Cold Adapted Humans. Uh keep in mind that this study is a Uh keep in mind that this study is a Uh keep in mind that this study is a little bit extreme, and there are little bit extreme, and there are little bit extreme, and there are reasons for that. Uh I guess to make a reasons for that. Uh I guess to make a reasons for that. Uh I guess to make a long story short, long story short, long story short, oftentimes in order to, quote and quote, oftentimes in order to, quote and quote, oftentimes in order to, quote and quote, see an effect in a study, see an effect in a study, see an effect in a study, scientists will use conditions that are scientists will use conditions that are scientists will use conditions that are pretty extreme compared to control pretty extreme compared to control pretty extreme compared to control group. Oftentimes you'll see a dose group. Oftentimes you'll see a dose group. Oftentimes you'll see a dose response, too, but it's a little bit response, too, but it's a little bit response, too, but it's a little bit trickier to do with uh human studies of trickier to do with uh human studies of trickier to do with uh human studies of deliberate cold exposure. It can be deliberate cold exposure. It can be deliberate cold exposure. It can be done, but not too common. But here, they done, but not too common. But here, they done, but not too common. But here, they used a pretty, what I would call, used a pretty, what I would call, used a pretty, what I would call, extreme stimulus. It was exposing people extreme stimulus. It was exposing people extreme stimulus. It was exposing people to 14° C water. So, that's 57.2° to 14° C water. So, that's 57.2° to 14° C water. So, that's 57.2° F, which isn't that cold. It's kind of like which isn't that cold. It's kind of like which isn't that cold. It's kind of like cool, I would say very cool water, but cool, I would say very cool water, but cool, I would say very cool water, but not what you might consider cold, not what you might consider cold, not what you might consider cold, depending on how well you tolerate cold, depending on how well you tolerate cold, depending on how well you tolerate cold, and that will vary, of course. But they and that will vary, of course. But they and that will vary, of course. But they had people exposed to that for an hour, had people exposed to that for an hour, had people exposed to that for an hour, which is a pretty long time. You know, which is a pretty long time. You know, which is a pretty long time. You know, most people, as I mentioned, are using most people, as I mentioned, are using most people, as I mentioned, are using colder temperatures of deliberate cold colder temperatures of deliberate cold colder temperatures of deliberate cold exposure. So, even, you know, high 30s, exposure. So, even, you know, high 30s, exposure. So, even, you know, high 30s, low 40s, low 40s, low 40s, maybe upper 40s, for anywhere from 1 to maybe upper 40s, for anywhere from 1 to maybe upper 40s, for anywhere from 1 to 10 minutes, depending on how conditioned 10 minutes, depending on how conditioned 10 minutes, depending on how conditioned they are. Uh and again, don't just jump they are. Uh and again, don't just jump they are. Uh and again, don't just jump into 10 minutes of deliberate cold into 10 minutes of deliberate cold into 10 minutes of deliberate cold exposure, please, um at, you know, if exposure, please, um at, you know, if exposure, please, um at, you know, if you aren't familiar with deliberate cold you aren't familiar with deliberate cold you aren't familiar with deliberate cold exposure. You have to ease into these exposure. You have to ease into these exposure. You have to ease into these sorts of things sorts of things sorts of things over time. And if you're interested in over time. And if you're interested in over time. And if you're interested in protocols for deliberate cold exposure, protocols for deliberate cold exposure, protocols for deliberate cold exposure, we have a zero-cost newsletter at we have a zero-cost newsletter at we have a zero-cost newsletter at yourhubermanlab.com. Go to the menu, go yourhubermanlab.com. Go to the menu, go yourhubermanlab.com. Go to the menu, go newsletter, and you can find that. We've newsletter, and you can find that. We've newsletter, and you can find that. We've done several episodes on deliberate cold done several episodes on deliberate cold done several episodes on deliberate cold exposure. In any event, In any event, In any event, this study, Immune System of Cold this study, Immune System of Cold this study, Immune System of Cold Exposed and Cold Adapted Humans, as I Exposed and Cold Adapted Humans, as I Exposed and Cold Adapted Humans, as I mentioned, had people in 14° C water for mentioned, had people in 14° C water for mentioned, had people in 14° C water for 1 hour. And basically, what they found 1 hour. And basically, what they found 1 hour. And basically, what they found is that one exposure to cold did not is that one exposure to cold did not is that one exposure to cold did not change immune system function in any change immune system function in any change immune system function in any kind of significant way. However, kind of significant way. However, kind of significant way. However, what they found was if people did what they found was if people did what they found was if people did deliberate cold exposure repeatedly over deliberate cold exposure repeatedly over deliberate cold exposure repeatedly over a period of about 6 weeks, a period of about 6 weeks, a period of about 6 weeks, and by repeatedly, I mean three times and by repeatedly, I mean three times and by repeatedly, I mean three times per week, what they found were trends per week, what they found were trends per week, what they found were trends and again trends are not statistically and again trends are not statistically and again trends are not statistically significant but trends towards increases significant but trends towards increases significant but trends towards increases in plasma concentrations of things like in plasma concentrations of things like in plasma concentrations of things like IL-6, interleukin-6, or total numbers of IL-6, interleukin-6, or total numbers of IL-6, interleukin-6, or total numbers of T lymphocytes and T helper cells and T lymphocytes and T helper cells and T lymphocytes and T helper cells and T suppressor cells and activated T and B T suppressor cells and activated T and B T suppressor cells and activated T and B lymphocytes. These are all immune cells lymphocytes. These are all immune cells lymphocytes. These are all immune cells and immune molecules that and immune molecules that and immune molecules that roughly correspond to an increase in roughly correspond to an increase in roughly correspond to an increase in immune system function. If you'd like to immune system function. If you'd like to immune system function. If you'd like to learn more about the immune system, I learn more about the immune system, I learn more about the immune system, I did an episode on immune system function did an episode on immune system function did an episode on immune system function and again you can find that at and again you can find that at and again you can find that at hubermanlab.com and it spells out the hubermanlab.com and it spells out the hubermanlab.com and it spells out the basic cell types of what's called the basic cell types of what's called the basic cell types of what's called the innate and the adaptive immune system. innate and the adaptive immune system. innate and the adaptive immune system. This study, which we will link to in the This study, which we will link to in the This study, which we will link to in the show note captions, is but one study of show note captions, is but one study of show note captions, is but one study of several other studies showing that several other studies showing that several other studies showing that deliberate cold exposure can increase deliberate cold exposure can increase deliberate cold exposure can increase immune system markers especially when immune system markers especially when immune system markers especially when deliberate cold exposure is done deliberate cold exposure is done deliberate cold exposure is done repeatedly over time. So in this case repeatedly over time. So in this case repeatedly over time. So in this case three times a week over a period of six three times a week over a period of six three times a week over a period of six weeks but again I want to highlight weeks but again I want to highlight weeks but again I want to highlight these aren't highly significant effects. these aren't highly significant effects. these aren't highly significant effects. These are trends in the direction of These are trends in the direction of These are trends in the direction of increased numbers of immune cells and increased numbers of immune cells and increased numbers of immune cells and immune markers. Now what's impossible to immune markers. Now what's impossible to immune markers. Now what's impossible to know is how those trends translate to know is how those trends translate to know is how those trends translate to actual resistance to specific actual resistance to specific actual resistance to specific concentrations of say cold virus or flu concentrations of say cold virus or flu concentrations of say cold virus or flu virus or any other virus or bacteria. virus or any other virus or bacteria. virus or any other virus or bacteria. That would be great but that's a very That would be great but that's a very That would be great but that's a very difficult study to do especially in the difficult study to do especially in the difficult study to do especially in the context of deliberate cold exposure as context of deliberate cold exposure as context of deliberate cold exposure as well. Now well. Now well. Now we can all be scientists about this and we can all be scientists about this and we can all be scientists about this and say what is it about deliberate cold say what is it about deliberate cold say what is it about deliberate cold exposure that would increase exposure that would increase exposure that would increase immune system function and there we can immune system function and there we can immune system function and there we can confidently say confidently say confidently say the molecules epinephrine and the molecules epinephrine and the molecules epinephrine and norepinephrine which are released in norepinephrine which are released in norepinephrine which are released in both brain and body in response to cold both brain and body in response to cold both brain and body in response to cold water exposure as well as things like water exposure as well as things like water exposure as well as things like deliberate hyperventilation deliberate hyperventilation deliberate hyperventilation the release of norepinephrine and the release of norepinephrine and the release of norepinephrine and epinephrine into the brain and body is epinephrine into the brain and body is epinephrine into the brain and body is known to have a number of different known to have a number of different known to have a number of different effects related to the immune system. It effects related to the immune system. It effects related to the immune system. It can be pro-immune can be pro-immune can be pro-immune at least in the short term and in the at least in the short term and in the at least in the short term and in the long term meaning if noradrenaline and long term meaning if noradrenaline and long term meaning if noradrenaline and adrenaline, again those are just adrenaline, again those are just adrenaline, again those are just different names for norepinephrine and different names for norepinephrine and different names for norepinephrine and epinephrine. I'm sorry those are the epinephrine. I'm sorry those are the epinephrine. I'm sorry those are the same thing but that's why I use them same thing but that's why I use them same thing but that's why I use them interchangeably, so that you don't get interchangeably, so that you don't get interchangeably, so that you don't get confused if you see noradrenaline or confused if you see noradrenaline or confused if you see noradrenaline or norepinephrine, that's the same thing. norepinephrine, that's the same thing. norepinephrine, that's the same thing. You hear epinephrine or adrenaline, same You hear epinephrine or adrenaline, same You hear epinephrine or adrenaline, same thing. Deliberate cold exposure or deliberate Deliberate cold exposure or deliberate Deliberate cold exposure or deliberate hyperventilation will increase those hyperventilation will increase those hyperventilation will increase those molecules, norepinephrine and molecules, norepinephrine and molecules, norepinephrine and epinephrine. And their increase is pro-immune. It can And their increase is pro-immune. It can And their increase is pro-immune. It can trigger the activation of immune cells trigger the activation of immune cells trigger the activation of immune cells and immune molecules that can make you and immune molecules that can make you and immune molecules that can make you more resistant to certain forms of more resistant to certain forms of more resistant to certain forms of infection. However, if norepinephrine infection. However, if norepinephrine infection. However, if norepinephrine and epinephrine are elevated and epinephrine are elevated and epinephrine are elevated chronically, and especially if they are elevated late and especially if they are elevated late and especially if they are elevated late in the day, in the day, in the day, repeatedly over many, many days, that repeatedly over many, many days, that repeatedly over many, many days, that can cause reductions in the number and can cause reductions in the number and can cause reductions in the number and efficiency of immune cells in combating efficiency of immune cells in combating efficiency of immune cells in combating infections. So, getting cold in this infections. So, getting cold in this infections. So, getting cold in this context of whether or not you can get context of whether or not you can get context of whether or not you can get sick from it should really be considered sick from it should really be considered sick from it should really be considered more as what happens when you spike your more as what happens when you spike your more as what happens when you spike your adrenaline and norepinephrine. adrenaline and norepinephrine. adrenaline and norepinephrine. And there's one other study that we can And there's one other study that we can And there's one other study that we can look to, which is now really a famous look to, which is now really a famous look to, which is now really a famous study published in Proceedings of the study published in Proceedings of the study published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, looking at National Academy of Sciences, looking at National Academy of Sciences, looking at so-called Wim Hof breathing, um but so-called Wim Hof breathing, um but so-called Wim Hof breathing, um but really that just translates to cyclic really that just translates to cyclic really that just translates to cyclic hyperventilation. So, this is inhaling hyperventilation. So, this is inhaling hyperventilation. So, this is inhaling through the nose, exhaling through the through the nose, exhaling through the through the nose, exhaling through the mouth repeatedly, 25 times or so. If you do that, you notice you feel If you do that, you notice you feel If you do that, you notice you feel quite warm. quite warm. quite warm. That's to do with some things related to That's to do with some things related to That's to do with some things related to vasodilation, as vasodilation, as vasodilation, as things to do with release of things to do with release of things to do with release of norepinephrine and epinephrine. We know norepinephrine and epinephrine. We know norepinephrine and epinephrine. We know that pattern of deliberate that pattern of deliberate that pattern of deliberate hyperventilation, much like deliberate hyperventilation, much like deliberate hyperventilation, much like deliberate cold exposure, cold exposure, cold exposure, deploys or releases noradrenaline and deploys or releases noradrenaline and deploys or releases noradrenaline and adrenaline into your brain and body, and adrenaline into your brain and body, and adrenaline into your brain and body, and we know from this study entitled we know from this study entitled we know from this study entitled Voluntary Activation of the Sympathetic Voluntary Activation of the Sympathetic Voluntary Activation of the Sympathetic Nervous System and Attenuation of the Nervous System and Attenuation of the Nervous System and Attenuation of the Innate Immune Response in Humans, Innate Immune Response in Humans, Innate Immune Response in Humans, showed really nicely, I think, that if showed really nicely, I think, that if showed really nicely, I think, that if people are injected with E. coli, right, people are injected with E. coli, right, people are injected with E. coli, right, a bacteria, it's actually end They did a bacteria, it's actually end They did a bacteria, it's actually end They did this through endotoxin injections. this through endotoxin injections. this through endotoxin injections. People got really sick. They'd get, you People got really sick. They'd get, you People got really sick. They'd get, you know, feel like they had the flu, they'd know, feel like they had the flu, they'd know, feel like they had the flu, they'd vomit, diarrhea, get a fever, etc. vomit, diarrhea, get a fever, etc. vomit, diarrhea, get a fever, etc. However, if they did the sorts of However, if they did the sorts of However, if they did the sorts of breathing that I talked about just a breathing that I talked about just a breathing that I talked about just a moment ago, moment ago, moment ago, prior to that they were able to ward off prior to that they were able to ward off prior to that they were able to ward off a lot of the symptoms associated with a lot of the symptoms associated with a lot of the symptoms associated with the endotoxin infection. And you would the endotoxin infection. And you would the endotoxin infection. And you would say, "Okay, wow, their immune system say, "Okay, wow, their immune system say, "Okay, wow, their immune system just fired up and they were able to just fired up and they were able to just fired up and they were able to fight it off." But it's trickier than fight it off." But it's trickier than fight it off." But it's trickier than that, actually. What happened was the that, actually. What happened was the that, actually. What happened was the release of epinephrine and release of epinephrine and release of epinephrine and norepinephrine from cyclic norepinephrine from cyclic norepinephrine from cyclic hyperventilation, which is really what hyperventilation, which is really what hyperventilation, which is really what really is, really is, really is, cyclic hyperventilation, also called Wim cyclic hyperventilation, also called Wim cyclic hyperventilation, also called Wim Hof breathing, also called Tummo Hof breathing, also called Tummo Hof breathing, also called Tummo breathing, etc., breathing, etc., breathing, etc., that actually had a suppressive action that actually had a suppressive action that actually had a suppressive action on certain arms of the immune system in on certain arms of the immune system in on certain arms of the immune system in a way that allowed people to avoid a way that allowed people to avoid a way that allowed people to avoid symptomology such as fever, nausea, etc. And we would such as fever, nausea, etc. And we would such as fever, nausea, etc. And we would imagine the same thing would occur with imagine the same thing would occur with imagine the same thing would occur with deliberate cold exposure deliberate cold exposure deliberate cold exposure done prior to bacterial infection or done prior to bacterial infection or done prior to bacterial infection or viral exposure. So, if you're sensing viral exposure. So, if you're sensing viral exposure. So, if you're sensing that I'm saying two things at once, I that I'm saying two things at once, I that I'm saying two things at once, I am. I'm saying deliberate cold exposure am. I'm saying deliberate cold exposure am. I'm saying deliberate cold exposure and cyclic hyperventilation can both and cyclic hyperventilation can both and cyclic hyperventilation can both cause deployment of molecules cause deployment of molecules cause deployment of molecules such as epinephrine and norepinephrine such as epinephrine and norepinephrine such as epinephrine and norepinephrine that lead to enhanced immune system that lead to enhanced immune system that lead to enhanced immune system function if done repeatedly. I'm also function if done repeatedly. I'm also function if done repeatedly. I'm also saying that increasing norepinephrine saying that increasing norepinephrine saying that increasing norepinephrine and epinephrine too much and epinephrine too much and epinephrine too much can suppress your immune system. can suppress your immune system. can suppress your immune system. In this study, the PNAS study that I In this study, the PNAS study that I In this study, the PNAS study that I mentioned a moment ago, that suppression mentioned a moment ago, that suppression mentioned a moment ago, that suppression of the immune response was actually one of the immune response was actually one of the immune response was actually one of the reasons people avoided of the reasons people avoided of the reasons people avoided symptomology, but they were still symptomology, but they were still symptomology, but they were still injected with endotoxins. They just injected with endotoxins. They just injected with endotoxins. They just weren't fighting off the endotoxin with weren't fighting off the endotoxin with weren't fighting off the endotoxin with fever. Remember, fever is an adaptation fever. Remember, fever is an adaptation fever. Remember, fever is an adaptation to fight infection. It's designed to fight infection. It's designed to fight infection. It's designed essentially to heat up the infection and essentially to heat up the infection and essentially to heat up the infection and kill it. So, what are we to take away kill it. So, what are we to take away kill it. So, what are we to take away from this? Here are what I think are the from this? Here are what I think are the from this? Here are what I think are the key takeaways. One, if you are feeling key takeaways. One, if you are feeling key takeaways. One, if you are feeling good to great, good to great, good to great, do your deliberate cold exposure, and do your deliberate cold exposure, and do your deliberate cold exposure, and perhaps don't worry so much about using perhaps don't worry so much about using perhaps don't worry so much about using your body's natural metabolism and your body's natural metabolism and your body's natural metabolism and thermogenic abilities to heat back up thermogenic abilities to heat back up thermogenic abilities to heat back up afterwards. But I don't suggest anyone ever allow But I don't suggest anyone ever allow But I don't suggest anyone ever allow themselves to stay really cold after themselves to stay really cold after themselves to stay really cold after deliberate cold exposure deliberate cold exposure deliberate cold exposure for more than 10 15 minutes or maybe for more than 10 15 minutes or maybe for more than 10 15 minutes or maybe half an hour, right? Get bundled back up half an hour, right? Get bundled back up half an hour, right? Get bundled back up or put on clothes. If it's a nice hot or put on clothes. If it's a nice hot or put on clothes. If it's a nice hot sunny day, get out in the sun and warm sunny day, get out in the sun and warm sunny day, get out in the sun and warm up. Again, temperatures and conditions up. Again, temperatures and conditions up. Again, temperatures and conditions will vary for different people, will vary for different people, will vary for different people, different locations, etc. different locations, etc. different locations, etc. If you are not feeling greatly, feeling If you are not feeling greatly, feeling If you are not feeling greatly, feeling a little run down, and you really want a little run down, and you really want a little run down, and you really want to do your deliberate cold exposure, do to do your deliberate cold exposure, do to do your deliberate cold exposure, do it, but then warm up really well it, but then warm up really well it, but then warm up really well afterwards. Maybe even drink some, you afterwards. Maybe even drink some, you afterwards. Maybe even drink some, you know, hot tea or other fluid afterwards know, hot tea or other fluid afterwards know, hot tea or other fluid afterwards as well. as well. as well. And if you are not feeling good, you're And if you are not feeling good, you're And if you are not feeling good, you're feeling malaise, you're feeling run feeling malaise, you're feeling run feeling malaise, you're feeling run down, despite what you read about deliberate despite what you read about deliberate despite what you read about deliberate cold exposure or cyclic hyperventilation cold exposure or cyclic hyperventilation cold exposure or cyclic hyperventilation allowing for the deployment of immune allowing for the deployment of immune allowing for the deployment of immune molecules or increasing the number of molecules or increasing the number of molecules or increasing the number of immune cells that you're making, immune cells that you're making, immune cells that you're making, avoid anything that's stressful or avoid anything that's stressful or avoid anything that's stressful or challenging, whether or not it's a cold challenging, whether or not it's a cold challenging, whether or not it's a cold challenge, a heat challenge, or an challenge, a heat challenge, or an challenge, a heat challenge, or an exercise challenge when you're feeling exercise challenge when you're feeling exercise challenge when you're feeling run down, because under those run down, because under those run down, because under those conditions, what you really want to do conditions, what you really want to do conditions, what you really want to do is slow your circulation down. Probably is slow your circulation down. Probably is slow your circulation down. Probably find a take a little walks or something, find a take a little walks or something, find a take a little walks or something, provided you're not doubled over in bed provided you're not doubled over in bed provided you're not doubled over in bed and, you know, vomiting and things like and, you know, vomiting and things like and, you know, vomiting and things like that. You know, a little bit of movement that. You know, a little bit of movement that. You know, a little bit of movement probably good to circulate your blood. probably good to circulate your blood. probably good to circulate your blood. But in general, But in general, But in general, the advice that you get to rest when the advice that you get to rest when the advice that you get to rest when you're sick and not push yourself, you're sick and not push yourself, you're sick and not push yourself, that's really good advice because you that's really good advice because you that's really good advice because you want all of your body's resources to be want all of your body's resources to be want all of your body's resources to be devoted to getting over that infection. And if to getting over that infection. And if to getting over that infection. And if you're interested in sickness and you're interested in sickness and you're interested in sickness and sickness behavior and the sorts of sickness behavior and the sorts of sickness behavior and the sorts of behaviors that can combat infection, behaviors that can combat infection, behaviors that can combat infection, check out the episode I did on the check out the episode I did on the check out the episode I did on the immune system. We'll link to it in the immune system. We'll link to it in the immune system. We'll link to it in the show note captions because it talks show note captions because it talks show note captions because it talks about how when we have a viral or about how when we have a viral or about how when we have a viral or bacterial infection, a whole set of bacterial infection, a whole set of bacterial infection, a whole set of brain circuits get activated that kind brain circuits get activated that kind brain circuits get activated that kind of encourage us to be more in the fetal of encourage us to be more in the fetal of encourage us to be more in the fetal position, to move less, to be eyes down, position, to move less, to be eyes down, position, to move less, to be eyes down, to kind of, you know, slump down. That's to kind of, you know, slump down. That's to kind of, you know, slump down. That's not a coincidence. That's because of the not a coincidence. That's because of the not a coincidence. That's because of the activation of these so-called sickness activation of these so-called sickness activation of these so-called sickness circuits that are really designed to circuits that are really designed to circuits that are really designed to help you heal yourself. So, I both help you heal yourself. So, I both help you heal yourself. So, I both apologize and, what do the kids say, apologize and, what do the kids say, apologize and, what do the kids say, sorry, not sorry, don't apologize for sorry, not sorry, don't apologize for sorry, not sorry, don't apologize for the somewhat nuanced answer here because the somewhat nuanced answer here because the somewhat nuanced answer here because a lot of information out there says, a lot of information out there says, a lot of information out there says, "Oh, you know, cold boosts your immune "Oh, you know, cold boosts your immune "Oh, you know, cold boosts your immune system." And yeah, that's true under system." And yeah, that's true under system." And yeah, that's true under certain conditions. It can also deplete certain conditions. It can also deplete certain conditions. It can also deplete your immune system and limit your immune system and limit your immune system and limit your ability to fight off infections under ability to fight off infections under ability to fight off infections under other conditions. And perhaps the last other conditions. And perhaps the last other conditions. And perhaps the last thing to say about this thing to say about this thing to say about this is that I am a big believer in using is that I am a big believer in using is that I am a big believer in using nasal breathing whenever you don't have nasal breathing whenever you don't have nasal breathing whenever you don't have to breathe through your mouth. So, if to breathe through your mouth. So, if to breathe through your mouth. So, if you're exercising hard, by all means you're exercising hard, by all means you're exercising hard, by all means breathe through your mouth. If you're breathe through your mouth. If you're breathe through your mouth. If you're doing martial arts and it requires that doing martial arts and it requires that doing martial arts and it requires that you breathe through your mouth, you breathe through your mouth, you breathe through your mouth, go ahead and do that. But, if you're go ahead and do that. But, if you're go ahead and do that. But, if you're doing, say, zone two cardio, low-level doing, say, zone two cardio, low-level doing, say, zone two cardio, low-level cardio, or you're just walking along, cardio, or you're just walking along, cardio, or you're just walking along, it's very clear, it's very clear, it's very clear, based on a growing amount of data, that based on a growing amount of data, that based on a growing amount of data, that being a nasal breather is better than being a nasal breather is better than being a nasal breather is better than being a mouth breather. And there are a being a mouth breather. And there are a being a mouth breather. And there are a number of different reasons for that number of different reasons for that number of different reasons for that we've talked about on the podcast and we've talked about on the podcast and we've talked about on the podcast and elsewhere, but one of the additional elsewhere, but one of the additional elsewhere, but one of the additional reasons is a main site of entry for reasons is a main site of entry for reasons is a main site of entry for infections is through the mouth. So, infections is through the mouth. So, infections is through the mouth. So, keep that mouth shut unless you need to keep that mouth shut unless you need to keep that mouth shut unless you need to talk. Thank you for joining for the talk. Thank you for joining for the talk. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything beginning of this Ask Me Anything beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to episode. To hear the full episode and to episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me hear future episodes of these Ask Me hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive Anything sessions, plus to receive Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of transcripts of them and transcripts of transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard the Huberman Lab podcast standard the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not released channel and premium tools not released channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to anywhere else, please go to anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which, of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which, of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which, of course, will still be continued to be course, will still be continued to be course, will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast. And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is the which I think we all agree is the which I think we all agree is the species that we are most interested in. species that we are most interested in. species that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund And we are going to specifically fund And we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing research that is aimed toward developing research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, further protocols for mental health, further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And physical health, and performance. And physical health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed those protocols will be distributed those protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the through all channels, not just the through all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all premium channel, but through all premium channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So, the idea here is to media channels. So, the idea here is to media channels. So, the idea here is to give you information to your burning give you information to your burning give you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium channel. So, this is a terrific way that channel. So, this is a terrific way that channel. So, this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds they're going to amplify whatever funds they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to come in through the premium channel to come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and further support research for science and further support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab Premium Channel, again, there's a Lab Premium Channel, again, there's a Lab Premium Channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll, of course, your questions, and you'll, of course, your questions, and you'll, of course, get answers to all the questions that get answers to all the questions that get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will other people ask as well. There will other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content, such as also be some premium content, such as also be some premium content, such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your interest in science.