Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. Today we Stamford School of Medicine. Today we Stamford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing aggression. I'm going to are discussing aggression. I'm going to are discussing aggression. I'm going to explain to you that there are several explain to you that there are several explain to you that there are several different types of aggression. For different types of aggression. For different types of aggression. For instance, reactive aggression versus instance, reactive aggression versus instance, reactive aggression versus proactive aggression. Meaning sometimes proactive aggression. Meaning sometimes proactive aggression. Meaning sometimes people will be aggressive because they people will be aggressive because they people will be aggressive because they feel threatened or they are protecting feel threatened or they are protecting feel threatened or they are protecting those that they love who also feel those that they love who also feel those that they love who also feel threatened. There's also proactive threatened. There's also proactive threatened. There's also proactive aggression where people go out of their aggression where people go out of their aggression where people go out of their way to deliberately try and harm others. way to deliberately try and harm others. way to deliberately try and harm others. And there is indirect aggression which And there is indirect aggression which And there is indirect aggression which is aggression not involving physical is aggression not involving physical is aggression not involving physical violence. For instance, shaming people violence. For instance, shaming people violence. For instance, shaming people and things of that sort. It turns out and things of that sort. It turns out and things of that sort. It turns out that there are different biological that there are different biological that there are different biological mechanisms underlying each of the mechanisms underlying each of the mechanisms underlying each of the different types of aggression. And today different types of aggression. And today different types of aggression. And today I will define those for you. I'll talk I will define those for you. I'll talk I will define those for you. I'll talk about the neural circuits in the brain about the neural circuits in the brain about the neural circuits in the brain and body that mediate each of the and body that mediate each of the and body that mediate each of the different kinds of aggression. Talk different kinds of aggression. Talk different kinds of aggression. Talk about some of the hormones and peptides about some of the hormones and peptides about some of the hormones and peptides and neurotransmitters involved. I and neurotransmitters involved. I and neurotransmitters involved. I promise to make it all accessible to promise to make it all accessible to promise to make it all accessible to you. Even if you do not have any biology you. Even if you do not have any biology you. Even if you do not have any biology or science background, I'm certain that or science background, I'm certain that or science background, I'm certain that by the end of the episode, you will come by the end of the episode, you will come by the end of the episode, you will come away with a much more thorough away with a much more thorough away with a much more thorough understanding of what this thing that we understanding of what this thing that we understanding of what this thing that we call aggression really is. And when you call aggression really is. And when you call aggression really is. And when you see it in other people, I think it will see it in other people, I think it will see it in other people, I think it will make more sense to you. And when you make more sense to you. And when you make more sense to you. And when you observe it in yourself or the impulse to observe it in yourself or the impulse to observe it in yourself or the impulse to engage in aggression, verbal or physical engage in aggression, verbal or physical engage in aggression, verbal or physical or otherwise, I hope that you'll or otherwise, I hope that you'll or otherwise, I hope that you'll understand it better as well. And of understand it better as well. And of understand it better as well. And of course, the tools that I will describe course, the tools that I will describe course, the tools that I will describe should allow you to modulate and control should allow you to modulate and control should allow you to modulate and control aggressive tendencies or predispositions aggressive tendencies or predispositions aggressive tendencies or predispositions to aggressiveness and just generally be to aggressiveness and just generally be to aggressiveness and just generally be able to engage with people in a more able to engage with people in a more able to engage with people in a more adaptive way. Overall, the context of adaptive way. Overall, the context of adaptive way. Overall, the context of aggression really matters. So there are aggression really matters. So there are aggression really matters. So there are instances where aggression is adaptive. instances where aggression is adaptive. instances where aggression is adaptive. For instance, a mother protecting her For instance, a mother protecting her For instance, a mother protecting her children. Of course, other forms of children. Of course, other forms of children. Of course, other forms of aggression like unprovoked proactive aggression like unprovoked proactive aggression like unprovoked proactive aggression, somebody simply being aggression, somebody simply being aggression, somebody simply being violent to somebody else even when violent to somebody else even when violent to somebody else even when unprovoked. Most of us cringe when we unprovoked. Most of us cringe when we unprovoked. Most of us cringe when we see that kind of behavior. It can even see that kind of behavior. It can even see that kind of behavior. It can even evoke aggression in people when they evoke aggression in people when they evoke aggression in people when they observe that kind of behavior. Many of observe that kind of behavior. Many of observe that kind of behavior. Many of you have probably heard the statement you have probably heard the statement you have probably heard the statement that I believe arises from pop that I believe arises from pop that I believe arises from pop psychology, not from formal academic psychology, not from formal academic psychology, not from formal academic psychology, that aggression is just psychology, that aggression is just psychology, that aggression is just sadness. It's a form of sadness that's sadness. It's a form of sadness that's sadness. It's a form of sadness that's amplified and it shows up as aggression. amplified and it shows up as aggression. amplified and it shows up as aggression. But when we look at the underlying But when we look at the underlying But when we look at the underlying biology and the peer-reviewed literature biology and the peer-reviewed literature biology and the peer-reviewed literature on this, nothing could be further from on this, nothing could be further from on this, nothing could be further from the truth. We have distinct circuits in the truth. We have distinct circuits in the truth. We have distinct circuits in the brain for aggression versus grief the brain for aggression versus grief the brain for aggression versus grief and mourning. Those are non-over and mourning. Those are non-over and mourning. Those are non-over overlapping. Now that doesn't mean that overlapping. Now that doesn't mean that overlapping. Now that doesn't mean that you can't be sad and aggressive or in a you can't be sad and aggressive or in a you can't be sad and aggressive or in a state of mourning and aggressive at the state of mourning and aggressive at the state of mourning and aggressive at the same time. But the idea that sadness and same time. But the idea that sadness and same time. But the idea that sadness and aggression are one in the same thing is aggression are one in the same thing is aggression are one in the same thing is simply not true. And by understanding simply not true. And by understanding simply not true. And by understanding that or perhaps by understanding that or perhaps by understanding that or perhaps by understanding that irritability and aggression are not the irritability and aggression are not the irritability and aggression are not the same thing, you'll be in a much better same thing, you'll be in a much better same thing, you'll be in a much better position to apply some of the tools that position to apply some of the tools that position to apply some of the tools that we will talk about in this episode in we will talk about in this episode in we will talk about in this episode in order to be able to reduce or eliminate order to be able to reduce or eliminate order to be able to reduce or eliminate or if it's adaptive to you to modulate or if it's adaptive to you to modulate or if it's adaptive to you to modulate aggression. And yes, there are cases aggression. And yes, there are cases aggression. And yes, there are cases where modulating your aggression, in where modulating your aggression, in where modulating your aggression, in some cases even amplifying aggression some cases even amplifying aggression some cases even amplifying aggression can be adaptive. One of the names that's can be adaptive. One of the names that's can be adaptive. One of the names that's most associated with the formal study of most associated with the formal study of most associated with the formal study of aggression is none other than Conrad aggression is none other than Conrad aggression is none other than Conrad Loren. Conrad Loren Loren. Conrad Loren Loren. Conrad Loren studied so-called imprinting behaviors studied so-called imprinting behaviors studied so-called imprinting behaviors and fixed action pattern behaviors. and fixed action pattern behaviors. and fixed action pattern behaviors. Patterns of behavior that could be Patterns of behavior that could be Patterns of behavior that could be evoked by a single stimulus. The idea evoked by a single stimulus. The idea evoked by a single stimulus. The idea that you can get a whole category of that you can get a whole category of that you can get a whole category of behaviors like looking to somebody for behaviors like looking to somebody for behaviors like looking to somebody for comfort and only them. The idea that comfort and only them. The idea that comfort and only them. The idea that you could get a huge category of that you could get a huge category of that you could get a huge category of different behaviors in a bunch of different behaviors in a bunch of different behaviors in a bunch of different contexts triggered by just the different contexts triggered by just the different contexts triggered by just the presence of that person is remarkable presence of that person is remarkable presence of that person is remarkable because what it suggested and what turns because what it suggested and what turns because what it suggested and what turns out to be true is that there are neural out to be true is that there are neural out to be true is that there are neural circuits, not just individual brain circuits, not just individual brain circuits, not just individual brain areas, but collections of brain areas areas, but collections of brain areas areas, but collections of brain areas that work together to engage a pattern that work together to engage a pattern that work together to engage a pattern of behaviors. And that's the first of behaviors. And that's the first of behaviors. And that's the first fundamental principle that we need to fundamental principle that we need to fundamental principle that we need to define today. that when we talk about define today. that when we talk about define today. that when we talk about aggression, we're talking about aggression, we're talking about aggression, we're talking about activation of neural circuits, not activation of neural circuits, not activation of neural circuits, not individual brain areas, but neural individual brain areas, but neural individual brain areas, but neural circuits that get played out in sequence circuits that get played out in sequence circuits that get played out in sequence like keys on a piano. But that playing like keys on a piano. But that playing like keys on a piano. But that playing out in sequence means that aggression is out in sequence means that aggression is out in sequence means that aggression is a verb. It has a beginning, a middle, a verb. It has a beginning, a middle, a verb. It has a beginning, a middle, and an end. And it's a process. It's not and an end. And it's a process. It's not and an end. And it's a process. It's not an event. And as you'll see, that turns an event. And as you'll see, that turns an event. And as you'll see, that turns out to be very important in terms of out to be very important in terms of out to be very important in terms of thinking about how one can halt thinking about how one can halt thinking about how one can halt aggression, prevent it from happening aggression, prevent it from happening aggression, prevent it from happening before it's initiated, or maybe even before it's initiated, or maybe even before it's initiated, or maybe even prolonging aggression if that's what's prolonging aggression if that's what's prolonging aggression if that's what's needed. Now, Conrad Loren had no real needed. Now, Conrad Loren had no real needed. Now, Conrad Loren had no real knowledge of neural circuits. I mean, knowledge of neural circuits. I mean, knowledge of neural circuits. I mean, obviously he knew there was this thing obviously he knew there was this thing obviously he knew there was this thing that we call a brain and a nervous that we call a brain and a nervous that we call a brain and a nervous system, and he knew that there were system, and he knew that there were system, and he knew that there were chemicals in the brain and hormones and chemicals in the brain and hormones and chemicals in the brain and hormones and things of that sort that were likely to things of that sort that were likely to things of that sort that were likely to play a role, but he really didn't take play a role, but he really didn't take play a role, but he really didn't take any measures to define what the neural any measures to define what the neural any measures to define what the neural circuits were. But he did think about circuits were. But he did think about circuits were. But he did think about what sorts of underlying processes could what sorts of underlying processes could what sorts of underlying processes could drive something like aggression. And he drive something like aggression. And he drive something like aggression. And he talked about one particular feature talked about one particular feature talked about one particular feature that's especially important, and that's especially important, and that's especially important, and that's this notion of a pressure. The idea that this notion of a pressure. The idea that this notion of a pressure. The idea that yes, certain hormones will bias somebody yes, certain hormones will bias somebody yes, certain hormones will bias somebody or an animal to be aggressive. Certain or an animal to be aggressive. Certain or an animal to be aggressive. Certain neurotransmitter states, and you'll neurotransmitter states, and you'll neurotransmitter states, and you'll learn what those are today, will bias learn what those are today, will bias learn what those are today, will bias somebody to be more or less aggressive. somebody to be more or less aggressive. somebody to be more or less aggressive. And yes, of course, there will be And yes, of course, there will be And yes, of course, there will be historical features based on their historical features based on their historical features based on their childhood, etc., etc. He understood that childhood, etc., etc. He understood that childhood, etc., etc. He understood that there will be a constellation of things there will be a constellation of things there will be a constellation of things that would drive people to be that would drive people to be that would drive people to be aggressive. And he described a so-called aggressive. And he described a so-called aggressive. And he described a so-called pressure, almost like a hydraulic pressure, almost like a hydraulic pressure, almost like a hydraulic pressure. Just think about fluid pressure. Just think about fluid pressure. Just think about fluid pressure in a small container being pressure in a small container being pressure in a small container being pushed, push pushed until the can or the pushed, push pushed until the can or the pushed, push pushed until the can or the container is ready to explode and how container is ready to explode and how container is ready to explode and how multiple features, multiple variables multiple features, multiple variables multiple features, multiple variables could impinge on that and create that could impinge on that and create that could impinge on that and create that pressure. It turns out that's exactly pressure. It turns out that's exactly pressure. It turns out that's exactly the way the system works. There is no the way the system works. There is no the way the system works. There is no single brain area that flips the switch single brain area that flips the switch single brain area that flips the switch for aggression. Although we'll soon talk for aggression. Although we'll soon talk for aggression. Although we'll soon talk about a brain structure that generally about a brain structure that generally about a brain structure that generally houses the propensity and the output of houses the propensity and the output of houses the propensity and the output of aggression. This notion of a hydraulic pressure that This notion of a hydraulic pressure that This notion of a hydraulic pressure that can drive us toward aggressive behavior can drive us toward aggressive behavior can drive us toward aggressive behavior or conversely can be very low pressure or conversely can be very low pressure or conversely can be very low pressure and keep us in a state of and keep us in a state of and keep us in a state of non-reactivity, maybe even passivity or non-reactivity, maybe even passivity or non-reactivity, maybe even passivity or submissiveness is a very important submissiveness is a very important submissiveness is a very important feature because it really captures the feature because it really captures the feature because it really captures the essence of how neural circuits work when essence of how neural circuits work when essence of how neural circuits work when we're talking about primitive behaviors we're talking about primitive behaviors we're talking about primitive behaviors generally. And you can start to notice generally. And you can start to notice generally. And you can start to notice this in yourself and in others. you can this in yourself and in others. you can this in yourself and in others. you can start to notice when you are veering start to notice when you are veering start to notice when you are veering toward aggression or when someone is toward aggression or when someone is toward aggression or when someone is veering toward aggression, verbal or veering toward aggression, verbal or veering toward aggression, verbal or physical. Now that veering is the physical. Now that veering is the physical. Now that veering is the buildup of this hydraulic pressure that buildup of this hydraulic pressure that buildup of this hydraulic pressure that Loren was referring to and it really Loren was referring to and it really Loren was referring to and it really does have an underlying biological does have an underlying biological does have an underlying biological basis. Now, it was some years later that basis. Now, it was some years later that basis. Now, it was some years later that the first experiments came along which the first experiments came along which the first experiments came along which really started to identify the brain really started to identify the brain really started to identify the brain areas and the biological so-called areas and the biological so-called areas and the biological so-called pressures that can induce aggressive pressures that can induce aggressive pressures that can induce aggressive behavior. And the person that really behavior. And the person that really behavior. And the person that really gets credit for this is a guy by the gets credit for this is a guy by the gets credit for this is a guy by the name of Walter Hess who at that time was name of Walter Hess who at that time was name of Walter Hess who at that time was working on cats. And I know that when working on cats. And I know that when working on cats. And I know that when you say working on cats, a lot of people you say working on cats, a lot of people you say working on cats, a lot of people would cringe. A lot of people have cats would cringe. A lot of people have cats would cringe. A lot of people have cats as pets. And certainly cats can be as pets. And certainly cats can be as pets. And certainly cats can be delightful. Some people like them more. delightful. Some people like them more. delightful. Some people like them more. Some people like them less. Most people Some people like them less. Most people Some people like them less. Most people cringe at the idea of doing experiments cringe at the idea of doing experiments cringe at the idea of doing experiments on cats. In the time of Hess, very few on cats. In the time of Hess, very few on cats. In the time of Hess, very few laboratories worked on mice. Most laboratories worked on mice. Most laboratories worked on mice. Most laboratories worked on cats or rats. So laboratories worked on cats or rats. So laboratories worked on cats or rats. So when I say he was working on cats, I when I say he was working on cats, I when I say he was working on cats, I realize that probably evokes some realize that probably evokes some realize that probably evokes some negative emotions in some of you, maybe negative emotions in some of you, maybe negative emotions in some of you, maybe even aggression in some of you. What we even aggression in some of you. What we even aggression in some of you. What we can do, however, is look at the data and can do, however, is look at the data and can do, however, is look at the data and make use of the data in terms of our make use of the data in terms of our make use of the data in terms of our understanding. What Hess did was he had cats that were What Hess did was he had cats that were What Hess did was he had cats that were awake and he was able to lower a awake and he was able to lower a awake and he was able to lower a stimulating electrode into their brain. stimulating electrode into their brain. stimulating electrode into their brain. Now keep in mind that the brain does not Now keep in mind that the brain does not Now keep in mind that the brain does not have any pain sensors. So after a small have any pain sensors. So after a small have any pain sensors. So after a small hole is made in the skull, electrodes hole is made in the skull, electrodes hole is made in the skull, electrodes are lowered into the brain. This is are lowered into the brain. This is are lowered into the brain. This is what's done commonly in human what's done commonly in human what's done commonly in human neurosurgery. He was trying to identify neurosurgery. He was trying to identify neurosurgery. He was trying to identify brain regions that could generate entire brain regions that could generate entire brain regions that could generate entire categories of behavior. Eventually, his categories of behavior. Eventually, his categories of behavior. Eventually, his electrode landed in a site and he electrode landed in a site and he electrode landed in a site and he provided electrical stimulation to the provided electrical stimulation to the provided electrical stimulation to the cat that caused this otherwise passive cat that caused this otherwise passive cat that caused this otherwise passive purring relaxing cat to suddenly go into purring relaxing cat to suddenly go into purring relaxing cat to suddenly go into an absolute rage when he stimulated this an absolute rage when he stimulated this an absolute rage when he stimulated this particular brain area. And the fact that particular brain area. And the fact that particular brain area. And the fact that when he turned off the stimulation of when he turned off the stimulation of when he turned off the stimulation of this particular brain area, the cat very this particular brain area, the cat very this particular brain area, the cat very quickly within seconds went back to quickly within seconds went back to quickly within seconds went back to being passive calm kitty. And later being passive calm kitty. And later being passive calm kitty. And later experiments done in mice but also in experiments done in mice but also in experiments done in mice but also in humans confirmed that indeed stimulation humans confirmed that indeed stimulation humans confirmed that indeed stimulation of this brain area evoked not just of this brain area evoked not just of this brain area evoked not just behavioral aggression but also behavioral aggression but also behavioral aggression but also subjective feelings of aggression and subjective feelings of aggression and subjective feelings of aggression and anger. So what was this incredible brain anger. So what was this incredible brain anger. So what was this incredible brain area? The so-called VMH or ventromedial area? The so-called VMH or ventromedial area? The so-called VMH or ventromedial hypothalamus. The ventromedial hypothalamus. The ventromedial hypothalamus. The ventromedial hypothalamus is a nucleus, meaning a hypothalamus is a nucleus, meaning a hypothalamus is a nucleus, meaning a small collection of neurons, only about small collection of neurons, only about small collection of neurons, only about 1,500 neurons on one side of your brain 1,500 neurons on one side of your brain 1,500 neurons on one side of your brain and a matching 1,500 neurons on the and a matching 1,500 neurons on the and a matching 1,500 neurons on the other side of your brain. And that other side of your brain. And that other side of your brain. And that combined 3,000 neurons or so is combined 3,000 neurons or so is combined 3,000 neurons or so is sufficient to generate aggressive sufficient to generate aggressive sufficient to generate aggressive behavior of the sort that Hess observed behavior of the sort that Hess observed behavior of the sort that Hess observed in the cat. And believe it or not, when in the cat. And believe it or not, when in the cat. And believe it or not, when you see somebody who's in a act of rage you see somebody who's in a act of rage you see somebody who's in a act of rage or in an act of verbal aggression or in or in an act of verbal aggression or in or in an act of verbal aggression or in an act of defensive aggression, an act of defensive aggression, an act of defensive aggression, protecting their family or loved ones or protecting their family or loved ones or protecting their family or loved ones or country, etc. Almost certainly those country, etc. Almost certainly those country, etc. Almost certainly those neurons are engaged in that behavior. neurons are engaged in that behavior. neurons are engaged in that behavior. Experiments done by David Anderson's lab Experiments done by David Anderson's lab Experiments done by David Anderson's lab at Caltech were really the first to at Caltech were really the first to at Caltech were really the first to parse the fine circuitry and to really parse the fine circuitry and to really parse the fine circuitry and to really show that the ventromedial hypothalamus show that the ventromedial hypothalamus show that the ventromedial hypothalamus is both necessary and sufficient for is both necessary and sufficient for is both necessary and sufficient for aggressive behavior. What they did was aggressive behavior. What they did was aggressive behavior. What they did was they identified where the ventromedial they identified where the ventromedial they identified where the ventromedial hypothalamus was in the mouse. That was hypothalamus was in the mouse. That was hypothalamus was in the mouse. That was pretty straightforward to do. It was pretty straightforward to do. It was pretty straightforward to do. It was sort of known before they started these sort of known before they started these sort of known before they started these experiments. And then they analyzed experiments. And then they analyzed experiments. And then they analyzed which genes which genes which genes meaning which DNA which of course meaning which DNA which of course meaning which DNA which of course becomes RNA and RNA becomes protein. becomes RNA and RNA becomes protein. becomes RNA and RNA becomes protein. Which DNA and therefore which proteins Which DNA and therefore which proteins Which DNA and therefore which proteins are expressed in particular cells of the are expressed in particular cells of the are expressed in particular cells of the ventromedial hypothalamus. And it turns ventromedial hypothalamus. And it turns ventromedial hypothalamus. And it turns out that there's a particular category out that there's a particular category out that there's a particular category of neurons in the vententral medial of neurons in the vententral medial of neurons in the vententral medial hypothalamus that make an estrogen hypothalamus that make an estrogen hypothalamus that make an estrogen receptor. And it is those neurons in particular And it is those neurons in particular And it is those neurons in particular that are responsible for generating that are responsible for generating that are responsible for generating aggressive behavior. How did they know aggressive behavior. How did they know aggressive behavior. How did they know this? Well, they used a tool that's this? Well, they used a tool that's this? Well, they used a tool that's actually been described by a previous actually been described by a previous actually been described by a previous guest of this podcast. We had an episode guest of this podcast. We had an episode guest of this podcast. We had an episode with the psychiatrist and bioengineer with the psychiatrist and bioengineer with the psychiatrist and bioengineer and my colleague at Stanford School of and my colleague at Stanford School of and my colleague at Stanford School of Medicine, Carl Dyeroth. He and others Medicine, Carl Dyeroth. He and others Medicine, Carl Dyeroth. He and others have developed tools that allow people have developed tools that allow people have developed tools that allow people to control the activity of neurons to control the activity of neurons to control the activity of neurons essentially by remote control by shining essentially by remote control by shining essentially by remote control by shining light on those neurons. So in the light on those neurons. So in the light on those neurons. So in the context of an experiment on a mouse, context of an experiment on a mouse, context of an experiment on a mouse, which is what David's lab did, and these which is what David's lab did, and these which is what David's lab did, and these were the beautiful experiments of Dulin, were the beautiful experiments of Dulin, were the beautiful experiments of Dulin, who's now in her own laboratory at New who's now in her own laboratory at New who's now in her own laboratory at New York University, put a little fiber York University, put a little fiber York University, put a little fiber optic cable down into the hypothalamus optic cable down into the hypothalamus optic cable down into the hypothalamus of the mouse. The mouse is able to move of the mouse. The mouse is able to move of the mouse. The mouse is able to move around in its cage, freely moving, even around in its cage, freely moving, even around in its cage, freely moving, even though it has a little tether. This though it has a little tether. This though it has a little tether. This little wire, it's a very thin wire. And little wire, it's a very thin wire. And little wire, it's a very thin wire. And that little thin wire is actually a that little thin wire is actually a that little thin wire is actually a little what we call optrode. And the little what we call optrode. And the little what we call optrode. And the experimentalist in this case Dou was experimentalist in this case Dou was experimentalist in this case Dou was able to stimulate the turning on of a able to stimulate the turning on of a able to stimulate the turning on of a little bit of blue light. And that blue little bit of blue light. And that blue little bit of blue light. And that blue light activated only those estrogen light activated only those estrogen light activated only those estrogen receptor neurons in only the receptor neurons in only the receptor neurons in only the ventromedial hypothalamus. And the way ventromedial hypothalamus. And the way ventromedial hypothalamus. And the way she was able to do that is she had she was able to do that is she had she was able to do that is she had introduced a gene that had been introduced a gene that had been introduced a gene that had been developed by our friend Carl Daiseroth developed by our friend Carl Daiseroth developed by our friend Carl Daiseroth that allows light to trigger electrical that allows light to trigger electrical that allows light to trigger electrical activity in those neurons. So if any of activity in those neurons. So if any of activity in those neurons. So if any of that is confusing or if all of that is that is confusing or if all of that is that is confusing or if all of that is confusing, here's the experiment. confusing, here's the experiment. confusing, here's the experiment. There's a mouse in a cage has a little There's a mouse in a cage has a little There's a mouse in a cage has a little wire coming out of its head. It doesn't wire coming out of its head. It doesn't wire coming out of its head. It doesn't notice, believe it or not. We know this notice, believe it or not. We know this notice, believe it or not. We know this because it's still eating and mating and because it's still eating and mating and because it's still eating and mating and doing all the things that mice like to doing all the things that mice like to doing all the things that mice like to do on a daily basis and sleeping, etc. do on a daily basis and sleeping, etc. do on a daily basis and sleeping, etc. And the mere pressing of a button will And the mere pressing of a button will And the mere pressing of a button will activate a little bit of light released activate a little bit of light released activate a little bit of light released at the end of that wire. That light at the end of that wire. That light at the end of that wire. That light activates particular neurons. In this activates particular neurons. In this activates particular neurons. In this case, it's the estrogen receptor case, it's the estrogen receptor case, it's the estrogen receptor containing neurons in only the containing neurons in only the containing neurons in only the ventromedial hypothalamus. A large ventromedial hypothalamus. A large ventromedial hypothalamus. A large number of experiments were done, but the number of experiments were done, but the number of experiments were done, but the first experiment really was to put the first experiment really was to put the first experiment really was to put the male mouse in with a female mouse who's male mouse in with a female mouse who's male mouse in with a female mouse who's in the so-called receptive phase of in the so-called receptive phase of in the so-called receptive phase of estrus. That is she will allow mating. estrus. That is she will allow mating. estrus. That is she will allow mating. And he starts mating with her. and they And he starts mating with her. and they And he starts mating with her. and they go through the standard repertoire of go through the standard repertoire of go through the standard repertoire of mating behaviors that you observe in mating behaviors that you observe in mating behaviors that you observe in mice, mounting, thrusting, intrammission mice, mounting, thrusting, intrammission mice, mounting, thrusting, intrammission as it's called in the mouse sex world. as it's called in the mouse sex world. as it's called in the mouse sex world. Um, well, I guess I don't know what the Um, well, I guess I don't know what the Um, well, I guess I don't know what the mice call it, but that's what the mice call it, but that's what the mice call it, but that's what the experimenters call it. And then experimenters call it. And then experimenters call it. And then afterwards that he will dismount. But afterwards that he will dismount. But afterwards that he will dismount. But about halfway through the behavior, Dau about halfway through the behavior, Dau about halfway through the behavior, Dau turned on the light to stimulate these turned on the light to stimulate these turned on the light to stimulate these estrogen receptor containing neurons estrogen receptor containing neurons estrogen receptor containing neurons only in the male mouse. And what she only in the male mouse. And what she only in the male mouse. And what she observed was incredibly dramatic. The observed was incredibly dramatic. The observed was incredibly dramatic. The male mouse ceases from trying to mate male mouse ceases from trying to mate male mouse ceases from trying to mate with the female mouse and immediately with the female mouse and immediately with the female mouse and immediately tries to kill the female mouse. He tries to kill the female mouse. He tries to kill the female mouse. He starts attacking her. Then she turns off starts attacking her. Then she turns off starts attacking her. Then she turns off the light. The male stops and goes back the light. The male stops and goes back the light. The male stops and goes back to trying to mate with the female mouse. to trying to mate with the female mouse. to trying to mate with the female mouse. So I'm sure all of this was very So I'm sure all of this was very So I'm sure all of this was very confusing and disturbing to the female confusing and disturbing to the female confusing and disturbing to the female mouse. Nonetheless, that was the mouse. Nonetheless, that was the mouse. Nonetheless, that was the repertoire. These are such dramatic repertoire. These are such dramatic repertoire. These are such dramatic shifts in behavior triggered only by the shifts in behavior triggered only by the shifts in behavior triggered only by the activation of only this small set of activation of only this small set of activation of only this small set of neurons within the ventromedial neurons within the ventromedial neurons within the ventromedial hypothalamus. The shift in behavior is hypothalamus. The shift in behavior is hypothalamus. The shift in behavior is almost instantaneous. Occurs within almost instantaneous. Occurs within almost instantaneous. Occurs within seconds if not milliseconds, thousands seconds if not milliseconds, thousands seconds if not milliseconds, thousands of a second. The next experiment that of a second. The next experiment that of a second. The next experiment that she did was to put a male mouse with she did was to put a male mouse with she did was to put a male mouse with this stimulation with light capability this stimulation with light capability this stimulation with light capability in its ventromedial hypothalamus into a in its ventromedial hypothalamus into a in its ventromedial hypothalamus into a cage alone, but with a rubber glove cage alone, but with a rubber glove cage alone, but with a rubber glove filled with air or water. Then she filled with air or water. Then she filled with air or water. Then she stimulates the activation of these stimulates the activation of these stimulates the activation of these ventromedial hypothalamus neurons and ventromedial hypothalamus neurons and ventromedial hypothalamus neurons and the mouse immediately tries to kill the mouse immediately tries to kill the mouse immediately tries to kill the glove. It goes into a rage attacking the glove. It goes into a rage attacking the glove. It goes into a rage attacking the glove as if it were another mouse or glove as if it were another mouse or glove as if it were another mouse or some other animate object. But of some other animate object. But of some other animate object. But of course, it's an inanimate object. It's course, it's an inanimate object. It's course, it's an inanimate object. It's just a rubber glove. She stops the just a rubber glove. She stops the just a rubber glove. She stops the stimulation and the mouse immediately stimulation and the mouse immediately stimulation and the mouse immediately goes back to being completely calm or at goes back to being completely calm or at goes back to being completely calm or at least not attacking. Again, we don't least not attacking. Again, we don't least not attacking. Again, we don't know what the mouse was feeling. know what the mouse was feeling. know what the mouse was feeling. Subsequent experiments done by Dulin in Subsequent experiments done by Dulin in Subsequent experiments done by Dulin in her own laboratory and other her own laboratory and other her own laboratory and other laboratories have shown that the laboratories have shown that the laboratories have shown that the ventromedial hypothalamus is connected ventromedial hypothalamus is connected ventromedial hypothalamus is connected with a bunch of other brain areas. One with a bunch of other brain areas. One with a bunch of other brain areas. One of them that I want to call out now is of them that I want to call out now is of them that I want to call out now is the so-called P AG, the perryqueductal the so-called P AG, the perryqueductal the so-called P AG, the perryqueductal gray nucleus. This is a large structure gray nucleus. This is a large structure gray nucleus. This is a large structure in the back of the brain that houses in the back of the brain that houses in the back of the brain that houses things like neurons that can create things like neurons that can create things like neurons that can create opioids. We all know of the opioid opioids. We all know of the opioid opioids. We all know of the opioid crisis, but these are neurons that can crisis, but these are neurons that can crisis, but these are neurons that can produce endogenous means made by the produce endogenous means made by the produce endogenous means made by the body chemicals that can cause pain body chemicals that can cause pain body chemicals that can cause pain relief. You could understand why that relief. You could understand why that relief. You could understand why that might occur in a circuit for aggression, might occur in a circuit for aggression, might occur in a circuit for aggression, right? Even if one is the aggressor, right? Even if one is the aggressor, right? Even if one is the aggressor, it's likely that they may incur some it's likely that they may incur some it's likely that they may incur some physical damage and they'd want some physical damage and they'd want some physical damage and they'd want some pain relief. pain relief. pain relief. The Pag also is connected to a number of The Pag also is connected to a number of The Pag also is connected to a number of neural circuits that eventually through neural circuits that eventually through neural circuits that eventually through several processing stages stations, several processing stages stations, several processing stages stations, excuse me, arrive at things like the excuse me, arrive at things like the excuse me, arrive at things like the jaws. And in fact, stimulation of the jaws. And in fact, stimulation of the jaws. And in fact, stimulation of the ventrome hypothalamus can evoke biting ventrome hypothalamus can evoke biting ventrome hypothalamus can evoke biting and aggressive biting behavior. Now, and aggressive biting behavior. Now, and aggressive biting behavior. Now, aggressive biting behavior is aggressive biting behavior is aggressive biting behavior is particularly interesting because in particularly interesting because in particularly interesting because in humans and especially in human children, humans and especially in human children, humans and especially in human children, biting is something that while young biting is something that while young biting is something that while young children might do as a form of children might do as a form of children might do as a form of aggression, tends to disappear pretty aggression, tends to disappear pretty aggression, tends to disappear pretty early in childhood. And if it doesn't, early in childhood. And if it doesn't, early in childhood. And if it doesn't, it's often seen as a mark of pathology. it's often seen as a mark of pathology. it's often seen as a mark of pathology. I think there is general agreement in I think there is general agreement in I think there is general agreement in the psychology community and the psychology community and the psychology community and the psychiatric community that past a psychiatric community that past a psychiatric community that past a certain age the using of one's teeth to certain age the using of one's teeth to certain age the using of one's teeth to impart aggress aggression and damage on impart aggress aggression and damage on impart aggress aggression and damage on others is a particularly primitive and others is a particularly primitive and others is a particularly primitive and troubling or at least for the observer troubling or at least for the observer troubling or at least for the observer or the person experiences a pretty or the person experiences a pretty or the person experiences a pretty disturbing event. Dou's lab has shown disturbing event. Dou's lab has shown disturbing event. Dou's lab has shown that activation of the vententral medial that activation of the vententral medial that activation of the vententral medial hypothalamus triggers a downstream hypothalamus triggers a downstream hypothalamus triggers a downstream circuit in the perryqueductal gray which circuit in the perryqueductal gray which circuit in the perryqueductal gray which then triggers a whole other set of then triggers a whole other set of then triggers a whole other set of circuits of fixed action patterns. Here circuits of fixed action patterns. Here circuits of fixed action patterns. Here we are back to Lorenzans with fixed we are back to Lorenzans with fixed we are back to Lorenzans with fixed action patterns including swinging of action patterns including swinging of action patterns including swinging of the limbs, right? Punching. This the limbs, right? Punching. This the limbs, right? Punching. This wouldn't necessarily be controlled wouldn't necessarily be controlled wouldn't necessarily be controlled punching, but also biting behavior. So, punching, but also biting behavior. So, punching, but also biting behavior. So, it's remarkable to me at least that we it's remarkable to me at least that we it's remarkable to me at least that we have circuits in our brain that can have circuits in our brain that can have circuits in our brain that can evoke violent use of things like our evoke violent use of things like our evoke violent use of things like our mouth or violent use of things like our mouth or violent use of things like our mouth or violent use of things like our limbs that of course could be used for limbs that of course could be used for limbs that of course could be used for things like singing or kissing or eating things like singing or kissing or eating things like singing or kissing or eating or you know justiculating in any kind of or you know justiculating in any kind of or you know justiculating in any kind of polite or impolite way. The point here polite or impolite way. The point here polite or impolite way. The point here is that neural circuits not individual is that neural circuits not individual is that neural circuits not individual brain areas evoke the constellation of brain areas evoke the constellation of brain areas evoke the constellation of behaviors that we call aggression. Now, behaviors that we call aggression. Now, behaviors that we call aggression. Now, many of you are probably puzzled or at many of you are probably puzzled or at many of you are probably puzzled or at least should be because I've been least should be because I've been least should be because I've been talking about this highly specialized talking about this highly specialized talking about this highly specialized brain area, the ventromedial brain area, the ventromedial brain area, the ventromedial hypothalamus, and this highly hypothalamus, and this highly hypothalamus, and this highly specialized subcategory of neurons in specialized subcategory of neurons in specialized subcategory of neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. These the ventromedial hypothalamus. These the ventromedial hypothalamus. These neurons that make estrogen receptor and neurons that make estrogen receptor and neurons that make estrogen receptor and yet the activation of those cells yet the activation of those cells yet the activation of those cells triggers dramatic and immediate triggers dramatic and immediate triggers dramatic and immediate aggression both in males and in females aggression both in males and in females aggression both in males and in females and both against males and against and both against males and against and both against males and against females. So, what's going on here? Most females. So, what's going on here? Most females. So, what's going on here? Most of us think about estrogen and we don't of us think about estrogen and we don't of us think about estrogen and we don't immediately think of aggression. Most of immediately think of aggression. Most of immediately think of aggression. Most of us hear testosterone and we might think us hear testosterone and we might think us hear testosterone and we might think about aggression. To make a long story about aggression. To make a long story about aggression. To make a long story short and to dispel a still short and to dispel a still short and to dispel a still unfortunately very common myth, unfortunately very common myth, unfortunately very common myth, testosterone does not increase testosterone does not increase testosterone does not increase aggressiveness. Testosterone increases proactivity and Testosterone increases proactivity and Testosterone increases proactivity and the willingness to lean into effort in the willingness to lean into effort in the willingness to lean into effort in competitive scenarios. If people are competitive scenarios. If people are competitive scenarios. If people are given testosterone or if you look at given testosterone or if you look at given testosterone or if you look at people who have different le levels, people who have different le levels, people who have different le levels, excuse me, of testosterone indogenously excuse me, of testosterone indogenously excuse me, of testosterone indogenously that they naturally make, what you'll that they naturally make, what you'll that they naturally make, what you'll find is that testosterone tends to find is that testosterone tends to find is that testosterone tends to increase competitiveness, but not just increase competitiveness, but not just increase competitiveness, but not just in aggressive scenarios. So, if somebody in aggressive scenarios. So, if somebody in aggressive scenarios. So, if somebody is already aggressive, giving them is already aggressive, giving them is already aggressive, giving them testosterone will have the tendency to testosterone will have the tendency to testosterone will have the tendency to make them more aggressive. If somebody make them more aggressive. If somebody make them more aggressive. If somebody however is very benevolent and however is very benevolent and however is very benevolent and altruistic, giving them testosterone altruistic, giving them testosterone altruistic, giving them testosterone will make them more benevolent and will make them more benevolent and will make them more benevolent and altruistic at least up to a point. Turns altruistic at least up to a point. Turns altruistic at least up to a point. Turns out there's evidence that in certain out there's evidence that in certain out there's evidence that in certain context estrogen can make people more context estrogen can make people more context estrogen can make people more aggressive. So what's going on here? aggressive. So what's going on here? aggressive. So what's going on here? Well, what's going on is that Well, what's going on is that Well, what's going on is that testosterone can be converted into testosterone can be converted into testosterone can be converted into estrogen through a process called estrogen through a process called estrogen through a process called aromatization. There's an enzyme called aromatization. There's an enzyme called aromatization. There's an enzyme called aromatase. Anytime you have a word that aromatase. Anytime you have a word that aromatase. Anytime you have a word that ends in asse at least if it's in the ends in asse at least if it's in the ends in asse at least if it's in the context of biology it's almost always context of biology it's almost always context of biology it's almost always not always but almost always an enzyme. not always but almost always an enzyme. not always but almost always an enzyme. So arom the aromatase enzyme converts So arom the aromatase enzyme converts So arom the aromatase enzyme converts testosterone into estrogen and it is testosterone into estrogen and it is testosterone into estrogen and it is actually testosterone aromatized actually testosterone aromatized actually testosterone aromatized converted into estrogen and then binding converted into estrogen and then binding converted into estrogen and then binding to these estrogen containing neurons in to these estrogen containing neurons in to these estrogen containing neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus that the ventromedial hypothalamus that the ventromedial hypothalamus that triggers aggression. I want to repeat triggers aggression. I want to repeat triggers aggression. I want to repeat that it is not testosterone itself that it is not testosterone itself that it is not testosterone itself that triggers aggression. It is testosterone triggers aggression. It is testosterone triggers aggression. It is testosterone aromatized into estrogen within the aromatized into estrogen within the aromatized into estrogen within the brain and binding to these estrogen brain and binding to these estrogen brain and binding to these estrogen receptor containing neurons in the receptor containing neurons in the receptor containing neurons in the vententral medial hypothalamus that vententral medial hypothalamus that vententral medial hypothalamus that evokes aggression and dramatic evokes aggression and dramatic evokes aggression and dramatic aggression at that. Now this effect of aggression at that. Now this effect of aggression at that. Now this effect of estrogen causing aggression in the brain estrogen causing aggression in the brain estrogen causing aggression in the brain is very robust. So much so that if you is very robust. So much so that if you is very robust. So much so that if you take a mouse that lacks the aromatase take a mouse that lacks the aromatase take a mouse that lacks the aromatase enzyme or a human that lacks the enzyme or a human that lacks the enzyme or a human that lacks the aromatase enzyme and they do exist then aromatase enzyme and they do exist then aromatase enzyme and they do exist then there is a reduction in overall there is a reduction in overall there is a reduction in overall aggression despite high levels of aggression despite high levels of aggression despite high levels of testosterone. It doesn't matter how much testosterone. It doesn't matter how much testosterone. It doesn't matter how much you increase testosterone or any of its you increase testosterone or any of its you increase testosterone or any of its other derivatives you do not observe other derivatives you do not observe other derivatives you do not observe this aggression. This runs counter to this aggression. This runs counter to this aggression. This runs counter to everything that we know and think about everything that we know and think about everything that we know and think about the role of testosterone. So the next the role of testosterone. So the next the role of testosterone. So the next time somebody says testosterone makes time somebody says testosterone makes time somebody says testosterone makes people aggressive, you can say ah no people aggressive, you can say ah no people aggressive, you can say ah no actually it's estrogen that makes people actually it's estrogen that makes people actually it's estrogen that makes people aggressive and animals aggressive for aggressive and animals aggressive for aggressive and animals aggressive for that matter. Now of course it is the that matter. Now of course it is the that matter. Now of course it is the case that because males have relatively case that because males have relatively case that because males have relatively less estrogen circulating in their brain less estrogen circulating in their brain less estrogen circulating in their brain and body than females, right? because and body than females, right? because and body than females, right? because they have testes, not ovaries. That they have testes, not ovaries. That they have testes, not ovaries. That testosterone is required in the first testosterone is required in the first testosterone is required in the first place in order to be converted into place in order to be converted into place in order to be converted into estrogen to activate this aggressive estrogen to activate this aggressive estrogen to activate this aggressive circuit involving these estrogen circuit involving these estrogen circuit involving these estrogen receptor containing neurons in the receptor containing neurons in the receptor containing neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. So, we've ventromedial hypothalamus. So, we've ventromedial hypothalamus. So, we've established that it's not testosterone, established that it's not testosterone, established that it's not testosterone, but testosterone converted into estrogen but testosterone converted into estrogen but testosterone converted into estrogen that activates these circuits for that activates these circuits for that activates these circuits for aggression. Nonetheless, it's still aggression. Nonetheless, it's still aggression. Nonetheless, it's still surprising, right? Right? I mean, most surprising, right? Right? I mean, most surprising, right? Right? I mean, most of us don't think about a estrogen as of us don't think about a estrogen as of us don't think about a estrogen as the hormone that stimulates aggression, the hormone that stimulates aggression, the hormone that stimulates aggression, but turns out it's all contextual. There but turns out it's all contextual. There but turns out it's all contextual. There are beautiful data showing that whether are beautiful data showing that whether are beautiful data showing that whether or not estrogen stimulates aggression or not estrogen stimulates aggression or not estrogen stimulates aggression can be powerfully modulated by whether can be powerfully modulated by whether can be powerfully modulated by whether or not days are short or days are long. or not days are short or days are long. or not days are short or days are long. In other words, whether or not there's a In other words, whether or not there's a In other words, whether or not there's a lot of sunshine or not. Day length is lot of sunshine or not. Day length is lot of sunshine or not. Day length is converted into hormonal signals and converted into hormonal signals and converted into hormonal signals and chemical signals. And the primary chemical signals. And the primary chemical signals. And the primary hormonal and chemical signals involve hormonal and chemical signals involve hormonal and chemical signals involve melatonin and dopamine and also the melatonin and dopamine and also the melatonin and dopamine and also the stress hormones. So to make a very long stress hormones. So to make a very long stress hormones. So to make a very long story short, in the long days where we story short, in the long days where we story short, in the long days where we get a lot of sunlight both in our eyes get a lot of sunlight both in our eyes get a lot of sunlight both in our eyes and on our skin, melatonin levels are and on our skin, melatonin levels are and on our skin, melatonin levels are reduced. Melatonin is a hormone that reduced. Melatonin is a hormone that reduced. Melatonin is a hormone that tends to produce states of sleepiness tends to produce states of sleepiness tends to produce states of sleepiness and quiescence. It also tends to and quiescence. It also tends to and quiescence. It also tends to activate pathways that tend to reduce uh activate pathways that tend to reduce uh activate pathways that tend to reduce uh things like breeding and sexual things like breeding and sexual things like breeding and sexual behavior. In long days, dopamine is behavior. In long days, dopamine is behavior. In long days, dopamine is increased. Dopamine is a molecule increased. Dopamine is a molecule increased. Dopamine is a molecule associated with feelings of well-being associated with feelings of well-being associated with feelings of well-being and motivation and the desire to seek and motivation and the desire to seek and motivation and the desire to seek out all sorts of things. And in long out all sorts of things. And in long out all sorts of things. And in long days, provided we're getting enough days, provided we're getting enough days, provided we're getting enough sunlight on our skin and to our eyes, sunlight on our skin and to our eyes, sunlight on our skin and to our eyes, the stress hormones, especially cortisol the stress hormones, especially cortisol the stress hormones, especially cortisol and some of the other stress hormones and some of the other stress hormones and some of the other stress hormones are reduced in levels. If estrogen are reduced in levels. If estrogen are reduced in levels. If estrogen levels are increased experimentally levels are increased experimentally levels are increased experimentally under long day conditions, it does not under long day conditions, it does not under long day conditions, it does not evoke aggression. However, in short evoke aggression. However, in short evoke aggression. However, in short days, if estrogen is increased, there is days, if estrogen is increased, there is days, if estrogen is increased, there is a heightened predisposition for a heightened predisposition for a heightened predisposition for aggression. And that makes perfect aggression. And that makes perfect aggression. And that makes perfect sense. If you think about what short sense. If you think about what short sense. If you think about what short days do to the biology of your brain and days do to the biology of your brain and days do to the biology of your brain and body, the melatonin signal goes up. body, the melatonin signal goes up. body, the melatonin signal goes up. There's more melatonin circulating for There's more melatonin circulating for There's more melatonin circulating for more of each 24-hour cycle. Stress more of each 24-hour cycle. Stress more of each 24-hour cycle. Stress hormones are circulating more. Why? hormones are circulating more. Why? hormones are circulating more. Why? Short days tend to be associated with Short days tend to be associated with Short days tend to be associated with winter. In winter, we are bombarded with winter. In winter, we are bombarded with winter. In winter, we are bombarded with more bacteria and viruses because more bacteria and viruses because more bacteria and viruses because bacteria and viruses actually survive bacteria and viruses actually survive bacteria and viruses actually survive better in cold than they do in heat. So, better in cold than they do in heat. So, better in cold than they do in heat. So, shorter days are conducive to shorter days are conducive to shorter days are conducive to aggression, not because days are short aggression, not because days are short aggression, not because days are short per se, but because stress hormone per se, but because stress hormone per se, but because stress hormone levels are higher, and because dopamine levels are higher, and because dopamine levels are higher, and because dopamine levels are lower. Now, here's where all levels are lower. Now, here's where all levels are lower. Now, here's where all of this starts to converge on a very of this starts to converge on a very of this starts to converge on a very clear biological picture, a very clear biological picture, a very clear biological picture, a very clear psychological picture, and indeed a very psychological picture, and indeed a very psychological picture, and indeed a very clear set of tools that we can think clear set of tools that we can think clear set of tools that we can think about and use. Under conditions where about and use. Under conditions where about and use. Under conditions where cortisol is high, where the stress cortisol is high, where the stress cortisol is high, where the stress hormone is elevated, and under hormone is elevated, and under hormone is elevated, and under conditions where the neurom modulator conditions where the neurom modulator conditions where the neurom modulator serotonin is reduced, there is a greater serotonin is reduced, there is a greater serotonin is reduced, there is a greater propensity for estrogen to trigger propensity for estrogen to trigger propensity for estrogen to trigger aggression. For males who make a lot of aggression. For males who make a lot of aggression. For males who make a lot of testosterone relative to estrogen, you testosterone relative to estrogen, you testosterone relative to estrogen, you have to swap in your mind this idea that have to swap in your mind this idea that have to swap in your mind this idea that if testosterone is high, that means that if testosterone is high, that means that if testosterone is high, that means that estrogen is low. Because if testosterone estrogen is low. Because if testosterone estrogen is low. Because if testosterone is high, there is going to be some is high, there is going to be some is high, there is going to be some aromatization, that conversion of aromatization, that conversion of aromatization, that conversion of testosterone to estrogen. So anytime you testosterone to estrogen. So anytime you testosterone to estrogen. So anytime you hear that testosterone is high, you hear that testosterone is high, you hear that testosterone is high, you should think testosterone is high in the should think testosterone is high in the should think testosterone is high in the body and perhaps estrogen is low in the body and perhaps estrogen is low in the body and perhaps estrogen is low in the body, but that means that there's going body, but that means that there's going body, but that means that there's going to be heightened levels of estrogen in to be heightened levels of estrogen in to be heightened levels of estrogen in the brain and therefore increased the brain and therefore increased the brain and therefore increased propensity for aggression. In females propensity for aggression. In females propensity for aggression. In females who generally make less testosterone who generally make less testosterone who generally make less testosterone relative to estrogen, there is relative to estrogen, there is relative to estrogen, there is sufficient estrogen already present to sufficient estrogen already present to sufficient estrogen already present to trigger aggression. So both males and trigger aggression. So both males and trigger aggression. So both males and females are primed for aggression. But females are primed for aggression. But females are primed for aggression. But that's riding on a context and that that's riding on a context and that that's riding on a context and that context of whether or not you get a context of whether or not you get a context of whether or not you get a tendency for aggression or not depends tendency for aggression or not depends tendency for aggression or not depends on whether or not cortisol is high or on whether or not cortisol is high or on whether or not cortisol is high or low. And I'm telling you that if low. And I'm telling you that if low. And I'm telling you that if cortisol is relatively higher in any cortisol is relatively higher in any cortisol is relatively higher in any individual, there's going to be a tilt, individual, there's going to be a tilt, individual, there's going to be a tilt, an increase in that hydraulic pressure an increase in that hydraulic pressure an increase in that hydraulic pressure that Loren talked about toward that Loren talked about toward that Loren talked about toward aggression. And if serotonin, the neurom modulator And if serotonin, the neurom modulator And if serotonin, the neurom modulator that is associated with feelings of that is associated with feelings of that is associated with feelings of well-being and sometimes even of slight well-being and sometimes even of slight well-being and sometimes even of slight passivity, but certainly of well-being, passivity, but certainly of well-being, passivity, but certainly of well-being, if serotonin is low, there's also going if serotonin is low, there's also going if serotonin is low, there's also going to be a further shift towards an to be a further shift towards an to be a further shift towards an aggressive tendency. So if we return to aggressive tendency. So if we return to aggressive tendency. So if we return to Lorenz's hydraulic pressure model of Lorenz's hydraulic pressure model of Lorenz's hydraulic pressure model of aggression and other internal states, we aggression and other internal states, we aggression and other internal states, we realize that external stimula, things realize that external stimula, things realize that external stimula, things that we hear, things that we see, for that we hear, things that we see, for that we hear, things that we see, for instance, someone saying something instance, someone saying something instance, someone saying something upsetting or us seeing somebody do upsetting or us seeing somebody do upsetting or us seeing somebody do something that we don't like to others something that we don't like to others something that we don't like to others or to us, as well as our internal state, or to us, as well as our internal state, or to us, as well as our internal state, our subjective feelings of well-being, our subjective feelings of well-being, our subjective feelings of well-being, but also our stress level, our feelings but also our stress level, our feelings but also our stress level, our feelings of whether or not we have enough of whether or not we have enough of whether or not we have enough resources and are content. with what we resources and are content. with what we resources and are content. with what we have all of that is converging on this have all of that is converging on this have all of that is converging on this thing that we call internal state and thing that we call internal state and thing that we call internal state and creating this pressure of either to be creating this pressure of either to be creating this pressure of either to be more aggressive or less aggressive. Now more aggressive or less aggressive. Now more aggressive or less aggressive. Now we have some major players feeding into we have some major players feeding into we have some major players feeding into that final pathway that question of that final pathway that question of that final pathway that question of whether or not will we hit the other whether or not will we hit the other whether or not will we hit the other person. Will we say the thing that is person. Will we say the thing that is person. Will we say the thing that is considered aggressive? Will we not say considered aggressive? Will we not say considered aggressive? Will we not say it? Again, there are many things it? Again, there are many things it? Again, there are many things funneling into that question and funneling into that question and funneling into that question and dictating whether or not the answer is dictating whether or not the answer is dictating whether or not the answer is absolutely I'll fight back or I'm going absolutely I'll fight back or I'm going absolutely I'll fight back or I'm going to attack them even unprovoked. we to attack them even unprovoked. we to attack them even unprovoked. we really can boil them down to just a few really can boil them down to just a few really can boil them down to just a few common elements. And I'm telling you common elements. And I'm telling you common elements. And I'm telling you that those elements are whether or not that those elements are whether or not that those elements are whether or not cortisol levels are relatively lower or cortisol levels are relatively lower or cortisol levels are relatively lower or relatively higher. Again, relatively higher. Again, relatively higher. Again, relatively higher is going to tend to make people higher is going to tend to make people higher is going to tend to make people more reactive. Why? Because more reactive. Why? Because more reactive. Why? Because reactivity is really a function of the reactivity is really a function of the reactivity is really a function of the autonomic nervous system, which is sort autonomic nervous system, which is sort autonomic nervous system, which is sort of like a seessaw that oscillates of like a seessaw that oscillates of like a seessaw that oscillates between the so-called sympathetic between the so-called sympathetic between the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, arm of the autonomic nervous system, arm of the autonomic nervous system, which tends to put us into a state of which tends to put us into a state of which tends to put us into a state of readiness through the release of readiness through the release of readiness through the release of adrenaline. Cortisol and adrenaline when adrenaline. Cortisol and adrenaline when adrenaline. Cortisol and adrenaline when they're circulating in the brain and they're circulating in the brain and they're circulating in the brain and body make us more likely to move and to body make us more likely to move and to body make us more likely to move and to react and to speak. It's actually what react and to speak. It's actually what react and to speak. It's actually what will induce a kind of low-level tremor, will induce a kind of low-level tremor, will induce a kind of low-level tremor, which is an anticipatory tremor to be which is an anticipatory tremor to be which is an anticipatory tremor to be able to move more quickly. Right? a body able to move more quickly. Right? a body able to move more quickly. Right? a body in motion is more easily set into in motion is more easily set into in motion is more easily set into further motion. That is, and in terms of further motion. That is, and in terms of further motion. That is, and in terms of keeping cortisol in a range that's keeping cortisol in a range that's keeping cortisol in a range that's healthy and doesn't bias someone toward healthy and doesn't bias someone toward healthy and doesn't bias someone toward high levels of aggression and high levels of aggression and high levels of aggression and irritability, that's again going to be irritability, that's again going to be irritability, that's again going to be set by a number of larger modulators or set by a number of larger modulators or set by a number of larger modulators or contextual cues. And I've talked about contextual cues. And I've talked about contextual cues. And I've talked about some of those on the podcast, but I'll some of those on the podcast, but I'll some of those on the podcast, but I'll just briefly recap them now. Obviously, just briefly recap them now. Obviously, just briefly recap them now. Obviously, getting sunlight in your eyes early in getting sunlight in your eyes early in getting sunlight in your eyes early in the day and as much sunlight as you the day and as much sunlight as you the day and as much sunlight as you safely can in your eyes throughout the safely can in your eyes throughout the safely can in your eyes throughout the day is going to be important. Again, day is going to be important. Again, day is going to be important. Again, because of this effect of estrogen in because of this effect of estrogen in because of this effect of estrogen in long days, not increasing aggression. long days, not increasing aggression. long days, not increasing aggression. However, in shorter days, estrogen However, in shorter days, estrogen However, in shorter days, estrogen increases aggression because of the increases aggression because of the increases aggression because of the increase in cortisol observed in short increase in cortisol observed in short increase in cortisol observed in short days. Another way to reduce cortisol was days. Another way to reduce cortisol was days. Another way to reduce cortisol was discussed in our episode on heat and the discussed in our episode on heat and the discussed in our episode on heat and the use of sauna and heat, but also hot use of sauna and heat, but also hot use of sauna and heat, but also hot baths. It turns out that hot baths and baths. It turns out that hot baths and baths. It turns out that hot baths and sauna can be very beneficial for sauna can be very beneficial for sauna can be very beneficial for reducing cortisol. All the details on reducing cortisol. All the details on reducing cortisol. All the details on that are included in the episode on heat that are included in the episode on heat that are included in the episode on heat and it's timestamped. So you can go and it's timestamped. So you can go and it's timestamped. So you can go directly to that if you want to learn directly to that if you want to learn directly to that if you want to learn about the temperatures and the various about the temperatures and the various about the temperatures and the various durations. But to just give a uh durations. But to just give a uh durations. But to just give a uh synopsis of that a 20 minute sauna at synopsis of that a 20 minute sauna at synopsis of that a 20 minute sauna at anywhere from 80 to 100° C is going to anywhere from 80 to 100° C is going to anywhere from 80 to 100° C is going to be beneficial for reducing cortisol. If be beneficial for reducing cortisol. If be beneficial for reducing cortisol. If you don't have access to a sauna, you don't have access to a sauna, you don't have access to a sauna, you could do a hot bath. And of course, some could do a hot bath. And of course, some could do a hot bath. And of course, some of you may be interested in exploring of you may be interested in exploring of you may be interested in exploring the supplementation route. And for the supplementation route. And for the supplementation route. And for reductions in cortisol, really the uh reductions in cortisol, really the uh reductions in cortisol, really the uh chief player there is ashwagandha, which chief player there is ashwagandha, which chief player there is ashwagandha, which is known to decrease cortisol fairly is known to decrease cortisol fairly is known to decrease cortisol fairly potently. I should just warn you that if potently. I should just warn you that if potently. I should just warn you that if you're going to use ashwagandha in order you're going to use ashwagandha in order you're going to use ashwagandha in order to reduce cortisol, first of all, check to reduce cortisol, first of all, check to reduce cortisol, first of all, check with your doctor or healthcare provider with your doctor or healthcare provider with your doctor or healthcare provider before adding or subtracting anything before adding or subtracting anything before adding or subtracting anything from your supplementation or health from your supplementation or health from your supplementation or health regimen. Of course, I don't just say regimen. Of course, I don't just say regimen. Of course, I don't just say that to protect us. I say that to that to protect us. I say that to that to protect us. I say that to protect you. You are responsible for protect you. You are responsible for protect you. You are responsible for your health, what you take and what you your health, what you take and what you your health, what you take and what you don't take. Chronic supplementation with don't take. Chronic supplementation with don't take. Chronic supplementation with ashwagandha can have some not so great ashwagandha can have some not so great ashwagandha can have some not so great effects of disruption of other hormone effects of disruption of other hormone effects of disruption of other hormone pathways and neurotransmitter pathways. pathways and neurotransmitter pathways. pathways and neurotransmitter pathways. So the limit seems to be about 2 weeks So the limit seems to be about 2 weeks So the limit seems to be about 2 weeks of regular use before you'd want to of regular use before you'd want to of regular use before you'd want to take a break of about 2 weeks. So take a break of about 2 weeks. So take a break of about 2 weeks. So ashwagandha again a very potent ashwagandha again a very potent ashwagandha again a very potent inhibitor of cortisol but with some inhibitor of cortisol but with some inhibitor of cortisol but with some other effects as well. Don't use it other effects as well. Don't use it other effects as well. Don't use it chronically for longer than 2 weeks. But chronically for longer than 2 weeks. But chronically for longer than 2 weeks. But if your goal is to reduce cortisol, if your goal is to reduce cortisol, if your goal is to reduce cortisol, let's say you're going through a period let's say you're going through a period let's say you're going through a period of increased irritability and aggressive of increased irritability and aggressive of increased irritability and aggressive tendency, maybe you're also not getting tendency, maybe you're also not getting tendency, maybe you're also not getting as much light as you would like. And as much light as you would like. And as much light as you would like. And perhaps also if there are other um perhaps also if there are other um perhaps also if there are other um circumstantial things leading you circumstantial things leading you circumstantial things leading you towards more aggressiveness and your towards more aggressiveness and your towards more aggressiveness and your goal is to reduce aggressiveness, that goal is to reduce aggressiveness, that goal is to reduce aggressiveness, that can be potentially helpful. And in light can be potentially helpful. And in light can be potentially helpful. And in light of all this stuff about cortisol and of all this stuff about cortisol and of all this stuff about cortisol and estrogen and daylength, estrogen and daylength, estrogen and daylength, I should mention that there are in fact I should mention that there are in fact I should mention that there are in fact some people who have a genetic some people who have a genetic some people who have a genetic predisposition to be more irritable and predisposition to be more irritable and predisposition to be more irritable and aggressive. There is a genetic variant aggressive. There is a genetic variant aggressive. There is a genetic variant present in certain people that adjusts present in certain people that adjusts present in certain people that adjusts their estrogen receptor sensitivity their estrogen receptor sensitivity their estrogen receptor sensitivity and that estrogen receptor sensitivity and that estrogen receptor sensitivity and that estrogen receptor sensitivity can result in increased levels of can result in increased levels of can result in increased levels of aggression. sometimes dramatic aggression. sometimes dramatic aggression. sometimes dramatic increases. However, and also very increases. However, and also very increases. However, and also very interestingly, photo period, meaning interestingly, photo period, meaning interestingly, photo period, meaning daylength is a strong modulator of daylength is a strong modulator of daylength is a strong modulator of whether or not that aggressiveness turns whether or not that aggressiveness turns whether or not that aggressiveness turns up or not. Whether or not that person up or not. Whether or not that person up or not. Whether or not that person with the particular gene variant is more with the particular gene variant is more with the particular gene variant is more aggressive or not depends on how long aggressive or not depends on how long aggressive or not depends on how long the day is and how long the night is. the day is and how long the night is. the day is and how long the night is. One particular study that I like that One particular study that I like that One particular study that I like that references this is trainer at all. The references this is trainer at all. The references this is trainer at all. The title of the study is photo period title of the study is photo period title of the study is photo period reverses the effects of estrogens on reverses the effects of estrogens on reverses the effects of estrogens on male aggression via genomic and male aggression via genomic and male aggression via genomic and non-genomic pathways. This was a paper non-genomic pathways. This was a paper non-genomic pathways. This was a paper published in the proceedings of the published in the proceedings of the published in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. It really National Academy of Sciences. It really National Academy of Sciences. It really points to the fact that rarely is it the points to the fact that rarely is it the points to the fact that rarely is it the case that just one gene will cause case that just one gene will cause case that just one gene will cause somebody to be hyperaggressive. somebody to be hyperaggressive. somebody to be hyperaggressive. Almost always there's going to be an Almost always there's going to be an Almost always there's going to be an interplay between genetics and interplay between genetics and interplay between genetics and environment. And as environment changes, environment. And as environment changes, environment. And as environment changes, such as daylength changes and the length such as daylength changes and the length such as daylength changes and the length of night changes, so too will the of night changes, so too will the of night changes, so too will the tendency for people with a given genetic tendency for people with a given genetic tendency for people with a given genetic variant to be more aggressive or not. variant to be more aggressive or not. variant to be more aggressive or not. Now, of course, in the absence of Now, of course, in the absence of Now, of course, in the absence of detailed genetic testing for this detailed genetic testing for this detailed genetic testing for this particular estrogen receptor variant, particular estrogen receptor variant, particular estrogen receptor variant, most people, I'm guessing you are most people, I'm guessing you are most people, I'm guessing you are probably not walking around knowing that probably not walking around knowing that probably not walking around knowing that you have this gene or not. you have this gene or not. you have this gene or not. Regardless, I think it's important to Regardless, I think it's important to Regardless, I think it's important to pay attention to how you feel at pay attention to how you feel at pay attention to how you feel at different times of year depending on different times of year depending on different times of year depending on whether or not summer, whether or not whether or not summer, whether or not whether or not summer, whether or not it's winter, whether or not you're it's winter, whether or not you're it's winter, whether or not you're getting sufficient sunlight, meaning getting sufficient sunlight, meaning getting sufficient sunlight, meaning viewing sufficient sunlight or not, viewing sufficient sunlight or not, viewing sufficient sunlight or not, whether or not you're getting sufficient whether or not you're getting sufficient whether or not you're getting sufficient sunlight exposure to your skin or not, sunlight exposure to your skin or not, sunlight exposure to your skin or not, whether or not you're indoors all the whether or not you're indoors all the whether or not you're indoors all the time. Generally, those things correlate time. Generally, those things correlate time. Generally, those things correlate with season, but not always. You can go with season, but not always. You can go with season, but not always. You can go through long bouts of you know hard work through long bouts of you know hard work through long bouts of you know hard work in the summer months when days are long in the summer months when days are long in the summer months when days are long but you're indoors a lot and getting a but you're indoors a lot and getting a but you're indoors a lot and getting a lot of fluorescent light exposure late lot of fluorescent light exposure late lot of fluorescent light exposure late in the evening and perhaps that's when in the evening and perhaps that's when in the evening and perhaps that's when you're feeling more aggressive. So we you're feeling more aggressive. So we you're feeling more aggressive. So we have to be careful about drawing a have to be careful about drawing a have to be careful about drawing a onetoone relationship between any onetoone relationship between any onetoone relationship between any biological feature and certainly biological feature and certainly biological feature and certainly psychological or behavioral feature like psychological or behavioral feature like psychological or behavioral feature like aggressiveness. But it's I believe aggressiveness. But it's I believe aggressiveness. But it's I believe helpful to know that these genetic helpful to know that these genetic helpful to know that these genetic biases exist. How they play out again biases exist. How they play out again biases exist. How they play out again they shift our biology in a general they shift our biology in a general they shift our biology in a general thematic direction. They don't change thematic direction. They don't change thematic direction. They don't change one thing. They change a variety of one thing. They change a variety of one thing. They change a variety of things that bias us toward or away from things that bias us toward or away from things that bias us toward or away from certain psychological and behavioral certain psychological and behavioral certain psychological and behavioral outcomes and the various things that we outcomes and the various things that we outcomes and the various things that we can do in order to offset them. And we can do in order to offset them. And we can do in order to offset them. And we described those earlier in terms of described those earlier in terms of described those earlier in terms of trying to keep cortisol low by getting trying to keep cortisol low by getting trying to keep cortisol low by getting sufficient sunlight regardless of time sufficient sunlight regardless of time sufficient sunlight regardless of time of year and regardless of whether or not of year and regardless of whether or not of year and regardless of whether or not you happen to have this particular you happen to have this particular you happen to have this particular genetic variant. I want to share with genetic variant. I want to share with genetic variant. I want to share with you a study that's focused on kids, but you a study that's focused on kids, but you a study that's focused on kids, but that has important ramifications for that has important ramifications for that has important ramifications for adults as well. There are many kids out adults as well. There are many kids out adults as well. There are many kids out there that suffer from so-called there that suffer from so-called there that suffer from so-called attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or ADHD. There are also many adults we or ADHD. There are also many adults we or ADHD. There are also many adults we are finding that are suffering from are finding that are suffering from are finding that are suffering from ADHD. In any event, the study I'm about ADHD. In any event, the study I'm about ADHD. In any event, the study I'm about to share with you explored how a to share with you explored how a to share with you explored how a particular pattern of supplementation in particular pattern of supplementation in particular pattern of supplementation in kids with ADHD was able to reduce kids with ADHD was able to reduce kids with ADHD was able to reduce aggressive episodes and impulsivity and aggressive episodes and impulsivity and aggressive episodes and impulsivity and increase self-regulation. increase self-regulation. increase self-regulation. And the title of the study is efficacy And the title of the study is efficacy And the title of the study is efficacy of carnitine in the treatment of carnitine in the treatment of carnitine in the treatment of children with attention deficit children with attention deficit children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. even though they hyperactivity disorder. even though they hyperactivity disorder. even though they put carnitine in the title that what put carnitine in the title that what put carnitine in the title that what they focused on was whether or not a they focused on was whether or not a they focused on was whether or not a cetal LC carnitine supplementation could cetal LC carnitine supplementation could cetal LC carnitine supplementation could somehow adjust the behavioral tendency somehow adjust the behavioral tendency somehow adjust the behavioral tendency of these kids with ADHD. And to make a of these kids with ADHD. And to make a of these kids with ADHD. And to make a long story short, indeed it did. There long story short, indeed it did. There long story short, indeed it did. There was a very significant effect of acetyl was a very significant effect of acetyl was a very significant effect of acetyl carnitine supplementation on improving carnitine supplementation on improving carnitine supplementation on improving some of the symptomology symptomology, some of the symptomology symptomology, some of the symptomology symptomology, excuse me, of ADHD. This was a excuse me, of ADHD. This was a excuse me, of ADHD. This was a randomized double blind placeboc control randomized double blind placeboc control randomized double blind placeboc control double crossover study. They showed double crossover study. They showed double crossover study. They showed significant reductions in their significant reductions in their significant reductions in their so-called total problem score. The total so-called total problem score. The total so-called total problem score. The total problem score is a well-established problem score is a well-established problem score is a well-established measure of behavioral problems in kids measure of behavioral problems in kids measure of behavioral problems in kids with ADHD and I should say adults with ADHD and I should say adults with ADHD and I should say adults with ADHD. Reductions in attentional problems ADHD. Reductions in attentional problems ADHD. Reductions in attentional problems overall reductions in delinquency and overall reductions in delinquency and overall reductions in delinquency and most important for sake of today's most important for sake of today's most important for sake of today's discussion significant reductions in discussion significant reductions in discussion significant reductions in aggressive behavior. They were able to aggressive behavior. They were able to aggressive behavior. They were able to confirm the shifts in alcarnitine confirm the shifts in alcarnitine confirm the shifts in alcarnitine within the bloodstream of these kids. within the bloodstream of these kids. within the bloodstream of these kids. that is they were able to correlate the that is they were able to correlate the that is they were able to correlate the physiology with the psychological physiology with the psychological physiology with the psychological changes. So studies such as this I think changes. So studies such as this I think changes. So studies such as this I think are useful because they point to the are useful because they point to the are useful because they point to the fact that fact that fact that very seldom if ever will there be one very seldom if ever will there be one very seldom if ever will there be one supplement or one nutritional change or supplement or one nutritional change or supplement or one nutritional change or even one behavioral change that's going even one behavioral change that's going even one behavioral change that's going to completely shift an individual from to completely shift an individual from to completely shift an individual from being aggressive and impulsive. rather being aggressive and impulsive. rather being aggressive and impulsive. rather that by combining different behavioral that by combining different behavioral that by combining different behavioral regimens, by paying attention to things regimens, by paying attention to things regimens, by paying attention to things like time of year and work conditions like time of year and work conditions like time of year and work conditions and school conditions and overall levels and school conditions and overall levels and school conditions and overall levels of stress and likely therefore levels of stress and likely therefore levels of stress and likely therefore levels of cortisol, etc. that you can use cortisol, etc. that you can use cortisol, etc. that you can use behaviors, diet, and supplementation as behaviors, diet, and supplementation as behaviors, diet, and supplementation as a way to shift that overall internal a way to shift that overall internal a way to shift that overall internal millu from one of providing a lot of millu from one of providing a lot of millu from one of providing a lot of internal hydraulic pressure, as it's internal hydraulic pressure, as it's internal hydraulic pressure, as it's been called throughout the episode, been called throughout the episode, been called throughout the episode, toward aggressive impulsivity and relax toward aggressive impulsivity and relax toward aggressive impulsivity and relax some of that hydraulic pressure and some of that hydraulic pressure and some of that hydraulic pressure and reduce aggressive tendencies. Thank you reduce aggressive tendencies. Thank you reduce aggressive tendencies. Thank you for joining me for our discussion about for joining me for our discussion about for joining me for our discussion about the biology, psychology, and actionable the biology, psychology, and actionable the biology, psychology, and actionable tools around aggression. And as always, tools around aggression. And as always, tools around aggression. And as always, thank you for your interest in science.