Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today, I have the pleasure of Today, I have the pleasure of Today, I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Samer Hattar as my guest introducing Dr. Samer Hattar as my guest introducing Dr. Samer Hattar as my guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And now, my on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And now, my on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And now, my conversation with Dr. Samer Hattar. conversation with Dr. Samer Hattar. conversation with Dr. Samer Hattar. Samer, thanks for sitting down with me. My thanks for sitting down with me. My thanks for sitting down with me. My pleasure. You are best known in pleasure. You are best known in pleasure. You are best known in scientific circles for your work on how scientific circles for your work on how scientific circles for your work on how light impacts mood, learning, feeding, light impacts mood, learning, feeding, light impacts mood, learning, feeding, hunger, sleep, and these sorts of hunger, sleep, and these sorts of hunger, sleep, and these sorts of topics. So, maybe you could just wade us topics. So, maybe you could just wade us topics. So, maybe you could just wade us into what the relationship is between into what the relationship is between into what the relationship is between light and these things like mood and light and these things like mood and light and these things like mood and hunger, et cetera. hunger, et cetera. hunger, et cetera. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. So, I mean, you do appreciate the effect So, I mean, you do appreciate the effect So, I mean, you do appreciate the effect of light for vision. So, when you wake of light for vision. So, when you wake of light for vision. So, when you wake up in a beautiful area, beautiful ocean, up in a beautiful area, beautiful ocean, up in a beautiful area, beautiful ocean, light is essential. The sunrise, the light is essential. The sunrise, the light is essential. The sunrise, the sunset. So, that's your conscious sunset. So, that's your conscious sunset. So, that's your conscious perception of light. perception of light. perception of light. But light has a completely different But light has a completely different But light has a completely different aspect that is independent of conscious aspect that is independent of conscious aspect that is independent of conscious vision, and that's how it regulates many vision, and that's how it regulates many vision, and that's how it regulates many important functions in your body. I important functions in your body. I important functions in your body. I think the best that is well studied and think the best that is well studied and think the best that is well studied and well known is your circadian clock. well known is your circadian clock. well known is your circadian clock. And the word circadian comes from the And the word circadian comes from the And the word circadian comes from the word circa, which is approximate, and DN word circa, which is approximate, and DN word circa, which is approximate, and DN is day. So, it's an approximate day. Why is day. So, it's an approximate day. Why is day. So, it's an approximate day. Why is it an approximate day? Because if I is it an approximate day? Because if I is it an approximate day? Because if I put you or any other human being who put you or any other human being who put you or any other human being who have a normal circadian clock in a have a normal circadian clock in a have a normal circadian clock in a constant conditions with no information constant conditions with no information constant conditions with no information about feeding time, about sleep time, about feeding time, about sleep time, about feeding time, about sleep time, about what time it is outside, you still about what time it is outside, you still about what time it is outside, you still have a daily rhythm, but it's not have a daily rhythm, but it's not have a daily rhythm, but it's not exactly 24 hours. So, it will shift out exactly 24 hours. So, it will shift out exactly 24 hours. So, it will shift out of the solar day because it's not of the solar day because it's not of the solar day because it's not exactly 24 hours, and hence the name exactly 24 hours, and hence the name exactly 24 hours, and hence the name circadian. &gt;&gt; How does that rhythm show up in the &gt;&gt; How does that rhythm show up in the &gt;&gt; How does that rhythm show up in the tissues of our body? It shows up at tissues of our body? It shows up at tissues of our body? It shows up at every level that we know we studied. It every level that we know we studied. It every level that we know we studied. It shows up at the level of the cell, it shows up at the level of the cell, it shows up at the level of the cell, it shows up at the level of the tissue, and shows up at the level of the tissue, and shows up at the level of the tissue, and it shows up at your behavior. The most it shows up at your behavior. The most it shows up at your behavior. The most obvious for you is your sleep-wake obvious for you is your sleep-wake obvious for you is your sleep-wake cycle. You sleep and you're awake and cycle. You sleep and you're awake and cycle. You sleep and you're awake and sleep at a 24-hour rhythms. The period sleep at a 24-hour rhythms. The period sleep at a 24-hour rhythms. The period length of the sleep rhythm on average is length of the sleep rhythm on average is length of the sleep rhythm on average is 24.2 hours. So, you'll be drifting 0.2 24.2 hours. So, you'll be drifting 0.2 24.2 hours. So, you'll be drifting 0.2 hours every day hours every day hours every day out of the solar day if you don't get out of the solar day if you don't get out of the solar day if you don't get the sunlight. So, this the sunlight the sunlight. So, this the sunlight the sunlight. So, this the sunlight adjusts that approximate day to an exact adjusts that approximate day to an exact adjusts that approximate day to an exact day. So, now your behavior is adjusted day. So, now your behavior is adjusted day. So, now your behavior is adjusted to the light-dark environment or the to the light-dark environment or the to the light-dark environment or the solar day. solar day. solar day. It's part of the brain that is not It's part of the brain that is not It's part of the brain that is not consciously driven. So, you actually do consciously driven. So, you actually do consciously driven. So, you actually do not know when it happens or when it not know when it happens or when it not know when it happens or when it doesn't happen, and that what we'll get doesn't happen, and that what we'll get doesn't happen, and that what we'll get into when I tell you why light affects into when I tell you why light affects into when I tell you why light affects your mood and why sometimes people don't your mood and why sometimes people don't your mood and why sometimes people don't know how to deal with light to improve know how to deal with light to improve know how to deal with light to improve their mood, for example. What's the their mood, for example. What's the their mood, for example. What's the relevance? I mean, why should we care relevance? I mean, why should we care relevance? I mean, why should we care about that short difference? about that short difference? about that short difference? &gt;&gt; So, let's do the math. If you shift out &gt;&gt; So, let's do the math. If you shift out &gt;&gt; So, let's do the math. If you shift out 0.2 hours a day, in 5 days you're 0.2 hours a day, in 5 days you're 0.2 hours a day, in 5 days you're shifting out 1 hour. So, you're shifting out 1 hour. So, you're shifting out 1 hour. So, you're literally 1 hour off literally 1 hour off literally 1 hour off in your social behavior in 5 days. In 10 in your social behavior in 5 days. In 10 in your social behavior in 5 days. In 10 days you're 2 hours off. And if you're days you're 2 hours off. And if you're days you're 2 hours off. And if you're an organism that is living in the wild, an organism that is living in the wild, an organism that is living in the wild, shifting out of the right phase of the shifting out of the right phase of the shifting out of the right phase of the cycle, you could either miss food or you cycle, you could either miss food or you cycle, you could either miss food or you could become food. So, it's really could become food. So, it's really could become food. So, it's really essential for survival. I think it's one essential for survival. I think it's one essential for survival. I think it's one of the strongest aspect of survival for of the strongest aspect of survival for of the strongest aspect of survival for animals to have the anticipation and the animals to have the anticipation and the animals to have the anticipation and the adjustment to the solar cycle. What is adjustment to the solar cycle. What is adjustment to the solar cycle. What is the machinery that allows that to the machinery that allows that to the machinery that allows that to happen? And happen? And happen? And how does that machinery work? Yeah, so how does that machinery work? Yeah, so how does that machinery work? Yeah, so we know we knew that in mammals, we know we knew that in mammals, we know we knew that in mammals, including us, we are mammals, humans, including us, we are mammals, humans, including us, we are mammals, humans, that the eyes are required for this that the eyes are required for this that the eyes are required for this function. So, if humans are born without function. So, if humans are born without function. So, if humans are born without eyes or the optic nerves are damaged, eyes or the optic nerves are damaged, eyes or the optic nerves are damaged, humans are not able to adjust to the humans are not able to adjust to the humans are not able to adjust to the solar cycle. So, we know that the eyes solar cycle. So, we know that the eyes solar cycle. So, we know that the eyes are required. In the human retinas, are required. In the human retinas, are required. In the human retinas, there are two types of photoreceptors. there are two types of photoreceptors. there are two types of photoreceptors. They are called rods and cones because They are called rods and cones because They are called rods and cones because of their shapes, and these rods and of their shapes, and these rods and of their shapes, and these rods and cones simply take the photon energy cones simply take the photon energy cones simply take the photon energy which light is made of and they change which light is made of and they change which light is made of and they change it in a way to an electrical signal that it in a way to an electrical signal that it in a way to an electrical signal that allow us to build the image of the allow us to build the image of the allow us to build the image of the environment in our cortices. However, environment in our cortices. However, environment in our cortices. However, people have found, including me with the people have found, including me with the people have found, including me with the work of David Berson and Ignacio work of David Berson and Ignacio work of David Berson and Ignacio Provencio, that there's a subset Provencio, that there's a subset Provencio, that there's a subset of ganglion cells. The ganglion cells of ganglion cells. The ganglion cells of ganglion cells. The ganglion cells are the cells that leave the retina, are the cells that leave the retina, are the cells that leave the retina, their axons leave the retina, and their axons leave the retina, and their axons leave the retina, and project to the brain. So, these were project to the brain. So, these were project to the brain. So, these were thought to only relay rod and thought to only relay rod and thought to only relay rod and cone information from the light cone information from the light cone information from the light environment to the brain. environment to the brain. environment to the brain. We found that a small subset of these We found that a small subset of these We found that a small subset of these ganglion cells are themselves ganglion cells are themselves ganglion cells are themselves photoreceptors that were completely photoreceptors that were completely photoreceptors that were completely missed in the retina. missed in the retina. missed in the retina. And these are the photoreceptors that And these are the photoreceptors that And these are the photoreceptors that relay light environment subconsciously relay light environment subconsciously relay light environment subconsciously to the areas in the brain that have and to the areas in the brain that have and to the areas in the brain that have and house the circadian clock or the house the circadian clock or the house the circadian clock or the circadian pacemaker, which adjust all circadian pacemaker, which adjust all circadian pacemaker, which adjust all the clocks in our bodies to the central the clocks in our bodies to the central the clocks in our bodies to the central brain clock brain clock brain clock that allows them to entrain to the that allows them to entrain to the that allows them to entrain to the 24-hour light-dark cycle. So, these are 24-hour light-dark cycle. So, these are 24-hour light-dark cycle. So, these are cells that connect the eye to the brain cells that connect the eye to the brain cells that connect the eye to the brain that behave like photoreceptors, that behave like photoreceptors, that behave like photoreceptors, essentially. I think um it's worth essentially. I think um it's worth essentially. I think um it's worth mentioning now that uh people who are mentioning now that uh people who are mentioning now that uh people who are pattern vision blind, so people who pattern vision blind, so people who pattern vision blind, so people who cannot see but have eyes, many of them cannot see but have eyes, many of them cannot see but have eyes, many of them still have these cells, still have these cells, still have these cells, these melanopsin intrinsically these melanopsin intrinsically these melanopsin intrinsically photosensitive cells, and can uh photosensitive cells, and can uh photosensitive cells, and can uh essentially match or entrain, as we say, essentially match or entrain, as we say, essentially match or entrain, as we say, onto the uh light-dark cycle. onto the uh light-dark cycle. onto the uh light-dark cycle. &gt;&gt; In fact, they possibly have no problems &gt;&gt; In fact, they possibly have no problems &gt;&gt; In fact, they possibly have no problems in circadian photoentrainment they have in circadian photoentrainment they have in circadian photoentrainment they have a normal sleep-wake cycle. But they're a normal sleep-wake cycle. But they're a normal sleep-wake cycle. But they're totally blind. But they are totally blind. But they are totally blind. But they are totally image blind. And what's really image blind. And what's really image blind. And what's really interesting is that and this story I interesting is that and this story I interesting is that and this story I heard from Chuck Czeisler, so I'll give heard from Chuck Czeisler, so I'll give heard from Chuck Czeisler, so I'll give him credit, that some of these people him credit, that some of these people him credit, that some of these people who are image blind, usually they get who are image blind, usually they get who are image blind, usually they get dry eyes and they give them a lot of dry eyes and they give them a lot of dry eyes and they give them a lot of pain and doctors used to think, oh, that pain and doctors used to think, oh, that pain and doctors used to think, oh, that since they are image blind and they're since they are image blind and they're since they are image blind and they're getting dry eye, why don't you just getting dry eye, why don't you just getting dry eye, why don't you just remove their eyes? They're not using remove their eyes? They're not using remove their eyes? They're not using them anymore. And the minute they would them anymore. And the minute they would them anymore. And the minute they would remove their eyes, they start having remove their eyes, they start having remove their eyes, they start having cyclical sleep problems indicating that cyclical sleep problems indicating that cyclical sleep problems indicating that now they are not entraining to the light now they are not entraining to the light now they are not entraining to the light dark cycle and are having cyclical jet dark cycle and are having cyclical jet dark cycle and are having cyclical jet lags when their clock shifts through the lags when their clock shifts through the lags when their clock shifts through the light dark cycle. That's really light dark cycle. That's really light dark cycle. That's really interesting and uh I hear from a number interesting and uh I hear from a number interesting and uh I hear from a number of blind people, a lot of them have of blind people, a lot of them have of blind people, a lot of them have issues with sleep. I think in part issues with sleep. I think in part issues with sleep. I think in part because they don't realize that they too because they don't realize that they too because they don't realize that they too need to see light at particular times of need to see light at particular times of need to see light at particular times of day or night in order to master their day or night in order to master their day or night in order to master their schedule. What is the proper way to interact with What is the proper way to interact with What is the proper way to interact with light in the first light in the first light in the first part of the day? Honestly, I think the part of the day? Honestly, I think the part of the day? Honestly, I think the easiest thing is waking up. Get as much easiest thing is waking up. Get as much easiest thing is waking up. Get as much light as you can. Into your eyes. Yeah, light as you can. Into your eyes. Yeah, light as you can. Into your eyes. Yeah, it's really nice. Your system is primed it's really nice. Your system is primed it's really nice. Your system is primed if you're entrained, it's primed to get if you're entrained, it's primed to get if you're entrained, it's primed to get light. The sun should be out. Even when light. The sun should be out. Even when light. The sun should be out. Even when it's cloudy, you're going to get enough it's cloudy, you're going to get enough it's cloudy, you're going to get enough intensity to help you adjust your cycle intensity to help you adjust your cycle intensity to help you adjust your cycle to the day-night cycle. to the day-night cycle. to the day-night cycle. &gt;&gt; These are general rules of thumb. How &gt;&gt; These are general rules of thumb. How &gt;&gt; These are general rules of thumb. How long do you recommend people go outside? long do you recommend people go outside? long do you recommend people go outside? &gt;&gt; it daily, I would say 15 minutes. If you &gt;&gt; it daily, I would say 15 minutes. If you &gt;&gt; it daily, I would say 15 minutes. If you don't do it daily, you may want to don't do it daily, you may want to don't do it daily, you may want to increase it. You do it more, it doesn't increase it. You do it more, it doesn't increase it. You do it more, it doesn't hurt. And I'll tell you, if you're hurt. And I'll tell you, if you're hurt. And I'll tell you, if you're sensitive, don't You don't even have to sensitive, don't You don't even have to sensitive, don't You don't even have to go in the sun. You could be in the go in the sun. You could be in the go in the sun. You could be in the shade. There's going to be so many shade. There's going to be so many shade. There's going to be so many photons out there in the shade. It's photons out there in the shade. It's photons out there in the shade. It's going to be perfect. going to be perfect. going to be perfect. &gt;&gt; Okay. And if um for some reason one &gt;&gt; Okay. And if um for some reason one &gt;&gt; Okay. And if um for some reason one finds themself very far north and it's finds themself very far north and it's finds themself very far north and it's very dense uh cloud cover, very dense uh cloud cover, very dense uh cloud cover, how long and at what point should how long and at what point should how long and at what point should somebody consider using an artificial somebody consider using an artificial somebody consider using an artificial light source to mimic the sunlight? light source to mimic the sunlight? light source to mimic the sunlight? Yeah, honestly, this is where we don't Yeah, honestly, this is where we don't Yeah, honestly, this is where we don't have a lot of information still. Because have a lot of information still. Because have a lot of information still. Because this is where we're going to discuss this is where we're going to discuss this is where we're going to discuss this maybe in more detail that if you this maybe in more detail that if you this maybe in more detail that if you put a humans in artificial conditions, put a humans in artificial conditions, put a humans in artificial conditions, the circadian system is very sensitive the circadian system is very sensitive the circadian system is very sensitive to light. to light. to light. But in reality, in the real environment, But in reality, in the real environment, But in reality, in the real environment, light also's affecting other aspects light also's affecting other aspects light also's affecting other aspects that are independent of the setting of that are independent of the setting of that are independent of the setting of the circadian pacemaker. Okay. And these the circadian pacemaker. Okay. And these the circadian pacemaker. Okay. And these which we call the direct effect of light which we call the direct effect of light which we call the direct effect of light on mood, for example. on mood, for example. on mood, for example. So, that is very hard to figure out what So, that is very hard to figure out what So, that is very hard to figure out what intensity you need to use and we haven't intensity you need to use and we haven't intensity you need to use and we haven't done enough experiments because the done enough experiments because the done enough experiments because the system has been discovered just system has been discovered just system has been discovered just recently. But yeah, I mean if you're honestly if But yeah, I mean if you're honestly if But yeah, I mean if you're honestly if you're that far north and you're in the you're that far north and you're in the you're that far north and you're in the winter and you want to get make sure you winter and you want to get make sure you winter and you want to get make sure you don't use these light boxes. I would don't use these light boxes. I would don't use these light boxes. I would suggest that personally. Okay, so I suggest that personally. Okay, so I suggest that personally. Okay, so I think we've think we've think we've nailed down that first part of the day. nailed down that first part of the day. nailed down that first part of the day. Basically it's get 10 to 30 minutes Basically it's get 10 to 30 minutes Basically it's get 10 to 30 minutes depending on how bright it is and try depending on how bright it is and try depending on how bright it is and try and do that as often as possible to and do that as often as possible to and do that as often as possible to give the system a regular give the system a regular give the system a regular &gt;&gt; Daily is the best. This system is really &gt;&gt; Daily is the best. This system is really &gt;&gt; Daily is the best. This system is really about and you'll see that even for about and you'll see that even for about and you'll see that even for the effect on depression it's about the effect on depression it's about the effect on depression it's about multiple days. This is so you don't have multiple days. This is so you don't have multiple days. This is so you don't have to worry if you missed it one day, you to worry if you missed it one day, you to worry if you missed it one day, you know, stay longer if you want. But if know, stay longer if you want. But if know, stay longer if you want. But if you're in a hurry and you want to do you're in a hurry and you want to do you're in a hurry and you want to do other stuff, that's a great other stuff, that's a great other stuff, that's a great recommendation. So you might want to recommendation. So you might want to recommendation. So you might want to compensate with some extra time if you compensate with some extra time if you compensate with some extra time if you missed a day or two. I've heard you say missed a day or two. I've heard you say missed a day or two. I've heard you say before it's entirely possible to get before it's entirely possible to get before it's entirely possible to get severely jet lagged without traveling. severely jet lagged without traveling. severely jet lagged without traveling. Absolutely. Simply by staying in, being Absolutely. Simply by staying in, being Absolutely. Simply by staying in, being on your phone too much, not getting the on your phone too much, not getting the on your phone too much, not getting the sunlight. &gt;&gt; And you saw this during the pandemic. A &gt;&gt; And you saw this during the pandemic. A &gt;&gt; And you saw this during the pandemic. A lot of people mentioned that their sleep lot of people mentioned that their sleep lot of people mentioned that their sleep wake cycle suffered a lot. wake cycle suffered a lot. wake cycle suffered a lot. Uh because if you're not going out and Uh because if you're not going out and Uh because if you're not going out and if you're staying at home and you don't if you're staying at home and you don't if you're staying at home and you don't have big windows and you're waking late, have big windows and you're waking late, have big windows and you're waking late, waking up late and then you're using waking up late and then you're using waking up late and then you're using very bright light till late at night, very bright light till late at night, very bright light till late at night, your body's going to shift. And now your body's going to shift. And now your body's going to shift. And now your day is going to start instead of like day is going to start instead of like day is going to start instead of like really when the sun comes up, let's say really when the sun comes up, let's say really when the sun comes up, let's say at 6:00 in the morning, it's going to at 6:00 in the morning, it's going to at 6:00 in the morning, it's going to your day is going to start at 11:00 in your day is going to start at 11:00 in your day is going to start at 11:00 in the morning. That's what your body's the morning. That's what your body's the morning. That's what your body's going to think is the beginning of the going to think is the beginning of the going to think is the beginning of the day. So then you're not going to be able to So then you're not going to be able to So then you're not going to be able to sleep at 10:00 at night because now sleep at 10:00 at night because now sleep at 10:00 at night because now that's really for your body is that's really for your body is that's really for your body is completely different timing. There is completely different timing. There is completely different timing. There is this idea of chronotypes that we all this idea of chronotypes that we all this idea of chronotypes that we all each intrinsically have a best rhythm each intrinsically have a best rhythm each intrinsically have a best rhythm of either being a morning person, you of either being a morning person, you of either being a morning person, you called yourself an early person, or a called yourself an early person, or a called yourself an early person, or a night owl, or more of a kind of night owl, or more of a kind of night owl, or more of a kind of standard, you know, to bed around 10:30 standard, you know, to bed around 10:30 standard, you know, to bed around 10:30 up around 7:00 type thing. And the and I up around 7:00 type thing. And the and I up around 7:00 type thing. And the and I think there are good data, correct think there are good data, correct think there are good data, correct me if I'm wrong, me if I'm wrong, me if I'm wrong, from the National Institutes of Mental from the National Institutes of Mental from the National Institutes of Mental Health and elsewhere showing that the Health and elsewhere showing that the Health and elsewhere showing that the more we deviate from that intrinsic more we deviate from that intrinsic more we deviate from that intrinsic rhythm, the more mental health issues rhythm, the more mental health issues rhythm, the more mental health issues and physical health issues start to crop and physical health issues start to crop and physical health issues start to crop up. &gt;&gt; So, there is great data on this and &gt;&gt; So, there is great data on this and &gt;&gt; So, there is great data on this and there's couple of things that complicate there's couple of things that complicate there's couple of things that complicate this. The first is this. The first is this. The first is the people who usually are late the people who usually are late the people who usually are late &gt;&gt; What do you mean? People that wake &gt;&gt; What do you mean? People that wake &gt;&gt; What do you mean? People that wake up late and go to sleep late? up late and go to sleep late? up late and go to sleep late? &gt;&gt; sleep late and wake up late. They &gt;&gt; sleep late and wake up late. They &gt;&gt; sleep late and wake up late. They have an overwhelmingly higher level of have an overwhelmingly higher level of have an overwhelmingly higher level of depression because human notice that depression because human notice that depression because human notice that people who go to sleep early and wake up people who go to sleep early and wake up people who go to sleep early and wake up early they do better in life. They early they do better in life. They early they do better in life. They notice that. notice that. notice that. &gt;&gt; They just perform better. They perform &gt;&gt; They just perform better. They perform &gt;&gt; They just perform better. They perform but the question is that intrinsic but the question is that intrinsic but the question is that intrinsic to the system or is that society? to the system or is that society? to the system or is that society? Because society start things usually Because society start things usually Because society start things usually early or late. That's a hard question to early or late. That's a hard question to early or late. That's a hard question to &gt;&gt; against late risers. &gt;&gt; against late risers. &gt;&gt; against late risers. &gt;&gt; We in a way we discriminate. And I'm not &gt;&gt; We in a way we discriminate. And I'm not &gt;&gt; We in a way we discriminate. And I'm not so sure that the circadian system is so sure that the circadian system is so sure that the circadian system is that variable in the human population. I that variable in the human population. I that variable in the human population. I mean, clearly there are maybe some mean, clearly there are maybe some mean, clearly there are maybe some genetic factors that make a small genetic factors that make a small genetic factors that make a small percentage of like everything with a percentage of like everything with a percentage of like everything with a bell shape. bell shape. bell shape. But I think most of the time the light But I think most of the time the light But I think most of the time the light environment may play a role. And once, environment may play a role. And once, environment may play a role. And once, as you as we've talked about, this is a as you as we've talked about, this is a as you as we've talked about, this is a long-term effect of light. Once you get long-term effect of light. Once you get long-term effect of light. Once you get into a rhythm, it's hard to break out of into a rhythm, it's hard to break out of into a rhythm, it's hard to break out of that rhythm because if you start that rhythm because if you start that rhythm because if you start sleeping late and waking up late, you're sleeping late and waking up late, you're sleeping late and waking up late, you're not getting the morning sunlight. not getting the morning sunlight. not getting the morning sunlight. &gt;&gt; Right. And so you're just going &gt;&gt; Right. And so you're just going &gt;&gt; Right. And so you're just going to be late. It seems to me is the case to be late. It seems to me is the case to be late. It seems to me is the case is that the only way to really know if is that the only way to really know if is that the only way to really know if you're meant to be an early bird, as you're meant to be an early bird, as you're meant to be an early bird, as they call it, an early person or a late they call it, an early person or a late they call it, an early person or a late person, or somewhere in between, is to person, or somewhere in between, is to person, or somewhere in between, is to get morning sunlight and figure out get morning sunlight and figure out get morning sunlight and figure out whether or not that makes you feel whether or not that makes you feel whether or not that makes you feel better. So, what should people do in the better. So, what should people do in the better. So, what should people do in the afternoon {slash} evening time in terms afternoon {slash} evening time in terms afternoon {slash} evening time in terms of their light viewing behavior? I mean, of their light viewing behavior? I mean, of their light viewing behavior? I mean, the best thing to do is to let the best thing to do is to let the best thing to do is to let the natural light creep in into darkness, natural light creep in into darkness, natural light creep in into darkness, right? That would be the best. But right? That would be the best. But right? That would be the best. But clearly, that would be inefficient. You clearly, that would be inefficient. You clearly, that would be inefficient. You you want to go home, you want to read, you want to go home, you want to read, you want to go home, you want to read, you want to talk to your kids, you want to talk to your kids, you want to talk to your kids, you want to talk to your family. So, I you want to talk to your family. So, I you want to talk to your family. So, I think, you know, it's nice to extend the think, you know, it's nice to extend the think, you know, it's nice to extend the day. I don't think that's wrong if you day. I don't think that's wrong if you day. I don't think that's wrong if you somehow can block somehow can block somehow can block that light from affecting your circadian that light from affecting your circadian that light from affecting your circadian clock. You do keep your home quite dim clock. You do keep your home quite dim clock. You do keep your home quite dim to dark at night. I am an extreme, but I to dark at night. I am an extreme, but I to dark at night. I am an extreme, but I measured it for myself and I asked Raji, measured it for myself and I asked Raji, measured it for myself and I asked Raji, my wife, if she's okay with it. She also my wife, if she's okay with it. She also my wife, if she's okay with it. She also liked the dimness. Both of us can see liked the dimness. Both of us can see liked the dimness. Both of us can see well in dim conditions, but I think well in dim conditions, but I think well in dim conditions, but I think you have to measure it for yourself. You you have to measure it for yourself. You you have to measure it for yourself. You really have to really have to really have to do It's a very simple experiment. Just do It's a very simple experiment. Just do It's a very simple experiment. Just try to dim the light as much as you can. try to dim the light as much as you can. try to dim the light as much as you can. I call it the minimum amount of light I call it the minimum amount of light I call it the minimum amount of light you require to see comfortably. You you require to see comfortably. You you require to see comfortably. You know, use red light that is very dim if know, use red light that is very dim if know, use red light that is very dim if you want to keep the room for sleeping. you want to keep the room for sleeping. you want to keep the room for sleeping. Red light that is very dim has very Red light that is very dim has very Red light that is very dim has very small effect on circadian clock. small effect on circadian clock. small effect on circadian clock. And below 10 lux of red light literally And below 10 lux of red light literally And below 10 lux of red light literally doesn't affect sleep at all. doesn't affect sleep at all. doesn't affect sleep at all. So, there are ways to do it. I've seen So, there are ways to do it. I've seen So, there are ways to do it. I've seen you check your phone after dark once or you check your phone after dark once or you check your phone after dark once or twice. Um and you did it by sort of twice. Um and you did it by sort of twice. Um and you did it by sort of pointing your phone away from you, pointing your phone away from you, pointing your phone away from you, right? It actually makes sense that you right? It actually makes sense that you right? It actually makes sense that you know, if you shine a flashlight in your know, if you shine a flashlight in your know, if you shine a flashlight in your eye, it's much brighter than if you eye, it's much brighter than if you eye, it's much brighter than if you shine a flashlight on the table. shine a flashlight on the table. shine a flashlight on the table. &gt;&gt; line. So, if you just look on the side, &gt;&gt; line. So, if you just look on the side, &gt;&gt; line. So, if you just look on the side, most of the light is going to go this most of the light is going to go this most of the light is going to go this way and you're only seeing And and even way and you're only seeing And and even way and you're only seeing And and even when I check sometimes, I check it so when I check sometimes, I check it so when I check sometimes, I check it so fast and switch it off so fast. So, fast and switch it off so fast. So, fast and switch it off so fast. So, ideally, I should not check iPhones and ideally, I should not check iPhones and ideally, I should not check iPhones and iPads. I don't use iPad at night because iPads. I don't use iPad at night because iPads. I don't use iPad at night because it's hard to lower it enough cuz it's a it's hard to lower it enough cuz it's a it's hard to lower it enough cuz it's a huge. But even my iPhone, I try not to huge. But even my iPhone, I try not to huge. But even my iPhone, I try not to use it at night. You had a use it at night. You had a use it at night. You had a what I consider absolutely landmark what I consider absolutely landmark what I consider absolutely landmark beautiful paper published in nature a beautiful paper published in nature a beautiful paper published in nature a few years ago few years ago few years ago showing that showing that showing that if you disrupt the if you disrupt the if you disrupt the exposure to light or the timing of the exposure to light or the timing of the exposure to light or the timing of the exposure to light, that there are exposure to light, that there are exposure to light, that there are dramatic effects on the stress system dramatic effects on the stress system dramatic effects on the stress system and on the learning and memory system. and on the learning and memory system. and on the learning and memory system. So, if I interpret that correctly, that So, if I interpret that correctly, that So, if I interpret that correctly, that could mean that when we view light and could mean that when we view light and could mean that when we view light and how much light, how much light, how much light, could make us feel happier or less happy could make us feel happier or less happy could make us feel happier or less happy or even depressed, stressed, learning, or even depressed, stressed, learning, or even depressed, stressed, learning, etc. Bingo. And the Bingo. And the Bingo. And the &gt;&gt; Even if we're sleeping and waking up at &gt;&gt; Even if we're sleeping and waking up at &gt;&gt; Even if we're sleeping and waking up at the appropriate time. the appropriate time. the appropriate time. &gt;&gt; Bingo. I mean, eventually, because we're &gt;&gt; Bingo. I mean, eventually, because we're &gt;&gt; Bingo. I mean, eventually, because we're talking about the whole system, talking about the whole system, talking about the whole system, eventually when you start having the eventually when you start having the eventually when you start having the other problems, you also develop sleep other problems, you also develop sleep other problems, you also develop sleep problems. But, you're absolutely right. problems. But, you're absolutely right. problems. But, you're absolutely right. And in fact, now research from Diego And in fact, now research from Diego And in fact, now research from Diego Fernandez in the laboratory have found Fernandez in the laboratory have found Fernandez in the laboratory have found that now we know that they actually that now we know that they actually that now we know that they actually require different brain regions. So, we require different brain regions. So, we require different brain regions. So, we don't only have a theory, we don't only don't only have a theory, we don't only don't only have a theory, we don't only have a light environment that showed have a light environment that showed have a light environment that showed they can be dissociated. We know that they can be dissociated. We know that they can be dissociated. We know that they use completely different brain they use completely different brain they use completely different brain regions. So, the SCN that I told you regions. So, the SCN that I told you regions. So, the SCN that I told you about earlier, the place where the about earlier, the place where the about earlier, the place where the central pacemaker is, the one that central pacemaker is, the one that central pacemaker is, the one that receives direct input from the retina receives direct input from the retina receives direct input from the retina through the ipRGCs to adjust your through the ipRGCs to adjust your through the ipRGCs to adjust your circadian clock, circadian clock, circadian clock, is not the area that receives the light is not the area that receives the light is not the area that receives the light input for mood regulation. It's a input for mood regulation. It's a input for mood regulation. It's a completely different brain region. And completely different brain region. And completely different brain region. And what's really amazing, this region also what's really amazing, this region also what's really amazing, this region also receives direct input from the ipRGCs, receives direct input from the ipRGCs, receives direct input from the ipRGCs, but projects to areas in the brain that but projects to areas in the brain that but projects to areas in the brain that are known to regulate mood, including are known to regulate mood, including are known to regulate mood, including the ventral medial prefrontal the ventral medial prefrontal the ventral medial prefrontal cortex, which has been prefrontal cortex, which has been prefrontal cortex, which has been studied for many years to be impacted in studied for many years to be impacted in studied for many years to be impacted in a human depression. So, just by this a human depression. So, just by this a human depression. So, just by this amazing serendipity to find that a amazing serendipity to find that a amazing serendipity to find that a region that is so deep in the region that is so deep in the region that is so deep in the advanced brain, like the prefrontal advanced brain, like the prefrontal advanced brain, like the prefrontal cortex is your executive brain, one of cortex is your executive brain, one of cortex is your executive brain, one of the most elaborated in humans, to see the most elaborated in humans, to see the most elaborated in humans, to see that they receive input from these that they receive input from these that they receive input from these ancient photoreceptor, was stunning to ancient photoreceptor, was stunning to ancient photoreceptor, was stunning to us. How does that finding inform us. How does that finding inform us. How does that finding inform daily protocols for you or for other daily protocols for you or for other daily protocols for you or for other people? So, that's why we came up with people? So, that's why we came up with people? So, that's why we came up with the tripartite model, because as a the tripartite model, because as a the tripartite model, because as a circadian biologist, I only thought of circadian biologist, I only thought of circadian biologist, I only thought of light through the circadian clock light through the circadian clock light through the circadian clock affecting behavior. As a sleep affecting behavior. As a sleep affecting behavior. As a sleep biologist, they only thought of the biologist, they only thought of the biologist, they only thought of the homeostatic drive affecting sleep, homeostatic drive affecting sleep, homeostatic drive affecting sleep, affecting behavior. And for people who affecting behavior. And for people who affecting behavior. And for people who study light for vision and other from study light for vision and other from study light for vision and other from they thought only of the environmental they thought only of the environmental they thought only of the environmental input. But now if you put them all input. But now if you put them all input. But now if you put them all together, you get with this tripartite together, you get with this tripartite together, you get with this tripartite model where it's really mind-boggling model where it's really mind-boggling model where it's really mind-boggling and it makes so much sense. The organism and it makes so much sense. The organism and it makes so much sense. The organism doesn't want to depend on a single doesn't want to depend on a single doesn't want to depend on a single component, but if you could incorporate component, but if you could incorporate component, but if you could incorporate these three together, these three together, these three together, you could have a beautiful system that you could have a beautiful system that you could have a beautiful system that is well adapted. So let me tell you the is well adapted. So let me tell you the is well adapted. So let me tell you the sleep-wake cycle, right? So we know sleep-wake cycle, right? So we know sleep-wake cycle, right? So we know there is a homeostatic drive there is a homeostatic drive there is a homeostatic drive to affect sleep. You've had beautiful to affect sleep. You've had beautiful to affect sleep. You've had beautiful talks about that. talks about that. talks about that. &gt;&gt; Which is basically the longer you're &gt;&gt; Which is basically the longer you're &gt;&gt; Which is basically the longer you're awake, the more you want to be asleep. awake, the more you want to be asleep. awake, the more you want to be asleep. So that's your homeostatic drive. We've So that's your homeostatic drive. We've So that's your homeostatic drive. We've talked about the circadian influence of talked about the circadian influence of talked about the circadian influence of sleep and the fact that light-dark cycle sleep and the fact that light-dark cycle sleep and the fact that light-dark cycle affect the circadian system, which affect the circadian system, which affect the circadian system, which eventually affects sleep. So these two eventually affects sleep. So these two eventually affects sleep. So these two components are well understood. Now the components are well understood. Now the components are well understood. Now the third factor is your direct light or third factor is your direct light or third factor is your direct light or environmental input. How much stress, environmental input. How much stress, environmental input. How much stress, how much light you get from there also how much light you get from there also how much light you get from there also can highly impact sleep. So even if you can highly impact sleep. So even if you can highly impact sleep. So even if you have a good circadian and homeostatic have a good circadian and homeostatic have a good circadian and homeostatic drive, if you're getting light at the drive, if you're getting light at the drive, if you're getting light at the wrong time of the day or if you're being wrong time of the day or if you're being wrong time of the day or if you're being stressed and thinking at the then your stressed and thinking at the then your stressed and thinking at the then your sleep's going to suffer. So you have to sleep's going to suffer. So you have to sleep's going to suffer. So you have to think of the three together to have a think of the three together to have a think of the three together to have a beautiful sleep-wake cycle. Let's talk beautiful sleep-wake cycle. Let's talk beautiful sleep-wake cycle. Let's talk about food and eating and appetite. about food and eating and appetite. about food and eating and appetite. You had yet another You had yet another You had yet another Um yes, I greatly admire your Um yes, I greatly admire your Um yes, I greatly admire your success in this way. Yet another success in this way. Yet another success in this way. Yet another incredible discovery showing that there incredible discovery showing that there incredible discovery showing that there are directs of direct, excuse me, are directs of direct, excuse me, are directs of direct, excuse me, effects of light on appetite and feeding effects of light on appetite and feeding effects of light on appetite and feeding behavior. So for somebody who's behavior. So for somebody who's behavior. So for somebody who's interested in affecting their eating interested in affecting their eating interested in affecting their eating behavior, how should they use light in behavior, how should they use light in behavior, how should they use light in order to adjust their eating behavior? order to adjust their eating behavior? order to adjust their eating behavior? Right. So now that I've told you about all So now that I've told you about all So now that I've told you about all these interaction between the different these interaction between the different these interaction between the different inputs to the circadian clock, inputs to the circadian clock, inputs to the circadian clock, just you think about it as an engineer. just you think about it as an engineer. just you think about it as an engineer. What would be the best thing? The best What would be the best thing? The best What would be the best thing? The best thing is to know when your food times thing is to know when your food times thing is to know when your food times happen in the day, when should you get happen in the day, when should you get happen in the day, when should you get light, and where is your circad- when is light, and where is your circad- when is light, and where is your circad- when is your circadian clock in your system, your circadian clock in your system, your circadian clock in your system, right? So, if you eat at very specific times of So, if you eat at very specific times of So, if you eat at very specific times of the day, that's another signal that is the day, that's another signal that is the day, that's another signal that is telling your body, your clock, you're in telling your body, your clock, you're in telling your body, your clock, you're in a certain time of the day. So, if you're a certain time of the day. So, if you're a certain time of the day. So, if you're having lunch at the correct time every having lunch at the correct time every having lunch at the correct time every day, and you're getting bright light, day, and you're getting bright light, day, and you're getting bright light, now you have two systems that are now you have two systems that are now you have two systems that are informing your clock, your clock is informing your clock, your clock is informing your clock, your clock is going to be better. So, regular meal going to be better. So, regular meal going to be better. So, regular meal times. &gt;&gt; Regular meal times that fit your &gt;&gt; Regular meal times that fit your &gt;&gt; Regular meal times that fit your circadian clock. So, and in fact, if you circadian clock. So, and in fact, if you circadian clock. So, and in fact, if you do that, when I started doing this, do that, when I started doing this, do that, when I started doing this, and it helped me lose weight, is that and it helped me lose weight, is that and it helped me lose weight, is that I'm exposing myself to the right amount I'm exposing myself to the right amount I'm exposing myself to the right amount of light dark cycle. I'm eating at of light dark cycle. I'm eating at of light dark cycle. I'm eating at regular time. It is amazing. You will be regular time. It is amazing. You will be regular time. It is amazing. You will be not hungry, let's say let's say you eat not hungry, let's say let's say you eat not hungry, let's say let's say you eat at noon. You will not feel any hunger at noon. You will not feel any hunger at noon. You will not feel any hunger at 11:45, and then all of sudden, the 11:45, and then all of sudden, the 11:45, and then all of sudden, the hunger jumps This is clearly not an hunger jumps This is clearly not an hunger jumps This is clearly not an energy issue, because it could not be energy issue, because it could not be energy issue, because it could not be that drastic. that drastic. that drastic. &gt;&gt; Right. Now, the desire to eat is mainly &gt;&gt; Right. Now, the desire to eat is mainly &gt;&gt; Right. Now, the desire to eat is mainly driven by these uh these cues, these driven by these uh these cues, these driven by these uh these cues, these hormone cues that are very exquisitely hormone cues that are very exquisitely hormone cues that are very exquisitely timed to exact sleep-wake cycle, but timed to exact sleep-wake cycle, but timed to exact sleep-wake cycle, but also to light. Exactly. How regular are also to light. Exactly. How regular are also to light. Exactly. How regular are you, or do you recommend people be about you, or do you recommend people be about you, or do you recommend people be about meal times? Are we talking about down to meal times? Are we talking about down to meal times? Are we talking about down to the minute? Like, if I the minute? Like, if I the minute? Like, if I &gt;&gt; Absolutely not. All right. Plus or So, &gt;&gt; Absolutely not. All right. Plus or So, &gt;&gt; Absolutely not. All right. Plus or So, 12:00 noon is my normal lunch, let's 12:00 noon is my normal lunch, let's 12:00 noon is my normal lunch, let's say, uh plus or minus half an hour. Okay. So, uh plus or minus half an hour. Okay. So, uh plus or minus half an hour. Okay. So, eat around between 11:30 and 12:30. eat around between 11:30 and 12:30. eat around between 11:30 and 12:30. &gt;&gt; If if that's the time. And it depends if &gt;&gt; If if that's the time. And it depends if &gt;&gt; If if that's the time. And it depends if you also do multiple meals. Remember, you also do multiple meals. Remember, you also do multiple meals. Remember, three meals, that's a decision that three meals, that's a decision that three meals, that's a decision that somebody came up with. I don't know why. somebody came up with. I don't know why. somebody came up with. I don't know why. &gt;&gt; Nowadays, people are fewer people are &gt;&gt; Nowadays, people are fewer people are &gt;&gt; Nowadays, people are fewer people are doing that, I think. doing that, I think. doing that, I think. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Given our friend Satchin Panda's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Given our friend Satchin Panda's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Given our friend Satchin Panda's work. &gt;&gt; I mean, so you could have two meals, you &gt;&gt; I mean, so you could have two meals, you &gt;&gt; I mean, so you could have two meals, you could have could have could have very multiples meals that are very multiples meals that are very multiples meals that are distributed across your active time. distributed across your active time. distributed across your active time. Some people are not hungry early in the Some people are not hungry early in the Some people are not hungry early in the day. They might be late-shifted people, day. They might be late-shifted people, day. They might be late-shifted people, in which case eating later in the day in which case eating later in the day in which case eating later in the day will work well for them. will work well for them. will work well for them. &gt;&gt; work as long as they don't eat early in &gt;&gt; work as long as they don't eat early in &gt;&gt; work as long as they don't eat early in the morning. That's just you have to the morning. That's just you have to the morning. That's just you have to work with your schedule, with your work with your schedule, with your work with your schedule, with your active schedule. What we're talking active schedule. What we're talking active schedule. What we're talking about really is finding your ideal sleep about really is finding your ideal sleep about really is finding your ideal sleep schedule. Exactly. And finding your schedule. Exactly. And finding your schedule. Exactly. And finding your ideal eating schedule. ideal eating schedule. ideal eating schedule. &gt;&gt; Exactly. And understanding how those two &gt;&gt; Exactly. And understanding how those two &gt;&gt; Exactly. And understanding how those two things interact. And you know, the nice things interact. And you know, the nice things interact. And you know, the nice thing, as you said, finding them out is thing, as you said, finding them out is thing, as you said, finding them out is going to help you to understand how they going to help you to understand how they going to help you to understand how they interact, because we know from the interact, because we know from the interact, because we know from the tripart model that they are all tripart model that they are all tripart model that they are all interconnected. And for each person, interconnected. And for each person, interconnected. And for each person, they're going to be interconnected they're going to be interconnected they're going to be interconnected differently. It's striking to me that in all animals It's striking to me that in all animals It's striking to me that in all animals besides humans, besides humans, besides humans, if they deviate too much from the if they deviate too much from the if they deviate too much from the appropriate exposure to light and appropriate exposure to light and appropriate exposure to light and light-dark cycle, they essentially don't light-dark cycle, they essentially don't light-dark cycle, they essentially don't mate and/or die and/or get killed off. mate and/or die and/or get killed off. mate and/or die and/or get killed off. But in humans, we are able to override But in humans, we are able to override But in humans, we are able to override that at least to some extent. But the that at least to some extent. But the that at least to some extent. But the ways in which we suffer ways in which we suffer ways in which we suffer appear to be things like obesity, appear to be things like obesity, appear to be things like obesity, metabolic syndromes, uh reproductive metabolic syndromes, uh reproductive metabolic syndromes, uh reproductive syndromes that are accompany the other syndromes that are accompany the other syndromes that are accompany the other syndromes, you know, endocrine syndromes, you know, endocrine syndromes, you know, endocrine syndromes, and mood and depressive syndromes, and mood and depressive syndromes, and mood and depressive disorders. Is there any effort at the level of the Is there any effort at the level of the Is there any effort at the level of the nationally or laboratories that the nationally or laboratories that the nationally or laboratories that you're aware of to try and use light in you're aware of to try and use light in you're aware of to try and use light in order to improve mood and mental health? order to improve mood and mental health? order to improve mood and mental health? I mean, honestly, this is my moonshot. I mean, honestly, this is my moonshot. I mean, honestly, this is my moonshot. This is the thing that I think people This is the thing that I think people This is the thing that I think people because it's I say don't take a because it's I say don't take a because it's I say don't take a pill, take a photon. Not I mean, you pill, take a photon. Not I mean, you pill, take a photon. Not I mean, you take pills, that's important. I'm just take pills, that's important. I'm just take pills, that's important. I'm just making it that really we have an making it that really we have an making it that really we have an opportunity right now with the opportunity right now with the opportunity right now with the incredible advances of LED lights, of incredible advances of LED lights, of incredible advances of LED lights, of changing spectrum of light, changing spectrum of light, changing spectrum of light, of regulating intensities, of regulating intensities, of regulating intensities, and just to asso- just as for simple and just to asso- just as for simple and just to asso- just as for simple changes, you could really improve changes, you could really improve changes, you could really improve sleep-wake cycle, productivity, and sleep-wake cycle, productivity, and sleep-wake cycle, productivity, and still you could actually get more done still you could actually get more done still you could actually get more done because as we've talked about, when you because as we've talked about, when you because as we've talked about, when you have all these messed up, now you have all these messed up, now you have all these messed up, now you have to sleep more, but your sleep is to sleep more, but your sleep is to sleep more, but your sleep is fragmented. It's not very good. And you fragmented. It's not very good. And you fragmented. It's not very good. And you can't focus when can't focus when can't focus when &gt;&gt; And you can't focus when you don't have &gt;&gt; And you can't focus when you don't have &gt;&gt; And you can't focus when you don't have alertness when you need the alertness. alertness when you need the alertness. alertness when you need the alertness. So, having all these you could allow you So, having all these you could allow you So, having all these you could allow you to do even more actually at the end than to do even more actually at the end than to do even more actually at the end than less. And that's the exciting part less. And that's the exciting part less. And that's the exciting part of it. Let's talk about jet lag. Mhm. of it. Let's talk about jet lag. Mhm. of it. Let's talk about jet lag. Mhm. What are the two or three things that What are the two or three things that What are the two or three things that people can do to adjust their schedule people can do to adjust their schedule people can do to adjust their schedule quickly? Like let's say fall classes are quickly? Like let's say fall classes are quickly? Like let's say fall classes are starting, you start a new job, or you starting, you start a new job, or you starting, you start a new job, or you have a baby or a puppy or whatever. have a baby or a puppy or whatever. have a baby or a puppy or whatever. What is the best way to shift the clock What is the best way to shift the clock What is the best way to shift the clock quickly? So, it's very simple as we've quickly? So, it's very simple as we've quickly? So, it's very simple as we've talked yesterday. So, imagine you're in talked yesterday. So, imagine you're in talked yesterday. So, imagine you're in the outside with no environmental in the outside with no environmental in the outside with no environmental with no industrial light. with no industrial light. with no industrial light. If you if your body thinks you're in If you if your body thinks you're in If you if your body thinks you're in early evening and you see a bright early evening and you see a bright early evening and you see a bright light, what does this tell you? Oh, light, what does this tell you? Oh, light, what does this tell you? Oh, wait. This is not early evening yet, wait. This is not early evening yet, wait. This is not early evening yet, it's still early afternoon or late it's still early afternoon or late it's still early afternoon or late afternoon. So, I have to delay my clock afternoon. So, I have to delay my clock afternoon. So, I have to delay my clock to go back to late afternoon. So, if you to go back to late afternoon. So, if you to go back to late afternoon. So, if you get light early in the evening, it get light early in the evening, it get light early in the evening, it delays your clock. delays your clock. delays your clock. So, what does So, what does So, what does &gt;&gt; Meaning that makes you want to go to &gt;&gt; Meaning that makes you want to go to &gt;&gt; Meaning that makes you want to go to sleep later. Yes, it delays your clock. sleep later. Yes, it delays your clock. sleep later. Yes, it delays your clock. So, later in the night, later in your So, later in the night, later in your So, later in the night, later in your night, and actually it just happens that in and actually it just happens that in and actually it just happens that in humans you get a temperature in the deer humans you get a temperature in the deer humans you get a temperature in the deer later in the night temp low temperature later in the night temp low temperature later in the night temp low temperature in your body. After that, light start in your body. After that, light start in your body. After that, light start advancing your clock. If I understand advancing your clock. If I understand advancing your clock. If I understand correctly, what you're saying is correctly, what you're saying is correctly, what you're saying is if your typical wake up time is say 7:00 if your typical wake up time is say 7:00 if your typical wake up time is say 7:00 a.m., then your low point in temperature then your low point in temperature then your low point in temperature probably occurs somewhere around 5:00 probably occurs somewhere around 5:00 probably occurs somewhere around 5:00 a.m. And if you view light right about around And if you view light right about around And if you view light right about around then, it's going to essentially advance then, it's going to essentially advance then, it's going to essentially advance your clock. your clock. your clock. &gt;&gt; Yeah, because then your body &gt;&gt; Yeah, because then your body &gt;&gt; Yeah, because then your body thinks, "Oh, it's 7:00 so it'll advance thinks, "Oh, it's 7:00 so it'll advance thinks, "Oh, it's 7:00 so it'll advance your clock by 1 to 2 hours." But if I your clock by 1 to 2 hours." But if I your clock by 1 to 2 hours." But if I were to view light say at 3:00 a.m., were to view light say at 3:00 a.m., were to view light say at 3:00 a.m., then it would probably delay my clock. then it would probably delay my clock. then it would probably delay my clock. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So, and then let's say Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So, and then let's say Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So, and then let's say I land in a new schedule. I want to I land in a new schedule. I want to I land in a new schedule. I want to adjust to a new schedule. Let's say I adjust to a new schedule. Let's say I adjust to a new schedule. Let's say I didn't manage to do anything with my didn't manage to do anything with my didn't manage to do anything with my light viewing before I went and I didn't light viewing before I went and I didn't light viewing before I went and I didn't I didn't anticipate the trip. Suddenly, I didn't anticipate the trip. Suddenly, I didn't anticipate the trip. Suddenly, I'm on a new schedule, okay? I'm on a new schedule, okay? I'm on a new schedule, okay? I was told that one of the ways to help I was told that one of the ways to help I was told that one of the ways to help shift the clock and to avoid shift the clock and to avoid shift the clock and to avoid gastrointestinal issues is to gastrointestinal issues is to gastrointestinal issues is to eat on the local schedule. eat on the local schedule. eat on the local schedule. &gt;&gt; Mhm. To start basically behaving like a &gt;&gt; Mhm. To start basically behaving like a &gt;&gt; Mhm. To start basically behaving like a local. Mhm. Even though your circadian local. Mhm. Even though your circadian local. Mhm. Even though your circadian clock will take a little bit of time to clock will take a little bit of time to clock will take a little bit of time to catch up. catch up. catch up. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. But, you have to remember &gt;&gt; Absolutely. But, you have to remember &gt;&gt; Absolutely. But, you have to remember the light, right? So, let's now the light, right? So, let's now the light, right? So, let's now that we explained it very simply, let's that we explained it very simply, let's that we explained it very simply, let's take a very simple example, right? take a very simple example, right? take a very simple example, right? New York to Italy. That's a simple New York to Italy. That's a simple New York to Italy. That's a simple example. New York time, Italy time, example. New York time, Italy time, example. New York time, Italy time, 6-hour difference, right? So, let's say 6-hour difference, right? So, let's say 6-hour difference, right? So, let's say you fly from New York at night, you fly from New York at night, you fly from New York at night, you reach Italy at 8:00 in the morning. What reach Italy at 8:00 in the morning. What reach Italy at 8:00 in the morning. What is the time in your New York time? is the time in your New York time? is the time in your New York time? You Although you reach You Although you reach You Although you reach &gt;&gt; 6 hours back. &gt;&gt; 6 hours back. &gt;&gt; 6 hours back. &gt;&gt; 6 hours back. It's 2:00 a.m. So, when &gt;&gt; 6 hours back. It's 2:00 a.m. So, when &gt;&gt; 6 hours back. It's 2:00 a.m. So, when you land Italy, you want to avoid light you land Italy, you want to avoid light you land Italy, you want to avoid light like the plague. Yeah, you could eat, like the plague. Yeah, you could eat, like the plague. Yeah, you could eat, but you really don't want to get a but you really don't want to get a but you really don't want to get a light. &gt;&gt; Right, cuz otherwise it's going to delay &gt;&gt; Right, cuz otherwise it's going to delay &gt;&gt; Right, cuz otherwise it's going to delay you. &gt;&gt; to delay you. It's going to send you to &gt;&gt; to delay you. It's going to send you to &gt;&gt; to delay you. It's going to send you to California instead of sending you to California instead of sending you to California instead of sending you to Italy. &gt;&gt; Right. What Sam is saying is so crucial. &gt;&gt; Right. What Sam is saying is so crucial. &gt;&gt; Right. What Sam is saying is so crucial. Just because getting bright light in Just because getting bright light in Just because getting bright light in your eyes early in the day is really your eyes early in the day is really your eyes early in the day is really beneficial when you're at home. When you beneficial when you're at home. When you beneficial when you're at home. When you travel to a new time zone, you have to travel to a new time zone, you have to travel to a new time zone, you have to take into account where your body thinks take into account where your body thinks take into account where your body thinks you are. And so, if you're looking at you are. And so, if you're looking at you are. And so, if you're looking at the Italian sunrise having just flown the Italian sunrise having just flown the Italian sunrise having just flown from New York to Italy, and you didn't from New York to Italy, and you didn't from New York to Italy, and you didn't prepare for that trip by waking up a prepare for that trip by waking up a prepare for that trip by waking up a little bit earlier in anticipation little bit earlier in anticipation little bit earlier in anticipation &gt;&gt; Multiple days, yeah. &gt;&gt; Multiple days, yeah. &gt;&gt; Multiple days, yeah. &gt;&gt; and you view light at 2:00 a.m. Excuse &gt;&gt; and you view light at 2:00 a.m. Excuse &gt;&gt; and you view light at 2:00 a.m. Excuse me, at 6:00 or 7:00 a.m. Italian me, at 6:00 or 7:00 a.m. Italian me, at 6:00 or 7:00 a.m. Italian time, beautiful Italian sunrise, you are time, beautiful Italian sunrise, you are time, beautiful Italian sunrise, you are going to delay your clock. You're going to delay your clock. You're going to delay your clock. You're going to basically throw yourself back to basically throw yourself back to basically throw yourself back to California, but you are in Italy. You're California, but you are in Italy. You're California, but you are in Italy. You're going to throw your biology back to going to throw your biology back to going to throw your biology back to California, and you are going to be up California, and you are going to be up California, and you are going to be up in the middle of the Italian night, and in the middle of the Italian night, and in the middle of the Italian night, and you're going to be a miserable. you're going to be a miserable. you're going to be a miserable. It's very important miserable. It's very important miserable. It's very important to avoid getting the wrong light to avoid getting the wrong light to avoid getting the wrong light information when you're trying to adjust information when you're trying to adjust information when you're trying to adjust your body because otherwise it shifts your body because otherwise it shifts your body because otherwise it shifts you to the other to the other cycle. you to the other to the other cycle. you to the other to the other cycle. Absolutely right. You are one of these Absolutely right. You are one of these Absolutely right. You are one of these people that has such vigor. I think a people that has such vigor. I think a people that has such vigor. I think a lot of your ability to work hard and lot of your ability to work hard and lot of your ability to work hard and focus and really do so many things at an focus and really do so many things at an focus and really do so many things at an impressive level is because you think impressive level is because you think impressive level is because you think about these issues and you think about these issues and you think about these issues and you think about when you're going to be optimal about when you're going to be optimal about when you're going to be optimal for focus, when you're going to be for focus, when you're going to be for focus, when you're going to be optimal for exercise, when and the when optimal for exercise, when and the when optimal for exercise, when and the when is the key. It's and I think a lot of is the key. It's and I think a lot of is the key. It's and I think a lot of people live in the landscape of feeling people live in the landscape of feeling people live in the landscape of feeling like there's something broken inside like there's something broken inside like there's something broken inside them. I really agree with you that I them. I really agree with you that I them. I really agree with you that I think part of the reason I'm continuing think part of the reason I'm continuing think part of the reason I'm continuing to be able to do this that I really to be able to do this that I really to be able to do this that I really think about it and I make sure that I think about it and I make sure that I think about it and I make sure that I keep everything aligned and that keep everything aligned and that keep everything aligned and that actually helps me a lot. Like I don't actually helps me a lot. Like I don't actually helps me a lot. Like I don't suffer in sleep, I don't suffer in suffer in sleep, I don't suffer in suffer in sleep, I don't suffer in waking up. I never use a timer to wake waking up. I never use a timer to wake waking up. I never use a timer to wake up. System is so aligned, it works. A up. System is so aligned, it works. A up. System is so aligned, it works. A lot of times people will say, "How come lot of times people will say, "How come lot of times people will say, "How come I go to sleep? I fall asleep fine, but I go to sleep? I fall asleep fine, but I go to sleep? I fall asleep fine, but then I wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 in the then I wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 in the then I wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning and can't fall back asleep." Is morning and can't fall back asleep." Is morning and can't fall back asleep." Is it possible that those people were it possible that those people were it possible that those people were supposed to go to bed at 8:00 p.m.? supposed to go to bed at 8:00 p.m.? supposed to go to bed at 8:00 p.m.? Yeah, I mean it is possible or it's Yeah, I mean it is possible or it's Yeah, I mean it is possible or it's possible that their clock is completely possible that their clock is completely possible that their clock is completely misaligned that they are getting maybe misaligned that they are getting maybe misaligned that they are getting maybe enough time at night when they are enough time at night when they are enough time at night when they are supposed and then they possibly feel so supposed and then they possibly feel so supposed and then they possibly feel so sleepy in the day. So there all these sleepy in the day. So there all these sleepy in the day. So there all these are possible combinations. Well, that's are possible combinations. Well, that's are possible combinations. Well, that's interesting idea I hadn't considered. So interesting idea I hadn't considered. So interesting idea I hadn't considered. So that what they think is their sleep, that what they think is their sleep, that what they think is their sleep, their body is so out of whack with the their body is so out of whack with the their body is so out of whack with the light dark cycle that it's actually a light dark cycle that it's actually a light dark cycle that it's actually a nap. &gt;&gt; or the weaker part of the sleep. I &gt;&gt; or the weaker part of the sleep. I &gt;&gt; or the weaker part of the sleep. I mean you see this in when you travel mean you see this in when you travel mean you see this in when you travel to different time zone before you to different time zone before you to different time zone before you adjust, you go to sleep really well, but adjust, you go to sleep really well, but adjust, you go to sleep really well, but 2 hours later you're fully up. 2 hours. 2 hours later you're fully up. 2 hours. 2 hours later you're fully up. 2 hours. If you were so tired and this is your If you were so tired and this is your If you were so tired and this is your regular sleep, there's no way you're regular sleep, there's no way you're regular sleep, there's no way you're going to wake up in 2 hours. Let's talk going to wake up in 2 hours. Let's talk going to wake up in 2 hours. Let's talk about seasonality a little bit. Are about seasonality a little bit. Are about seasonality a little bit. Are there other effects of seasonality on there other effects of seasonality on there other effects of seasonality on humans that were you aware of? Honestly, humans that were you aware of? Honestly, humans that were you aware of? Honestly, you could see it perfectly I think in you could see it perfectly I think in you could see it perfectly I think in Scandinavia. I mean you could talk to Scandinavia. I mean you could talk to Scandinavia. I mean you could talk to people in who live in Sure, they get people in who live in Sure, they get people in who live in Sure, they get seasonal depression. What seasonal depression. What seasonal depression. What seasonal depression is one, but actually when you depression is one, but actually when you depression is one, but actually when you start asking them questions, they tell start asking them questions, they tell start asking them questions, they tell you like in the winter they barely could you like in the winter they barely could you like in the winter they barely could wake up, they barely have the energy. wake up, they barely have the energy. wake up, they barely have the energy. Before even depression, even people who Before even depression, even people who Before even depression, even people who don't get seasonal depression, they'll don't get seasonal depression, they'll don't get seasonal depression, they'll tell you our energy level is lower, our tell you our energy level is lower, our tell you our energy level is lower, our ability to go to work is not the ability to go to work is not the ability to go to work is not the same. And in the summer, same. And in the summer, same. And in the summer, most people actually sleep very little. most people actually sleep very little. most people actually sleep very little. They tell you we really can They tell you we really can They tell you we really can we feel like we're manic, we have all we feel like we're manic, we have all we feel like we're manic, we have all this energy. this energy. this energy. And not in a negative way, in a funny And not in a negative way, in a funny And not in a negative way, in a funny way, right? I mean, but if you want to way, right? I mean, but if you want to way, right? I mean, but if you want to sleep, we have to put these curtain. I sleep, we have to put these curtain. I sleep, we have to put these curtain. I think in these situations, you could think in these situations, you could think in these situations, you could really appreciate the seasonality of really appreciate the seasonality of really appreciate the seasonality of humans. I think we kind of destroyed our humans. I think we kind of destroyed our humans. I think we kind of destroyed our seasonality because we don't get exposed seasonality because we don't get exposed seasonality because we don't get exposed to that much natural light. We have all to that much natural light. We have all to that much natural light. We have all this artificial light. But I think, this artificial light. But I think, this artificial light. But I think, honestly, one of the thing that is going to happen one of the thing that is going to happen one of the thing that is going to happen if they follow your recommendation, this if they follow your recommendation, this if they follow your recommendation, this is going to cause them to also is going to cause them to also is going to cause them to also experience some changes across the experience some changes across the experience some changes across the season. Because now, season. Because now, season. Because now, they're going to see the sun they're going to see the sun they're going to see the sun differently. If you're going to go out differently. If you're going to go out differently. If you're going to go out in the morning, in the summer, you're in the morning, in the summer, you're in the morning, in the summer, you're going to get the much brighter That's going to get the much brighter That's going to get the much brighter That's why I don't like the change in time. I why I don't like the change in time. I why I don't like the change in time. I know people think, "Oh, because you're know people think, "Oh, because you're know people think, "Oh, because you're biased, you cuz I think Wait, wait, biased, you cuz I think Wait, wait, biased, you cuz I think Wait, wait, wait. Sorry, the change Are you wait, wait. Sorry, the change Are you wait, wait. Sorry, the change Are you talking about daylight savings?" talking about daylight savings?" talking about daylight savings?" &gt;&gt; Daylight saving. It's such a bad idea &gt;&gt; Daylight saving. It's such a bad idea &gt;&gt; Daylight saving. It's such a bad idea because it disrupts that rhythm that because it disrupts that rhythm that because it disrupts that rhythm that you're having. you're having. you're having. Cuz I think your body, if you keep that Cuz I think your body, if you keep that Cuz I think your body, if you keep that rhythm, you will see the whole rhythm, you will see the whole rhythm, you will see the whole seasonality. And I look at it from a seasonality. And I look at it from a seasonality. And I look at it from a different aspect than other people. If different aspect than other people. If different aspect than other people. If you think about it, Andrew, there is a you think about it, Andrew, there is a you think about it, Andrew, there is a situation where you're getting light situation where you're getting light situation where you're getting light perfectly well, and then all of sudden perfectly well, and then all of sudden perfectly well, and then all of sudden they delayed by 1 hour because And then, they delayed by 1 hour because And then, they delayed by 1 hour because And then, even though it's the summer, your body even though it's the summer, your body even though it's the summer, your body now, if you're still not adjusting, now, if you're still not adjusting, now, if you're still not adjusting, think, "Oh, wait, what happened? What think, "Oh, wait, what happened? What think, "Oh, wait, what happened? What kind of happened?" Well, I'm glad you're kind of happened?" Well, I'm glad you're kind of happened?" Well, I'm glad you're bringing this up because I always bringing this up because I always bringing this up because I always thought, you know, what's the big deal, thought, you know, what's the big deal, thought, you know, what's the big deal, 1 hour, right? 1 hour shift, you know, 1 hour, right? 1 hour shift, you know, 1 hour, right? 1 hour shift, you know, spring forward, fall back. spring forward, fall back. spring forward, fall back. &gt;&gt; adjust to 1 hour, actually. But the but &gt;&gt; adjust to 1 hour, actually. But the but &gt;&gt; adjust to 1 hour, actually. But the but this goes back to the beginning of our this goes back to the beginning of our this goes back to the beginning of our discussion. It's not just 1 hour. discussion. It's not just 1 hour. discussion. It's not just 1 hour. &gt;&gt; Right. Because it's 1 hour across that 1 &gt;&gt; Right. Because it's 1 hour across that 1 &gt;&gt; Right. Because it's 1 hour across that 1 day, but there's this cumulative effect day, but there's this cumulative effect day, but there's this cumulative effect on the clock and these on the clock and these on the clock and these uh three elements of your tripartite uh three elements of your tripartite uh three elements of your tripartite model, right? The homeostatic sleep and model, right? The homeostatic sleep and model, right? The homeostatic sleep and the light direct effects on mood. And the light direct effects on mood. And the light direct effects on mood. And when it's so close, it's sometimes hard when it's so close, it's sometimes hard when it's so close, it's sometimes hard to figure out how to adjust it perfectly to figure out how to adjust it perfectly to figure out how to adjust it perfectly because, you know, we're already sleep because, you know, we're already sleep because, you know, we're already sleep deprived in our society. And then you deprived in our society. And then you deprived in our society. And then you shift it by, you know, so it just it shift it by, you know, so it just it shift it by, you know, so it just it all accumulates and it has no benefit. I all accumulates and it has no benefit. I all accumulates and it has no benefit. I just don't understand why they do this. just don't understand why they do this. just don't understand why they do this. It makes no sense. Well, I think that It makes no sense. Well, I think that It makes no sense. Well, I think that the reason they do it is because they the reason they do it is because they the reason they do it is because they don't understand the biology. Because 1 don't understand the biology. Because 1 don't understand the biology. Because 1 hour seems trivial unless you understand hour seems trivial unless you understand hour seems trivial unless you understand that the repercussions of that 1 hour that the repercussions of that 1 hour that the repercussions of that 1 hour shift. Because what's also clear now, shift. Because what's also clear now, shift. Because what's also clear now, based on what you're saying, is that based on what you're saying, is that based on what you're saying, is that 1 hour shift is taking you out of that 1 hour shift is taking you out of that 1 hour shift is taking you out of alignment with the natural light-dark alignment with the natural light-dark alignment with the natural light-dark cycle in exactly the wrong direction. cycle in exactly the wrong direction. cycle in exactly the wrong direction. &gt;&gt; It's pushing people to get even later &gt;&gt; It's pushing people to get even later &gt;&gt; It's pushing people to get even later Yeah. In the summer when light is going Yeah. In the summer when light is going Yeah. In the summer when light is going to push you later anyway. It's really to push you later anyway. It's really to push you later anyway. It's really compounding the problem that already compounding the problem that already compounding the problem that already exists. Samer, this has been um Samer, this has been um Samer, this has been um an amazing march through the importance an amazing march through the importance an amazing march through the importance of light. I'm certain that people are of light. I'm certain that people are of light. I'm certain that people are going to start thinking about how to going to start thinking about how to going to start thinking about how to change their relationship with light as change their relationship with light as change their relationship with light as a way to anchor everything that they do a way to anchor everything that they do a way to anchor everything that they do and that's important to their health. and that's important to their health. and that's important to their health. Let's talk a little bit about where Let's talk a little bit about where Let's talk a little bit about where people can find you. Your laboratory is people can find you. Your laboratory is people can find you. Your laboratory is at the National Institutes of Mental at the National Institutes of Mental at the National Institutes of Mental Health. He's head of the Chronobiology Health. He's head of the Chronobiology Health. He's head of the Chronobiology Unit, all these things that I've Unit, all these things that I've Unit, all these things that I've mentioned earlier. But um you are active mentioned earlier. But um you are active mentioned earlier. But um you are active on Twitter and Instagram. Right. on Twitter and Instagram. Right. on Twitter and Instagram. Right. &gt;&gt; So, what is your uh Twitter handle? It's &gt;&gt; So, what is your uh Twitter handle? It's &gt;&gt; So, what is your uh Twitter handle? It's @SamerHattar and I think the same for @SamerHattar and I think the same for @SamerHattar and I think the same for Instagram. &gt;&gt; Definitely give him a follow there and &gt;&gt; Definitely give him a follow there and &gt;&gt; Definitely give him a follow there and on and on Twitter. And um and I'm sure on and on Twitter. And um and I'm sure on and on Twitter. And um and I'm sure that he'll be happy to answer questions that he'll be happy to answer questions that he'll be happy to answer questions uh and entertain any and all discussions uh and entertain any and all discussions uh and entertain any and all discussions about chronobiology. Absolutely. Yeah, about chronobiology. Absolutely. Yeah, about chronobiology. Absolutely. Yeah, and light. and light. and light. Yeah. Great. Thank you, Samer. Awesome. Thank Great. Thank you, Samer. Awesome. Thank Great. Thank you, Samer. Awesome. Thank you, Andrew.