Awe is good for Awe is good for Awe is good for reduced inflammation, elevated vagal reduced inflammation, elevated vagal reduced inflammation, elevated vagal tone, reduced long COVID symptoms. We tone, reduced long COVID symptoms. We tone, reduced long COVID symptoms. We have people with long COVID, just a have people with long COVID, just a have people with long COVID, just a minute of awe a day minute of awe a day minute of awe a day reduce long COVID symptoms. It's good reduce long COVID symptoms. It's good reduce long COVID symptoms. It's good news, right? And and there's so much news, right? And and there's so much news, right? And and there's so much science on it that I just now science on it that I just now science on it that I just now I think medical doctors are starting to I think medical doctors are starting to I think medical doctors are starting to think like, I'm going to prescribe think like, I'm going to prescribe think like, I'm going to prescribe nature, I'll prescribe music through nature, I'll prescribe music through nature, I'll prescribe music through awe, right? Um as a mechanism. Welcome awe, right? Um as a mechanism. Welcome awe, right? Um as a mechanism. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science [music] and discuss science [music] and discuss science [music] and science-based tools for everyday life. &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Dacher Keltner. Dr. Dacher today is Dr. Dacher Keltner. Dr. Dacher today is Dr. Dacher Keltner. Dr. Dacher Keltner is a professor of psychology and Keltner is a professor of psychology and Keltner is a professor of psychology and the co-director of the Greater Good the co-director of the Greater Good the co-director of the Greater Good Science Center at the University of Science Center at the University of Science Center at the University of California, Berkeley. California, Berkeley. California, Berkeley. Dacher is an expert in the science of Dacher is an expert in the science of Dacher is an expert in the science of emotions and their role in social emotions and their role in social emotions and their role in social dynamics and bonding. Today, we discuss dynamics and bonding. Today, we discuss dynamics and bonding. Today, we discuss his fascinating work on the science of his fascinating work on the science of his fascinating work on the science of emotions, including the role of teasing emotions, including the role of teasing emotions, including the role of teasing in social bonding, the role of in social bonding, the role of in social bonding, the role of embarrassment in social bonding, and his embarrassment in social bonding, and his embarrassment in social bonding, and his fascinating work on awe and the things fascinating work on awe and the things fascinating work on awe and the things that lead to awe. As he describes, awe that lead to awe. As he describes, awe that lead to awe. As he describes, awe is not elusive. It happens when we shift is not elusive. It happens when we shift is not elusive. It happens when we shift our perception from a very small scale our perception from a very small scale our perception from a very small scale to a very large scale or back again, to a very large scale or back again, to a very large scale or back again, such as when we suddenly reach a new such as when we suddenly reach a new such as when we suddenly reach a new horizon or visual vista. Today, you'll horizon or visual vista. Today, you'll horizon or visual vista. Today, you'll understand what all of that really understand what all of that really understand what all of that really means, and more importantly, how you can means, and more importantly, how you can means, and more importantly, how you can create this incredible thing that we create this incredible thing that we create this incredible thing that we call awe in everyday life. We also talk call awe in everyday life. We also talk call awe in everyday life. We also talk about the critical aspect of human about the critical aspect of human about the critical aspect of human bonding in groups and the things that bonding in groups and the things that bonding in groups and the things that both establish and inhibit deep human both establish and inhibit deep human both establish and inhibit deep human bonds. So, today is a very practical as bonds. So, today is a very practical as bonds. So, today is a very practical as well as conceptual conversation that no well as conceptual conversation that no well as conceptual conversation that no doubt will change the way that you think doubt will change the way that you think doubt will change the way that you think about your life every day and think about your life every day and think about your life every day and think about opportunities for awe every day. about opportunities for awe every day. about opportunities for awe every day. As you'll soon see, Dacher Keltner is a As you'll soon see, Dacher Keltner is a As you'll soon see, Dacher Keltner is a truly special scientist known for his truly special scientist known for his truly special scientist known for his incredible rigor and creativity in the incredible rigor and creativity in the incredible rigor and creativity in the study of emotions, but also continually study of emotions, but also continually study of emotions, but also continually offering you, the public, ways to be and offering you, the public, ways to be and offering you, the public, ways to be and feel genuinely better and to get more feel genuinely better and to get more feel genuinely better and to get more out of life. It was a true honor and out of life. It was a true honor and out of life. It was a true honor and pleasure to host him. Before we begin, pleasure to host him. Before we begin, pleasure to host him. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast I'd like to emphasize that this podcast I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and is separate from my teaching and is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Dacher Keltner. Dr. Dacher Keltner. Dr. Dacher Keltner. Dr. Dacher Keltner, welcome. Good to be Dr. Dacher Keltner, welcome. Good to be Dr. Dacher Keltner, welcome. Good to be with you, Andrew. with you, Andrew. with you, Andrew. Awe. Yeah, we all intuitively know what Awe. Yeah, we all intuitively know what Awe. Yeah, we all intuitively know what it is, and yet it is, and yet it is, and yet we also don't know how to articulate it. we also don't know how to articulate it. we also don't know how to articulate it. Yeah. I want to say the words overwhelm, Yeah. I want to say the words overwhelm, Yeah. I want to say the words overwhelm, excited. I get the physical sensation of a lift. I get the physical sensation of a lift. I get the physical sensation of a lift. I don't think anyone ever said the word I don't think anyone ever said the word I don't think anyone ever said the word awe and then collapsed into a turtle awe and then collapsed into a turtle awe and then collapsed into a turtle position. Maybe we could explore that and your Maybe we could explore that and your Maybe we could explore that and your thoughts about that. But what got you thoughts about that. But what got you thoughts about that. But what got you into awe? Yeah, and I and I love the into awe? Yeah, and I and I love the into awe? Yeah, and I and I love the word lift. That's really interesting. Um word lift. That's really interesting. Um word lift. That's really interesting. Um yeah, I was uh a young scholar in the yeah, I was uh a young scholar in the yeah, I was uh a young scholar in the science of emotion that really Paul science of emotion that really Paul science of emotion that really Paul Ekman was a pioneer in, Ekman was a pioneer in, Ekman was a pioneer in, you know, and that field you know, and that field you know, and that field in the, you know, '90s and early 2000s in the, you know, '90s and early 2000s in the, you know, '90s and early 2000s was uh really focused on negative was uh really focused on negative was uh really focused on negative emotions, you know, and you know emotions, you know, and you know emotions, you know, and you know this science, right? Anger, fear, fight this science, right? Anger, fear, fight this science, right? Anger, fear, fight or flight physiology, amygdala, or flight physiology, amygdala, or flight physiology, amygdala, cortisol, uh disgust, you know, Paul Rozin and uh disgust, you know, Paul Rozin and uh disgust, you know, Paul Rozin and John Haidt. John Haidt. John Haidt. Um And thinking about emotions from that And thinking about emotions from that And thinking about emotions from that lens and it lens and it lens and it as a young scientist uh as a young scientist uh as a young scientist uh and given the powerful tools of emotion and given the powerful tools of emotion and given the powerful tools of emotion science of Darwin and Ekman and how to science of Darwin and Ekman and how to science of Darwin and Ekman and how to just observe phenomena, just observe phenomena, just observe phenomena, uh it didn't make contact with my life in it didn't make contact with my life in it didn't make contact with my life in my own experience, you know? I my own experience, you know? I my own experience, you know? I was raised as a wild child in the late was raised as a wild child in the late was raised as a wild child in the late '60s in Laurel Canyon and, you know, it '60s in Laurel Canyon and, you know, it '60s in Laurel Canyon and, you know, it was like music and social change and was like music and social change and was like music and social change and protest and uh protest and uh protest and uh you know, and beauty and I was raised by you know, and beauty and I was raised by you know, and beauty and I was raised by a dad who's a visual artist and my mom a dad who's a visual artist and my mom a dad who's a visual artist and my mom taught romanticism and Virginia Woolf taught romanticism and Virginia Woolf taught romanticism and Virginia Woolf and awe and the mind and awe and the mind and awe and the mind and I was like, "Wow, there's all this and I was like, "Wow, there's all this and I was like, "Wow, there's all this stuff that our science, my science, can't that our science, my science, can't that our science, my science, can't speak to. Music and visual patterns and speak to. Music and visual patterns and speak to. Music and visual patterns and dance and collective movement and you dance and collective movement and you dance and collective movement and you know, someone like Martin Luther King know, someone like Martin Luther King know, someone like Martin Luther King and why he makes me cry, you know? and why he makes me cry, you know? and why he makes me cry, you know? And I remember And I remember And I remember feeling this and asking Paul Ekman, I feeling this and asking Paul Ekman, I feeling this and asking Paul Ekman, I was like, "You know, what should I do was like, "You know, what should I do was like, "You know, what should I do with my career?" And he's like, "Study with my career?" And he's like, "Study with my career?" And he's like, "Study awe, you know?" And awe, you know?" And awe, you know?" And so that got me going. so that got me going. so that got me going. If we could If we could If we could maybe we could talk about the faces for maybe we could talk about the faces for maybe we could talk about the faces for a moment. You know, I think every a moment. You know, I think every a moment. You know, I think every psychology and neuroscience student psychology and neuroscience student psychology and neuroscience student &gt;&gt; Yeah. sees these faces of disgust, of &gt;&gt; Yeah. sees these faces of disgust, of &gt;&gt; Yeah. sees these faces of disgust, of pleasure. Uh Darwin talked about this. pleasure. Uh Darwin talked about this. pleasure. Uh Darwin talked about this. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Babies are often presented in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Babies are often presented in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Babies are often presented in parallel with those pictures of adults parallel with those pictures of adults parallel with those pictures of adults where they'll show a baby like, you where they'll show a baby like, you where they'll show a baby like, you know, recoiling from something or, you know, recoiling from something or, you know, recoiling from something or, you know, wide-eyed and leaning in. You know, wide-eyed and leaning in. You know, wide-eyed and leaning in. You know, there always seems to be a motor know, there always seems to be a motor know, there always seems to be a motor component to this that maybe isn't as component to this that maybe isn't as component to this that maybe isn't as captured in those two-dimensional captured in those two-dimensional captured in those two-dimensional photographs. But what's the story about photographs. But what's the story about photographs. But what's the story about sort of hardwired facial emotions? And sort of hardwired facial emotions? And sort of hardwired facial emotions? And what are the revisions to that story what are the revisions to that story what are the revisions to that story that I I'm probably not aware of? Yeah, that I I'm probably not aware of? Yeah, that I I'm probably not aware of? Yeah, thank you for asking that. Um thank you for asking that. Um thank you for asking that. Um you know, I've spent 30 years working on you know, I've spent 30 years working on you know, I've spent 30 years working on that very problem. Um that very problem. Um that very problem. Um Paul Ekman came in and you know, as Paul Ekman came in and you know, as Paul Ekman came in and you know, as you've suggested, right? He did this you've suggested, right? He did this you've suggested, right? He did this revolutionary work in New Guinea. revolutionary work in New Guinea. revolutionary work in New Guinea. You know, showed photos of six emotions, You know, showed photos of six emotions, You know, showed photos of six emotions, static photographs of anger, fear, static photographs of anger, fear, static photographs of anger, fear, sadness, disgust, surprise, and a smile. sadness, disgust, surprise, and a smile. sadness, disgust, surprise, and a smile. They kind of interpreted the faces like They kind of interpreted the faces like They kind of interpreted the faces like you or I would, uh naming it, using the you or I would, uh naming it, using the you or I would, uh naming it, using the right words to describe those faces. right words to describe those faces. right words to describe those faces. And that And that And that you know, and this is how science you know, and this is how science you know, and this is how science occasionally works, which is just by occasionally works, which is just by occasionally works, which is just by accident that became the field. And accident that became the field. And accident that became the field. And there are a lot of debates about how there are a lot of debates about how there are a lot of debates about how reliable those faces are, how universal reliable those faces are, how universal reliable those faces are, how universal are they in different cultures. are they in different cultures. are they in different cultures. Uh Ekman really positive, sort of a Uh Ekman really positive, sort of a Uh Ekman really positive, sort of a strong universality. That's been strong universality. That's been strong universality. That's been contested by Jim Russell, Lisa Feldman contested by Jim Russell, Lisa Feldman contested by Jim Russell, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and others. Barrett, and others. Barrett, and others. Um but since then, Um but since then, Um but since then, there are controversies around how wire there are controversies around how wire there are controversies around how wire hardwired they are. Do they occur hardwired they are. Do they occur hardwired they are. Do they occur reliably in a child's development? Yes reliably in a child's development? Yes reliably in a child's development? Yes and no, you know, young children show and no, you know, young children show and no, you know, young children show disgust expressions disgust expressions disgust expressions uh like social mammals do. They wince at uh like social mammals do. They wince at uh like social mammals do. They wince at bad smells just like you or I would. Uh bad smells just like you or I would. Uh bad smells just like you or I would. Uh anger is a little bit trickier to pin anger is a little bit trickier to pin anger is a little bit trickier to pin down developmentally. But then, our lab down developmentally. But then, our lab down developmentally. But then, our lab and several labs around the world, you and several labs around the world, you and several labs around the world, you know, Jess Tracy at UB British Columbia, know, Jess Tracy at UB British Columbia, know, Jess Tracy at UB British Columbia, Disa Sauter, Disa Sauter, Disa Sauter, uh and I want to talk about this uh and I want to talk about this uh and I want to talk about this computational work uh started to expand computational work uh started to expand computational work uh started to expand uh the vocabulary of faces. And now, we uh the vocabulary of faces. And now, we uh the vocabulary of faces. And now, we there's a lot of data that suggests there's a lot of data that suggests there's a lot of data that suggests there are 20 different facial there are 20 different facial there are 20 different facial expressions. Laughter, love, compassion, expressions. Laughter, love, compassion, expressions. Laughter, love, compassion, awe, you know, whoa. awe, you know, whoa. awe, you know, whoa. Uh embarrassment, shame, pain, uh you Uh embarrassment, shame, pain, uh you Uh embarrassment, shame, pain, uh you know, and that uh know, and that uh know, and that uh in some sense has broadened the taxonomy in some sense has broadened the taxonomy in some sense has broadened the taxonomy of emotions. We used to think of six, of emotions. We used to think of six, of emotions. We used to think of six, now there are probably 20 distinct now there are probably 20 distinct now there are probably 20 distinct states in the mind. And that's where the states in the mind. And that's where the states in the mind. And that's where the field is heading is to really start to field is heading is to really start to field is heading is to really start to think about physiological patterns, think about physiological patterns, think about physiological patterns, brain patterns of these distinct brain patterns of these distinct brain patterns of these distinct states. And and I'll tell you um the states. And and I'll tell you um the states. And and I'll tell you um the hardwiring question, hardwiring question, hardwiring question, I mean, it's hard science to do, right? I mean, it's hard science to do, right? I mean, it's hard science to do, right? Just to imagine Just to imagine Just to imagine videotaping people from five different videotaping people from five different videotaping people from five different countries, getting their emotional countries, getting their emotional countries, getting their emotional expressions, and then making sense of expressions, and then making sense of expressions, and then making sense of them. Uh it used to take 1 hour to code the Uh it used to take 1 hour to code the Uh it used to take 1 hour to code the facial muscle movements of one of 1 facial muscle movements of one of 1 facial muscle movements of one of 1 minute, right? So, this is slow science. minute, right? So, this is slow science. minute, right? So, this is slow science. And I would really encourage listeners And I would really encourage listeners And I would really encourage listeners and viewers to go to Alan Cowan.com. and viewers to go to Alan Cowan.com. and viewers to go to Alan Cowan.com. And I had a grad student at Berkeley, And I had a grad student at Berkeley, And I had a grad student at Berkeley, Alan Cowan, who Alan Cowan, who Alan Cowan, who you know, you know, you know, &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; he's a computational genius and he &gt;&gt; he's a computational genius and he &gt;&gt; he's a computational genius and he looked at our old science and said, looked at our old science and said, looked at our old science and said, "We can use AI to code the face." And he "We can use AI to code the face." And he "We can use AI to code the face." And he did it with Google engineers. He coded did it with Google engineers. He coded did it with Google engineers. He coded 2 million videos from 144 cultures 2 million videos from 144 cultures 2 million videos from 144 cultures and 16 facial expressions. and 16 facial expressions. and 16 facial expressions. Uh 75% overlap across cultures in how we Uh 75% overlap across cultures in how we Uh 75% overlap across cultures in how we show awe at fireworks, concentration on show awe at fireworks, concentration on show awe at fireworks, concentration on a test, you know, laugh at friends. So, a test, you know, laugh at friends. So, a test, you know, laugh at friends. So, right now I would say 50 to 60% is right now I would say 50 to 60% is right now I would say 50 to 60% is hardwired. It's part of who we are in hardwired. It's part of who we are in hardwired. It's part of who we are in our evolutionary history. And then the our evolutionary history. And then the our evolutionary history. And then the rest is rest is rest is subject to variation in interesting subject to variation in interesting subject to variation in interesting ways. I would like to take a quick break and I would like to take a quick break and I would like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Juve. acknowledge one of our sponsors, Juve. acknowledge one of our sponsors, Juve. Juve makes medical-grade red light Juve makes medical-grade red light Juve makes medical-grade red light therapy devices. therapy devices. therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have Now, if there's one thing that I have Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, it's the incredible impact that light it's the incredible impact that light it's the incredible impact that light can have on our biology and our health. can have on our biology and our health. can have on our biology and our health. Now, in addition to sunlight, which I've Now, in addition to sunlight, which I've Now, in addition to sunlight, which I've talked about a lot on this podcast, red talked about a lot on this podcast, red talked about a lot on this podcast, red light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light have been specifically shown to have been specifically shown to have been specifically shown to have positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellular and organ health. aspects of cellular and organ health. aspects of cellular and organ health. These include faster muscle recovery, These include faster muscle recovery, These include faster muscle recovery, improved skin health, wound healing, improved skin health, wound healing, improved skin health, wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, improved mitochondrial inflammation, improved mitochondrial inflammation, improved mitochondrial function, and even improvements in function, and even improvements in function, and even improvements in vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red light devices out there. But what sets light devices out there. But what sets light devices out there. But what sets Juve lights apart, and why they're my Juve lights apart, and why they're my Juve lights apart, and why they're my preferred red light therapy device, is preferred red light therapy device, is preferred red light therapy device, is that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning they use the wavelengths, meaning they use the wavelengths, meaning they use the specific wavelengths of red light, near specific wavelengths of red light, near specific wavelengths of red light, near infrared, and infrared light in infrared, and infrared light in infrared, and infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal combination to trigger the optimal combination to trigger the optimal cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use the Juve whole body panel about three to the Juve whole body panel about three to the Juve whole body panel about three to four times a week, usually for about 10 four times a week, usually for about 10 four times a week, usually for about 10 to 20 minutes per session, and I use the to 20 minutes per session, and I use the to 20 minutes per session, and I use the Juve handheld light both at home and Juve handheld light both at home and Juve handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you would like to try when I travel. If you would like to try when I travel. If you would like to try Juve, they're offering up to $400 off Juve, they're offering up to $400 off Juve, they're offering up to $400 off select products for listeners of this select products for listeners of this select products for listeners of this podcast. To learn more, visit Juve, podcast. To learn more, visit Juve, podcast. To learn more, visit Juve, spelled j o v dot com slash spelled j o v dot com slash spelled j o v dot com slash Huberman. Again, that's j o v dot Huberman. Again, that's j o v dot Huberman. Again, that's j o v dot com slash Huberman. Today's episode is com slash Huberman. Today's episode is com slash Huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep are customized to your unique sleep are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on this and on other podcasts before on this and on other podcasts before on this and on other podcasts about the fact that getting a great about the fact that getting a great about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of night's sleep is the foundation of night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. When we aren't getting performance. When we aren't getting performance. When we aren't getting great sleep on a consistent basis, great sleep on a consistent basis, great sleep on a consistent basis, everything suffers. And when we are everything suffers. And when we are everything suffers. And when we are sleeping well and enough, our mental sleeping well and enough, our mental sleeping well and enough, our mental health, physical health, and performance health, physical health, and performance health, physical health, and performance in all endeavors improve markedly. Now, in all endeavors improve markedly. Now, in all endeavors improve markedly. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge the mattress you sleep on makes a huge the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep that difference in the quality of sleep that difference in the quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft it is or you get each night. How soft it is or you get each night. How soft it is or how firm it is all play into your how firm it is all play into your how firm it is all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your comfort and need to be tailored to your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the unique sleep needs. If you go to the unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief Helix website, you can take a brief Helix website, you can take a brief 2-minute quiz and it will ask you 2-minute quiz and it will ask you 2-minute quiz and it will ask you questions such as, do you sleep on your questions such as, do you sleep on your questions such as, do you sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe you know, maybe you don't. Do you tend you know, maybe you don't. Do you tend you know, maybe you don't. Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night? to run hot or cold during the night? to run hot or cold during the night? Things of that sort. You answer those Things of that sort. You answer those Things of that sort. You answer those questions and Helix will match you to questions and Helix will match you to questions and Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that the ideal mattress for you. For me, that the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk, d u s k, turned out to be the Dusk, d u s k, turned out to be the Dusk, d u s k, mattress. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress for more than 4 years now and mattress for more than 4 years now and mattress for more than 4 years now and it's been far and away the best sleep it's been far and away the best sleep it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. If you'd like to try that I've ever had. If you'd like to try that I've ever had. If you'd like to try Helix, you can go to Helix, you can go to Helix, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 27% off their entire site. giving up to 27% off their entire site. giving up to 27% off their entire site. Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, which allows you to use your HSA/FSA which allows you to use your HSA/FSA which allows you to use your HSA/FSA dollars to shop Helix's award-winning dollars to shop Helix's award-winning dollars to shop Helix's award-winning mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's helixsleep.com/huberman to get up to 27% off. to get up to 27% off. to get up to 27% off. I'm going to ask you I'm going to ask you I'm going to ask you that may or may not be possible to answer. may or may not be possible to answer. may or may not be possible to answer. Yeah. But if anyone could, it would be Yeah. But if anyone could, it would be Yeah. But if anyone could, it would be you. And it's not a test. Here's what you. And it's not a test. Here's what you. And it's not a test. Here's what I'm thinking. The relationship between I'm thinking. The relationship between I'm thinking. The relationship between emotions and emotions and emotions and what we call motor patterns, movement, what we call motor patterns, movement, what we call motor patterns, movement, is obviously very close, right? Disgust, is obviously very close, right? Disgust, is obviously very close, right? Disgust, a recoil, um a recoil, um a recoil, um we'll explore awe, um we'll explore awe, um we'll explore awe, um anger, etc. And then there's this other anger, etc. And then there's this other anger, etc. And then there's this other node, which is language, right? So we node, which is language, right? So we node, which is language, right? So we have like emotions, motor, language. have like emotions, motor, language. have like emotions, motor, language. &gt;&gt; Right. Obviously those can't be &gt;&gt; Right. Obviously those can't be &gt;&gt; Right. Obviously those can't be dissociated. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But can we imagine somebody, let's &gt;&gt; Yeah. But can we imagine somebody, let's &gt;&gt; Yeah. But can we imagine somebody, let's just like hypothetical person, who can just like hypothetical person, who can just like hypothetical person, who can keep their body very still while they're keep their body very still while they're keep their body very still while they're angry and be very articulate. That includes not be very articulate. That includes not be very articulate. That includes not moving their hands. We'd probably think moving their hands. We'd probably think moving their hands. We'd probably think perhaps that person's like sociopathic, perhaps that person's like sociopathic, perhaps that person's like sociopathic, but that's not the picture I'm trying to but that's not the picture I'm trying to but that's not the picture I'm trying to paint. And then on the other extreme, And then on the other extreme, And then on the other extreme, can imagine somebody who can imagine somebody who can imagine somebody who um is um is um is very angry and is gesticulating a lot very angry and is gesticulating a lot very angry and is gesticulating a lot and moving like we can immediately say, and moving like we can immediately say, and moving like we can immediately say, "Oh, yeah, that make that makes sense." "Oh, yeah, that make that makes sense." "Oh, yeah, that make that makes sense." And we could do this for any emotion, And we could do this for any emotion, And we could do this for any emotion, right? So how should we think about right? So how should we think about right? So how should we think about emotion as an experience and how it's emotion as an experience and how it's emotion as an experience and how it's expressed along these three axes, right? expressed along these three axes, right? expressed along these three axes, right? &gt;&gt; Which is motor, language, and then the &gt;&gt; Which is motor, language, and then the &gt;&gt; Which is motor, language, and then the emotion itself. I feel like without um emotion itself. I feel like without um emotion itself. I feel like without um conceptualizing that, conceptualizing that, conceptualizing that, I as a true novice of this, right? This I as a true novice of this, right? This I as a true novice of this, right? This isn't my area of understanding or isn't my area of understanding or isn't my area of understanding or expertise, I can't really understand what an I can't really understand what an I can't really understand what an emotion is. emotion is. emotion is. But if I can understand how those are But if I can understand how those are But if I can understand how those are linked, may maybe that's a portal into linked, may maybe that's a portal into linked, may maybe that's a portal into that. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know. I mean, it's a profound &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know. I mean, it's a profound &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know. I mean, it's a profound question, Andrew, and it's question, Andrew, and it's question, Andrew, and it's central to our field, which is central to our field, which is central to our field, which is you know, the and I appreciate it you know, the and I appreciate it you know, the and I appreciate it coming out of your scientific background coming out of your scientific background coming out of your scientific background of studying other mammals and other of studying other mammals and other of studying other mammals and other species and there are these species and there are these species and there are these motor patterns that you see in emotion motor patterns that you see in emotion motor patterns that you see in emotion around the world. When you soothe a around the world. When you soothe a around the world. When you soothe a child that's crying, right? You're going child that's crying, right? You're going child that's crying, right? You're going to bring it in close and caress and to bring it in close and caress and to bring it in close and caress and touch and have emotion when you're you touch and have emotion when you're you touch and have emotion when you're you know, when you're uh fighting a rival or know, when you're uh fighting a rival or know, when you're uh fighting a rival or when you're you see rotten food, you're when you're you see rotten food, you're when you're you see rotten food, you're going to that motor pattern will be going to that motor pattern will be going to that motor pattern will be there. You know, and that's part of our You know, and that's part of our You know, and that's part of our research that 75% of that is this motor research that 75% of that is this motor research that 75% of that is this motor pattern of facial musculature and body pattern of facial musculature and body pattern of facial musculature and body and skeletal muscles and how we respond and skeletal muscles and how we respond and skeletal muscles and how we respond to the emotional events of life. to the emotional events of life. to the emotional events of life. And then we have this massively And then we have this massively And then we have this massively complicated, you know, conceptual system complicated, you know, conceptual system complicated, you know, conceptual system that puts words to experience. that puts words to experience. that puts words to experience. And that's mainly what we study in And that's mainly what we study in And that's mainly what we study in psychological sciences. Just a Oh, I'm psychological sciences. Just a Oh, I'm psychological sciences. Just a Oh, I'm feeling angry or ashamed or embarrassed feeling angry or ashamed or embarrassed feeling angry or ashamed or embarrassed or love or compassion. or love or compassion. or love or compassion. And we know and your question points And we know and your question points And we know and your question points to this, like very often they're to this, like very often they're to this, like very often they're disconnected, right? The motor pattern disconnected, right? The motor pattern disconnected, right? The motor pattern and the language we use and how I would and the language we use and how I would and the language we use and how I would interpret it in another person. Uh interpret it in another person. Uh interpret it in another person. Uh on balance, they correlate point two, so on balance, they correlate point two, so on balance, they correlate point two, so they're just weakly they're kind of they're just weakly they're kind of they're just weakly they're kind of these streams of behavior that these streams of behavior that these streams of behavior that are just part of who we are, right? Our are just part of who we are, right? Our are just part of who we are, right? Our motor patterns and language. motor patterns and language. motor patterns and language. And there are a lot of ways to think And there are a lot of ways to think And there are a lot of ways to think about it. You could think about cultures about it. You could think about cultures about it. You could think about cultures that value being calm, like a lot of that value being calm, like a lot of that value being calm, like a lot of East Asian cultures. Be calm. Don't East Asian cultures. Be calm. Don't East Asian cultures. Be calm. Don't disrupt things. Don't disrupt things. Don't disrupt things. Don't blurt out. Don't protest, right? And and blurt out. Don't protest, right? And and blurt out. Don't protest, right? And and you'll see this disconnect. Um you can you'll see this disconnect. Um you can you'll see this disconnect. Um you can think about certain people who think about certain people who think about certain people who they just are more authentic and their they just are more authentic and their they just are more authentic and their motor patterns come out in expressions motor patterns come out in expressions motor patterns come out in expressions and they will tell you how they feel. Uh and they will tell you how they feel. Uh and they will tell you how they feel. Uh so, it's a central problem that we so, it's a central problem that we so, it's a central problem that we grapple with. And then I love your grapple with. And then I love your grapple with. And then I love your third part of this equation of emotion third part of this equation of emotion third part of this equation of emotion science, which is the feeling, the science, which is the feeling, the science, which is the feeling, the emotion. Michael Pollan is right, you know, his Michael Pollan is right, you know, his Michael Pollan is right, you know, his new book on consciousness, the conscious new book on consciousness, the conscious new book on consciousness, the conscious feeling of something. feeling of something. feeling of something. We think we can get it to it with words. We think we can get it to it with words. We think we can get it to it with words. I don't think so. Mhm. You probably I don't think so. Mhm. You probably I don't think so. Mhm. You probably wouldn't either, right? Studying the wouldn't either, right? Studying the wouldn't either, right? Studying the other species you studied, right? Uh other species you studied, right? Uh other species you studied, right? Uh it's some weird mixture of everything it's some weird mixture of everything it's some weird mixture of everything that's happening in your body. that's happening in your body. that's happening in your body. And ironically, And ironically, And ironically, the emotion or the feeling is still one the emotion or the feeling is still one the emotion or the feeling is still one of the uncharted territories of our of the uncharted territories of our of the uncharted territories of our field. It's field. It's field. It's why as these complicated motor patterns take these complicated motor patterns take these complicated motor patterns take unfold and words are unfolding and unfold and words are unfolding and unfold and words are unfolding and images and memories and visual things images and memories and visual things images and memories and visual things that you study, that you study, that you study, how does it all come together in my how does it all come together in my how does it all come together in my feeling of feeling of feeling of compassion or awe? compassion or awe? compassion or awe? And we barely know, you know, we just we And we barely know, you know, we just we And we barely know, you know, we just we don't know. Every once in a while I'll don't know. Every once in a while I'll don't know. Every once in a while I'll try and try and try and think about a concept from way outside think about a concept from way outside think about a concept from way outside of standard science. Yeah. Like the of standard science. Yeah. Like the of standard science. Yeah. Like the chakras or something. chakras or something. chakras or something. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's kind of interesting, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's kind of interesting, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's kind of interesting, right? I mean, even if it just if one right? I mean, even if it just if one right? I mean, even if it just if one looks at just purely as a Western looks at just purely as a Western looks at just purely as a Western scientist, this idea that maybe there is scientist, this idea that maybe there is scientist, this idea that maybe there is a confluence of a confluence of a confluence of nerves and of vasculature and stuff of nerves and of vasculature and stuff of nerves and of vasculature and stuff that makes you feel kind of like rooted that makes you feel kind of like rooted that makes you feel kind of like rooted at like Yeah. and calm, right? Versus at like Yeah. and calm, right? Versus at like Yeah. and calm, right? Versus like up in your head. like up in your head. like up in your head. Uh I've been um Uh I've been um Uh I've been um watching this really interesting watching this really interesting watching this really interesting Instagram channel. It's a woman who does Instagram channel. It's a woman who does Instagram channel. It's a woman who does voices for cartoons. voices for cartoons. voices for cartoons. And she has the most incredible And she has the most incredible And she has the most incredible understanding of understanding of understanding of voice. And she's commenting a lot of the time And she's commenting a lot of the time And she's commenting a lot of the time on people in shows that I don't watch, but people in shows that I don't watch, but people in shows that I don't watch, but they have little excerpts of where like they have little excerpts of where like they have little excerpts of where like I guess there's this doctor on the this I guess there's this doctor on the this I guess there's this doctor on the this It's like an ER type show. It's like a It's like an ER type show. It's like a It's like an ER type show. It's like a revisiting of the show ER, but she revisiting of the show ER, but she revisiting of the show ER, but she talks about how as he's matured from talks about how as he's matured from talks about how as he's matured from season to season in his role on the season to season in his role on the season to season in his role on the show. And he's mentoring how she show. And he's mentoring how she show. And he's mentoring how she literally talks about how um his larynx literally talks about how um his larynx literally talks about how um his larynx and pharynx are how he's controlling and pharynx are how he's controlling and pharynx are how he's controlling those differently as he matures. And those differently as he matures. And those differently as he matures. And then when he has a breakdown, how that then when he has a breakdown, how that then when he has a breakdown, how that the voice moves further up into his head the voice moves further up into his head the voice moves further up into his head and what that's about. And I And so and what that's about. And I And so and what that's about. And I And so sitting about this, and sitting about this, and sitting about this, and you know, here's somebody that's a very you know, here's somebody that's a very you know, here's somebody that's a very unique, uh, you know, window into all of unique, uh, you know, window into all of unique, uh, you know, window into all of this, but this, but this, but we sort of know this intuitively. Like, we sort of know this intuitively. Like, we sort of know this intuitively. Like, when we're excited, like, there's this when we're excited, like, there's this when we're excited, like, there's this kind of rising from the bottom, and when kind of rising from the bottom, and when kind of rising from the bottom, and when we're relaxed, everything just kind of we're relaxed, everything just kind of we're relaxed, everything just kind of sinks down to a the diaphragmatic sinks down to a the diaphragmatic sinks down to a the diaphragmatic breathing and things. breathing and things. breathing and things. &gt;&gt; Yeah. As a scientist who studies &gt;&gt; Yeah. As a scientist who studies &gt;&gt; Yeah. As a scientist who studies emotion, how do you sort of decide what what, uh, how do you sort of decide what what, uh, how do you sort of decide what what, uh, which lens to look at things through? which lens to look at things through? which lens to look at things through? Um, because a lot of the stuff I'm Um, because a lot of the stuff I'm Um, because a lot of the stuff I'm talking about might sound a little talking about might sound a little talking about might sound a little esoteric, but it's actually the stuff esoteric, but it's actually the stuff esoteric, but it's actually the stuff that's easiest to measure. Yeah. that's easiest to measure. Yeah. that's easiest to measure. Yeah. Presumably, you can quantitatively measure like you can quantitatively measure like you can quantitatively measure like breaths per minute when somebody's breaths per minute when somebody's breaths per minute when somebody's looking at an awe-inspiring image versus looking at an awe-inspiring image versus looking at an awe-inspiring image versus like a trivial image. like a trivial image. like a trivial image. &gt;&gt; I love your reference to chakras, and &gt;&gt; I love your reference to chakras, and &gt;&gt; I love your reference to chakras, and you know, the older I get, you know, you know, the older I get, you know, you know, the older I get, you know, I've been doing emotion science for 34 I've been doing emotion science for 34 I've been doing emotion science for 34 years or 5 years. years or 5 years. years or 5 years. It's good to think about the other It's good to think about the other It's good to think about the other traditions, you know, we wouldn't have traditions, you know, we wouldn't have traditions, you know, we wouldn't have thought about the breath, the power of thought about the breath, the power of thought about the breath, the power of the breath, the breath, the breath, uh, without the contemplative meditation uh, without the contemplative meditation uh, without the contemplative meditation traditions that you've in part tested traditions that you've in part tested traditions that you've in part tested uh, and Richie Davidson and others. uh, and Richie Davidson and others. uh, and Richie Davidson and others. And lo and behold, the breath, deep And lo and behold, the breath, deep And lo and behold, the breath, deep exhalation, activates the vagus nerve, exhalation, activates the vagus nerve, exhalation, activates the vagus nerve, calms us down. calms us down. calms us down. That activation of the vagus nerve gives That activation of the vagus nerve gives That activation of the vagus nerve gives people a sense of warmth in your chest, people a sense of warmth in your chest, people a sense of warmth in your chest, which kind of sounds like the heart which kind of sounds like the heart which kind of sounds like the heart chakra and all the speculation around chakra and all the speculation around chakra and all the speculation around how your soul is in your heart. Well, how your soul is in your heart. Well, how your soul is in your heart. Well, there's a neurophysiological there's a neurophysiological there's a neurophysiological correlate of that. Uh, I love the correlate of that. Uh, I love the correlate of that. Uh, I love the paintings of Alex Grey, the psychedelic paintings of Alex Grey, the psychedelic paintings of Alex Grey, the psychedelic artist. Like, if you want an image of artist. Like, if you want an image of artist. Like, if you want an image of what our neurophysiology is as it what our neurophysiology is as it what our neurophysiology is as it synchronizes in love, you could it's synchronizes in love, you could it's synchronizes in love, you could it's pretty close, or it's interesting, pretty close, or it's interesting, pretty close, or it's interesting, right? So, it's good to find inspiration right? So, it's good to find inspiration right? So, it's good to find inspiration in that. One of the great things about in that. One of the great things about in that. One of the great things about the science of emotion, and I the science of emotion, and I the science of emotion, and I brought these tools into the study of brought these tools into the study of brought these tools into the study of awe, you know, which is awe, you know, which is awe, you know, which is we have learned a lot about how to we have learned a lot about how to we have learned a lot about how to measure emotion. You know, you can measure emotion. You know, you can measure emotion. You know, you can measure it with facial muscles and gaze measure it with facial muscles and gaze measure it with facial muscles and gaze patterns and coloration of the face and patterns and coloration of the face and patterns and coloration of the face and breath patterns and, you know, different breath patterns and, you know, different breath patterns and, you know, different measures of vagal tone measures of vagal tone measures of vagal tone and immune system activation and immune system activation and immune system activation and activation in the gut and of course activation in the gut and of course activation in the gut and of course brain activation and the voice which is brain activation and the voice which is brain activation and the voice which is one of my favorite modalities. one of my favorite modalities. one of my favorite modalities. I learned this in some sense from I learned this in some sense from I learned this in some sense from Darwin. Darwin's expression of emotion in man Darwin's expression of emotion in man Darwin's expression of emotion in man and animals is in my view and we're just and animals is in my view and we're just and animals is in my view and we're just publishing a paper on this publishing a paper on this publishing a paper on this on everything that he said about human on everything that he said about human on everything that he said about human emotion. 53 emotions annotated with emotion. 53 emotions annotated with emotion. 53 emotions annotated with eight modalities of expressive behavior. eight modalities of expressive behavior. eight modalities of expressive behavior. I wrote it with Darwin scholar Frank I wrote it with Darwin scholar Frank I wrote it with Darwin scholar Frank Sulloway who knows everything about Sulloway who knows everything about Sulloway who knows everything about Darwin and I choose how to study an Darwin and I choose how to study an Darwin and I choose how to study an emotion based on what's happening out in based on what's happening out in based on what's happening out in our lives and our the phenomena out our lives and our the phenomena out our lives and our the phenomena out there, right? So if you're studying awe, there, right? So if you're studying awe, there, right? So if you're studying awe, you should get people around big trees you should get people around big trees you should get people around big trees or in musical concerts or in museums, or in musical concerts or in museums, or in musical concerts or in museums, right? If you're I studied embarrassment early If you're I studied embarrassment early If you're I studied embarrassment early in my career in my career in my career and modesty and I'm like, I got to study and modesty and I'm like, I got to study and modesty and I'm like, I got to study young men teasing each other cuz we young men teasing each other cuz we young men teasing each other cuz we embarrass each other, you know, embarrass each other, you know, embarrass each other, you know, intentionally. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness, we have to hear about &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness, we have to hear about &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness, we have to hear about that work again. It's become that work again. It's become that work again. It's become very relevant nowadays because of the very relevant nowadays because of the very relevant nowadays because of the because of the because of the because of the I'll just call it what it is. It's not I'll just call it what it is. It's not I'll just call it what it is. It's not dreaded, it's the dreadful manosphere, dreaded, it's the dreadful manosphere, dreaded, it's the dreadful manosphere, you know, which people use very broadly you know, which people use very broadly you know, which people use very broadly but I think now it's being, you know, but I think now it's being, you know, but I think now it's being, you know, allocated to the worst of the allocated to the worst of the allocated to the worst of the worst. But then there is this phenomenon among But then there is this phenomenon among But then there is this phenomenon among males where they'll rib each other and males where they'll rib each other and males where they'll rib each other and you know, and there's a there's a you know, and there's a there's a you know, and there's a there's a healthy version of males healthy version of males healthy version of males interacting too, right? You know, interacting too, right? You know, interacting too, right? You know, so we'll get back to that. I base it on so we'll get back to that. I base it on so we'll get back to that. I base it on what's the phenomenon of interest, what's the phenomenon of interest, what's the phenomenon of interest, right? That that speaks to humanity and right? That that speaks to humanity and right? That that speaks to humanity and then what are our best measures that we can what are our best measures that we can what are our best measures that we can go after it? go after it? go after it? These days, if you want to measure awe, These days, if you want to measure awe, These days, if you want to measure awe, what's your favorite awe stimulus? First what's your favorite awe stimulus? First what's your favorite awe stimulus? First up and thank you at for asking you about up and thank you at for asking you about up and thank you at for asking you about measurement like it's interesting like measurement like it's interesting like measurement like it's interesting like people like, oh, you can't study awe, people like, oh, you can't study awe, people like, oh, you can't study awe, you know, you don't know how to measure you know, you don't know how to measure you know, you don't know how to measure it. It's it's ineffable. It's it. It's it's ineffable. It's it. It's it's ineffable. It's mysterious. It's spiritual. mysterious. It's spiritual. mysterious. It's spiritual. We can measure awe really well. You We can measure awe really well. You We can measure awe really well. You know, the vocalization, know, the vocalization, know, the vocalization, you know, the facial expression, uh you know, the facial expression, uh you know, the facial expression, uh activation part parts of the brain are activation part parts of the brain are activation part parts of the brain are deactivated. Uh vagal tone, the goosebumps is a good Uh vagal tone, the goosebumps is a good Uh vagal tone, the goosebumps is a good uh part of the awe response. uh part of the awe response. uh part of the awe response. As we As we As we started to study awe, started to study awe, started to study awe, we did two things. And one is typical we did two things. And one is typical we did two things. And one is typical what's you know, science, which is what's you know, science, which is what's you know, science, which is get your most cool awe videos, show them get your most cool awe videos, show them get your most cool awe videos, show them to people, you know, and I had some mis- to people, you know, and I had some mis- to people, you know, and I had some mis- missteps in this science. I had a woman missteps in this science. I had a woman missteps in this science. I had a woman who was an honor student at Berkeley who was an honor student at Berkeley who was an honor student at Berkeley who was coming back from Burning Man and you was coming back from Burning Man and you was coming back from Burning Man and you know, she's like, "I'm going to show know, she's like, "I'm going to show know, she's like, "I'm going to show engineers fractal imagery." And you engineers fractal imagery." And you engineers fractal imagery." And you know, and know, and know, and the engineers are like, "Who is this the engineers are like, "Who is this the engineers are like, "Who is this woman?" And woman?" And woman?" And &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I mean, there is the I've never been &gt;&gt; I mean, there is the I've never been &gt;&gt; I mean, there is the I've never been to Burning Man, but there's the to Burning Man, but there's the to Burning Man, but there's the post-Burning Man glow that people come post-Burning Man glow that people come post-Burning Man glow that people come back with. That is, for understandable back with. That is, for understandable back with. That is, for understandable reasons, hard for most people to enter reasons, hard for most people to enter reasons, hard for most people to enter with them. It's like a kid coming back with them. It's like a kid coming back with them. It's like a kid coming back from summer camp. from summer camp. from summer camp. &gt;&gt; There's great visual imagery. You know, &gt;&gt; There's great visual imagery. You know, &gt;&gt; There's great visual imagery. You know, BBC Earth is awesome. And it's it uh BBC Earth is awesome. And it's it uh BBC Earth is awesome. And it's it uh makes people feel awe. Slow motion, makes people feel awe. Slow motion, makes people feel awe. Slow motion, guys. I don't know if you know these guys. I don't know if you know these guys. I don't know if you know these guys. They film wild things in slow motion, They film wild things in slow motion, They film wild things in slow motion, like, you know, dropping a wine glass like, you know, dropping a wine glass like, you know, dropping a wine glass and it's this spectacular photography and it's this spectacular photography and it's this spectacular photography and just and just and just you know, you're like, "So, it opens you know, you're like, "So, it opens you know, you're like, "So, it opens you up to up to up to &gt;&gt; Cool. We'll put a link to that. &gt;&gt; Cool. We'll put a link to that. &gt;&gt; Cool. We'll put a link to that. I love super slow mo. Yeah. Um and I love super slow mo. Yeah. Um and I love super slow mo. Yeah. Um and that fits our definition, which is like, that fits our definition, which is like, that fits our definition, which is like, you don't understand what's happening. you don't understand what's happening. you don't understand what's happening. It's vast. It's mysterious. But what I'm It's vast. It's mysterious. But what I'm It's vast. It's mysterious. But what I'm really proud of, Andrew, is the work we really proud of, Andrew, is the work we really proud of, Andrew, is the work we did out in the field, right? So, one of our out in the field, right? So, one of our out in the field, right? So, one of our first studies on the Berkeley campus first studies on the Berkeley campus first studies on the Berkeley campus that you frequented and got your that you frequented and got your that you frequented and got your master's degree at and headed into master's degree at and headed into master's degree at and headed into neuroscience was neuroscience was neuroscience was uh in our paleontology museum. There's a uh in our paleontology museum. There's a uh in our paleontology museum. There's a replica of a T-Rex skeleton. replica of a T-Rex skeleton. replica of a T-Rex skeleton. When I was 5 years old and I learned When I was 5 years old and I learned When I was 5 years old and I learned about dinosaurs, it changed my life. It about dinosaurs, it changed my life. It about dinosaurs, it changed my life. It was just in the LA Natural History was just in the LA Natural History was just in the LA Natural History Museum. Like, "Wow!" So, we studied Museum. Like, "Wow!" So, we studied Museum. Like, "Wow!" So, we studied people standing near the T-Rex skeleton, people standing near the T-Rex skeleton, people standing near the T-Rex skeleton, and they became expansive and they became expansive and they became expansive and collective. We studied people near giant eucalyptus We studied people near giant eucalyptus We studied people near giant eucalyptus trees. We studied people trees. We studied people trees. We studied people at Yosemite, you know, Yang Bai, a at Yosemite, you know, Yang Bai, a at Yosemite, you know, Yang Bai, a student in my lab, stopped hundreds of student in my lab, stopped hundreds of student in my lab, stopped hundreds of travelers from all over the world right travelers from all over the world right travelers from all over the world right when you see Yosemite, when you see Yosemite, when you see Yosemite, and she said, "How do you feel about and she said, "How do you feel about and she said, "How do you feel about yourself right now?" And they're like, yourself right now?" And they're like, yourself right now?" And they're like, "I feel small and quiet, but part of "I feel small and quiet, but part of "I feel small and quiet, but part of something really large, right?" Uh something really large, right?" Uh something really large, right?" Uh subsequent to that, there are scientists subsequent to that, there are scientists subsequent to that, there are scientists who are studying mosh pits at concerts who are studying mosh pits at concerts who are studying mosh pits at concerts and, you know, surfers and, you know, and, you know, surfers and, you know, and, you know, surfers and, you know, rock cli- I mean, it's, you know, rock cli- I mean, it's, you know, rock cli- I mean, it's, you know, backpackers and, you know, we studied backpackers and, you know, we studied backpackers and, you know, we studied One of my favorite studies later with One of my favorite studies later with One of my favorite studies later with Stacy Bear, who's a veteran who ran that Stacy Bear, who's a veteran who ran that Stacy Bear, who's a veteran who ran that who's amazing human being, an Outward who's amazing human being, an Outward who's amazing human being, an Outward Bound pioneer. Bound pioneer. Bound pioneer. We studied people rafting down the We studied people rafting down the We studied people rafting down the American River, you know, veterans just American River, you know, veterans just American River, you know, veterans just like, "Whoa!" We've studied people in like, "Whoa!" We've studied people in like, "Whoa!" We've studied people in art museums, Carnegie Hall, you know, so art museums, Carnegie Hall, you know, so art museums, Carnegie Hall, you know, so it's it you know, one of the joys is it's it you know, one of the joys is it's it you know, one of the joys is when science when science when science you know, just in the spirit of your you know, just in the spirit of your you know, just in the spirit of your questions, it's like, "Well, what should questions, it's like, "Well, what should questions, it's like, "Well, what should I really do here, right? I could stay in I really do here, right? I could stay in I really do here, right? I could stay in the lab." But it's like, "No, you know, the lab." But it's like, "No, you know, the lab." But it's like, "No, you know, we got to we got to we got to go do stuff, you know, that uh go do stuff, you know, that uh go do stuff, you know, that uh My dream study was to like have a My dream study was to like have a My dream study was to like have a participant come in participant come in participant come in and engage a conversation, the other and engage a conversation, the other and engage a conversation, the other participant is Shaquille O'Neal, right? participant is Shaquille O'Neal, right? participant is Shaquille O'Neal, right? And it's like, 7'2", 350 lbs, you'd be And it's like, 7'2", 350 lbs, you'd be And it's like, 7'2", 350 lbs, you'd be like, "Whoa!" But couldn't do that. So, like, "Whoa!" But couldn't do that. So, like, "Whoa!" But couldn't do that. So, uh so there it's been fun. It's been a uh so there it's been fun. It's been a uh so there it's been fun. It's been a wild ride. And so many thoughts. Uh wild ride. And so many thoughts. Uh wild ride. And so many thoughts. Uh first one, um I'm lucky I didn't rotate first one, um I'm lucky I didn't rotate first one, um I'm lucky I didn't rotate through your lab because I uh would have through your lab because I uh would have through your lab because I uh would have never become a neuroscientist, but I'm never become a neuroscientist, but I'm never become a neuroscientist, but I'm unlucky &gt;&gt; We're glad you missed that &gt;&gt; We're glad you missed that &gt;&gt; We're glad you missed that opportunity. &gt;&gt; But I'm But I'm unlucky because it would &gt;&gt; But I'm But I'm unlucky because it would &gt;&gt; But I'm But I'm unlucky because it would have been so much fun to cuz I have been so much fun to cuz I have been so much fun to cuz I well, I loved the well, I loved the well, I loved the wet lab, as they call it, uh getting the wet lab, as they call it, uh getting the wet lab, as they call it, uh getting into these experiments would just be into these experiments would just be into these experiments would just be incredible. Couple things uh the incredible. Couple things uh the incredible. Couple things uh the Shaquille O'Neal thing I um Shaquille O'Neal thing I um Shaquille O'Neal thing I um you know I think we're all moved by you know I think we're all moved by you know I think we're all moved by these uh I guess they used to call them these uh I guess they used to call them these uh I guess they used to call them Make-A-Wish Foundation things where a Make-A-Wish Foundation things where a Make-A-Wish Foundation things where a kid who sadly is dying gets some last kid who sadly is dying gets some last kid who sadly is dying gets some last wish. It's a tragic circumstance, but wish. It's a tragic circumstance, but wish. It's a tragic circumstance, but then you get to observe these kids and then you get to observe these kids and then you get to observe these kids and most importantly they get to experience most importantly they get to experience most importantly they get to experience something that they never could have something that they never could have something that they never could have imagined happening like a Shaquille imagined happening like a Shaquille imagined happening like a Shaquille O'Neal walking in. I feel like that's O'Neal walking in. I feel like that's O'Neal walking in. I feel like that's probably happened or something. And I probably happened or something. And I probably happened or something. And I think what we're witnessing in those think what we're witnessing in those think what we're witnessing in those moments has to be all. Like they can't moments has to be all. Like they can't moments has to be all. Like they can't believe that this believe that this believe that this human or this event, whatever it is that human or this event, whatever it is that human or this event, whatever it is that they wish for is happening there. they wish for is happening there. they wish for is happening there. And so it's sort of layers upon layers And so it's sort of layers upon layers And so it's sort of layers upon layers of there's like a grief component for of there's like a grief component for of there's like a grief component for those of us watching, but a huge aspect those of us watching, but a huge aspect those of us watching, but a huge aspect of the of the of the of just how touching it is of just how touching it is of just how touching it is the fact that like for those moments the fact that like for those moments the fact that like for those moments they're not thinking about their they're not thinking about their they're not thinking about their mortality. And no kid should have to mortality. And no kid should have to mortality. And no kid should have to think about their mortality, right? I think about their mortality, right? I think about their mortality, right? I mean even as I talk about it it's like mean even as I talk about it it's like mean even as I talk about it it's like Yeah, it's profound. Yeah, it's just Yeah, it's profound. Yeah, it's just Yeah, it's profound. Yeah, it's just it's like there's an overwhelming in the it's like there's an overwhelming in the it's like there's an overwhelming in the opposite direction, right? That's an opposite direction, right? That's an opposite direction, right? That's an particularly uh complicated and particularly uh complicated and particularly uh complicated and interesting uh case where you've got two things uh case where you've got two things uh case where you've got two things colliding, right? Because I feel like colliding, right? Because I feel like colliding, right? Because I feel like awe is so life-affirming. Yeah, it is. awe is so life-affirming. Yeah, it is. awe is so life-affirming. Yeah, it is. And uh anyway that's just a an obs- an And uh anyway that's just a an obs- an And uh anyway that's just a an obs- an observation, but horizons are something observation, but horizons are something observation, but horizons are something that fascinated me for a long time as a that fascinated me for a long time as a that fascinated me for a long time as a vision scientist because when we see a vision scientist because when we see a vision scientist because when we see a horizon, our visual um angle widens. horizon, our visual um angle widens. horizon, our visual um angle widens. That's cool. We become more That's cool. We become more That's cool. We become more parasympathetic. There's a whole Is that parasympathetic. There's a whole Is that parasympathetic. There's a whole Is that right? coming off the accelerator of the right? coming off the accelerator of the right? coming off the accelerator of the sympathetic nervous system. So we relax sympathetic nervous system. So we relax sympathetic nervous system. So we relax by virtue of coming off the by virtue of coming off the by virtue of coming off the focusing component. When we focus in the focusing component. When we focus in the focusing component. When we focus in through a tunnel, we it's quite the through a tunnel, we it's quite the through a tunnel, we it's quite the opposite. I feel like there's something opposite. I feel like there's something opposite. I feel like there's something unique to this experience of unique to this experience of unique to this experience of being in a tunnel, thinking about being in a tunnel, thinking about being in a tunnel, thinking about Yosemite, or in a bunch of trees, or and Yosemite, or in a bunch of trees, or and Yosemite, or in a bunch of trees, or and then the horizon opens up. then the horizon opens up. then the horizon opens up. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's this transformation &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's this transformation &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's this transformation of visual of visual of visual space. And those moments, at least for space. And those moments, at least for space. And those moments, at least for me, are the moments. So, I mean, I can me, are the moments. So, I mean, I can me, are the moments. So, I mean, I can hike along a ridgeline for a long time hike along a ridgeline for a long time hike along a ridgeline for a long time and be like, "This is amazing." But and be like, "This is amazing." But and be like, "This is amazing." But there's something distinctly there's something distinctly there's something distinctly &gt;&gt; Yeah. bigger &gt;&gt; Yeah. bigger &gt;&gt; Yeah. bigger in the experience of going from in the experience of going from in the experience of going from confinement &gt;&gt; Yeah. to openness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. to openness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. to openness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It could be brought to the lab. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It could be brought to the lab. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It could be brought to the lab. But do you think that's what's going on But do you think that's what's going on But do you think that's what's going on in Yosemite or the Grand Canyon? in Yosemite or the Grand Canyon? in Yosemite or the Grand Canyon? Right? Do people working in Yosemite in Right? Do people working in Yosemite in Right? Do people working in Yosemite in the Grand Canyon, do [laughter] they the Grand Canyon, do [laughter] they the Grand Canyon, do [laughter] they attenuate? They're like, "Oh, yeah, like attenuate? They're like, "Oh, yeah, like attenuate? They're like, "Oh, yeah, like another horizon." another horizon." another horizon." &gt;&gt; I don't know, you know, working with &gt;&gt; I don't know, you know, working with &gt;&gt; I don't know, you know, working with rangers right now and they I think I rangers right now and they I think I rangers right now and they I think I think the big expansive forms of awe think the big expansive forms of awe think the big expansive forms of awe that those places provide is attenuated, that those places provide is attenuated, that those places provide is attenuated, but I they're still finding it in but I they're still finding it in but I they're still finding it in subtler ways. subtler ways. subtler ways. Yeah, that's really interesting. And you Yeah, that's really interesting. And you Yeah, that's really interesting. And you know, it's as interesting as um I've know, it's as interesting as um I've know, it's as interesting as um I've been privileged to been privileged to been privileged to know Pete Doctor at Pixar for 15 years know Pete Doctor at Pixar for 15 years know Pete Doctor at Pixar for 15 years and worked on some of his films, Inside and worked on some of his films, Inside and worked on some of his films, Inside Out and Inside Out 2 and Soul. Out and Inside Out 2 and Soul. Out and Inside Out 2 and Soul. &gt;&gt; played a big role in that. Yeah, and &gt;&gt; played a big role in that. Yeah, and &gt;&gt; played a big role in that. Yeah, and through the science of emotion. And I through the science of emotion. And I through the science of emotion. And I was like, you know, in one of our was like, you know, in one of our was like, you know, in one of our conversations, I was like, "Tell me conversations, I was like, "Tell me conversations, I was like, "Tell me about some techniques for about some techniques for about some techniques for producing awe producing awe producing awe in children's films, animated films." in children's films, animated films." in children's films, animated films." And and he described first just what you And and he described first just what you And and he described first just what you said, like, said, like, said, like, you know, the film is narrow, like a you know, the film is narrow, like a you know, the film is narrow, like a certain kind of attention, you know, certain kind of attention, you know, certain kind of attention, you know, sort of sympathetic, fearful, checking sort of sympathetic, fearful, checking sort of sympathetic, fearful, checking things, and then things, and then things, and then &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; it comes it's suddenly you see the &gt;&gt; it comes it's suddenly you see the &gt;&gt; it comes it's suddenly you see the vastness of something and it's true, it vastness of something and it's true, it vastness of something and it's true, it is awe-inspiring. is awe-inspiring. is awe-inspiring. When you think about it When you think about it When you think about it neuroscientifically, it's a very neuroscientifically, it's a very neuroscientifically, it's a very basic form of awe is shifting from small basic form of awe is shifting from small basic form of awe is shifting from small to vast in terms of vision and to vast in terms of vision and to vast in terms of vision and perception. And then it becomes metaphorical, right? And then it becomes metaphorical, right? And then it becomes metaphorical, right? It's like, "God, I'm thinking about It's like, "God, I'm thinking about It's like, "God, I'm thinking about [clears throat] like I love one of the [clears throat] like I love one of the [clears throat] like I love one of the wonders of life wonders of life wonders of life that uh that makes us feel awe is big ideas uh that makes us feel awe is big ideas uh that makes us feel awe is big ideas and epiphanies. and epiphanies. and epiphanies. And very often people be like, "God, And very often people be like, "God, And very often people be like, "God, I've been working so hard at this, you I've been working so hard at this, you I've been working so hard at this, you know, I'm working on a paper, know, I'm working on a paper, know, I'm working on a paper, something in technology or some part of something in technology or some part of something in technology or some part of my life." And then you suddenly realize my life." And then you suddenly realize my life." And then you suddenly realize it's part of something large, right? One it's part of something large, right? One it's part of something large, right? One of the musicians that I interviewed, of the musicians that I interviewed, of the musicians that I interviewed, Yumi Kendall, in the book, in the Yumi Kendall, in the book, in the Yumi Kendall, in the book, in the chapter on musical awe, said, "You know, chapter on musical awe, said, "You know, chapter on musical awe, said, "You know, she's a cellist for the Philadelphia she's a cellist for the Philadelphia she's a cellist for the Philadelphia Symphony, said, Symphony, said, Symphony, said, 'You know, I practice for 5 hours a 'You know, I practice for 5 hours a 'You know, I practice for 5 hours a day. It's hard, man. And it's small and day. It's hard, man. And it's small and day. It's hard, man. And it's small and narrow, and where's my finger? narrow, and where's my finger? narrow, and where's my finger? And then when I'm on stage and I and I And then when I'm on stage and I and I And then when I'm on stage and I and I feel the notes go out into this space, feel the notes go out into this space, feel the notes go out into this space, the vastness you're talking about, I the vastness you're talking about, I the vastness you're talking about, I feel like I'm part of history, right? feel like I'm part of history, right? feel like I'm part of history, right? And I tear up and cry.' And I tear up and cry.' And I tear up and cry.' Um so, I think you're I think I you Um so, I think you're I think I you Um so, I think you're I think I you got to send me those papers, Andrew, cuz got to send me those papers, Andrew, cuz got to send me those papers, Andrew, cuz I think it's fundamental, which is from I think it's fundamental, which is from I think it's fundamental, which is from small to vast. And in fact, small to vast. And in fact, small to vast. And in fact, we did this really cool study with we did this really cool study with we did this really cool study with Virginia Sturm at UC San Francisco Brain Virginia Sturm at UC San Francisco Brain Virginia Sturm at UC San Francisco Brain Health. Old people go out on an awe walk once a Old people go out on an awe walk once a Old people go out on an awe walk once a week for 8 weeks. week for 8 weeks. week for 8 weeks. 75 years old or older, and all we asked 75 years old or older, and all we asked 75 years old or older, and all we asked them to do is to go from small to vast them to do is to go from small to vast them to do is to go from small to vast in how they looked at things. You know, in how they looked at things. You know, in how they looked at things. You know, look at a tree, look at a leaf, go out look at a tree, look at a leaf, go out look at a tree, look at a leaf, go out to the pattern of leaves. It brought to the pattern of leaves. It brought to the pattern of leaves. It brought them awe them awe them awe and less physical pain and less physical pain and less physical pain uh over 8 weeks. And now we're finding 6 uh over 8 weeks. And now we're finding 6 uh over 8 weeks. And now we're finding 6 years later better brain health, right? years later better brain health, right? years later better brain health, right? So, small to vast is a big part of it. So, small to vast is a big part of it. So, small to vast is a big part of it. &gt;&gt; I'm um struck by the by the awe walk, um &gt;&gt; I'm um struck by the by the awe walk, um &gt;&gt; I'm um struck by the by the awe walk, um and I know this comes up in your and I know this comes up in your and I know this comes up in your book and elsewhere, and you've done a book and elsewhere, and you've done a book and elsewhere, and you've done a lot of research on this. Uh for those lot of research on this. Uh for those lot of research on this. Uh for those listening, um listening, um listening, um what would an awe walk look like, and um what would an awe walk look like, and um what would an awe walk look like, and um what are some of the health benefits you what are some of the health benefits you what are some of the health benefits you just mentioned a few that have that have just mentioned a few that have that have just mentioned a few that have that have been observed both in the short and the been observed both in the short and the been observed both in the short and the long term? Yeah, thank you. You know, long term? Yeah, thank you. You know, long term? Yeah, thank you. You know, uh we are a walking species, you know, we are a walking species, you know, we are a walking species, you know, it is just in our DNA to walk. it is just in our DNA to walk. it is just in our DNA to walk. We meandered from Africa all the way to We meandered from Africa all the way to We meandered from Africa all the way to all the continents. A lot of people, all the continents. A lot of people, all the continents. A lot of people, Rebecca Solnit writes about this, like Rebecca Solnit writes about this, like Rebecca Solnit writes about this, like walking is almost sacred. It's a kind of walking is almost sacred. It's a kind of walking is almost sacred. It's a kind of consciousness. Like you're saying, like, "Whoa, I'm Like you're saying, like, "Whoa, I'm Like you're saying, like, "Whoa, I'm picking up a vaster view of what's picking up a vaster view of what's picking up a vaster view of what's around me." around me." around me." And I uh decided to just create this awe And I uh decided to just create this awe And I uh decided to just create this awe walk, you know? And I did it for a walk, you know? And I did it for a walk, you know? And I did it for a meditation group or mindful magazine. meditation group or mindful magazine. meditation group or mindful magazine. You just slow down. You just slow down. You just slow down. It's a lot of people walk. Hundreds of, It's a lot of people walk. Hundreds of, It's a lot of people walk. Hundreds of, you know, tens of millions of people you know, tens of millions of people you know, tens of millions of people have regular walks in the United States. have regular walks in the United States. have regular walks in the United States. Uh it's good for you, you know, so we Uh it's good for you, you know, so we Uh it's good for you, you know, so we just add it all. Like on your regular just add it all. Like on your regular just add it all. Like on your regular walk once a week in our study, walk once a week in our study, walk once a week in our study, uh go somewhere you wouldn't ordinarily uh go somewhere you wouldn't ordinarily uh go somewhere you wouldn't ordinarily go. Go someplace that may surprise you. Go someplace that may surprise you. Go someplace that may surprise you. Uh I walk around Berkeley a lot and I Uh I walk around Berkeley a lot and I Uh I walk around Berkeley a lot and I was like, "Well, I'm going to go past was like, "Well, I'm going to go past was like, "Well, I'm going to go past the little playground that my daughters the little playground that my daughters the little playground that my daughters played at when they were young and just played at when they were young and just played at when they were young and just feel that, you know, Cordenices Park." feel that, you know, Cordenices Park." feel that, you know, Cordenices Park." &gt;&gt; Yeah, with the rock slide. &gt;&gt; Yeah, with the rock slide. &gt;&gt; Yeah, with the rock slide. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; And the tunnel. Exactly. I love that &gt;&gt; And the tunnel. Exactly. I love that &gt;&gt; And the tunnel. Exactly. I love that place. &gt;&gt; Near the rose garden. &gt;&gt; Near the rose garden. &gt;&gt; Near the rose garden. &gt;&gt; a secret, should we give this away? &gt;&gt; a secret, should we give this away? &gt;&gt; a secret, should we give this away? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a secret hiking trail There's a secret hiking trail There's a secret hiking trail through it's actually through a private it's actually through a private it's actually through a private property's backyard and they allow you property's backyard and they allow you property's backyard and they allow you to go through if you are quiet and you to go through if you are quiet and you to go through if you are quiet and you pick up your trash. And there's an pick up your trash. And there's an pick up your trash. And there's an incredible waterfall and place to stand incredible waterfall and place to stand incredible waterfall and place to stand at the top. There's a beam there. You've at the top. There's a beam there. You've at the top. There's a beam there. You've been there, I'm sure. We can look out been there, I'm sure. We can look out been there, I'm sure. We can look out over this what is kind of like a trench over this what is kind of like a trench over this what is kind of like a trench of tree It's it's a total transformation of tree It's it's a total transformation of tree It's it's a total transformation of one space to the next. of one space to the next. of one space to the next. If you look for it properly, I'm sure If you look for it properly, I'm sure If you look for it properly, I'm sure now it's on the internet. It's in now it's on the internet. It's in now it's on the internet. It's in kind of kind of kind of swinging gates, not locked. And Still swinging gates, not locked. And Still swinging gates, not locked. And Still hard to find. And there's a little hard to find. And there's a little hard to find. And there's a little monastery maybe nearby and monastery maybe nearby and monastery maybe nearby and you might and you might see me a and you might and you might see me a and you might and you might see me a couple years ago you would have seen me couple years ago you would have seen me couple years ago you would have seen me and me and my dog, but you might see me and me and my dog, but you might see me and me and my dog, but you might see me eating a slice of pizza from the cheese eating a slice of pizza from the cheese eating a slice of pizza from the cheese board sitting on that log. I spend a lot board sitting on that log. I spend a lot board sitting on that log. I spend a lot of time there. I'm getting goosebumps, of time there. I'm getting goosebumps, of time there. I'm getting goosebumps, Andrew. That is just pure Berkeley. Andrew. That is just pure Berkeley. Andrew. That is just pure Berkeley. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. So, yeah, so in this study, awewalk, So, yeah, so in this study, awewalk, So, yeah, so in this study, awewalk, go on your walk, find a place that's go on your walk, find a place that's go on your walk, find a place that's going to be a little surprising where it going to be a little surprising where it going to be a little surprising where it may make you feel a little bit of may make you feel a little bit of may make you feel a little bit of childlike wonder. childlike wonder. childlike wonder. And it's interesting, no one's asked me And it's interesting, no one's asked me And it's interesting, no one's asked me this question, you know, your this question, you know, your this question, you know, your observation about small to vast, and we observation about small to vast, and we observation about small to vast, and we just said, just said, just said, "Slow down, "Slow down, "Slow down, deepen your breathing, sync it up with deepen your breathing, sync it up with deepen your breathing, sync it up with your walking, which you've studied your walking, which you've studied your walking, which you've studied empirically the breath. empirically the breath. empirically the breath. And then um And then um And then um go from small to vast, you know, look at go from small to vast, you know, look at go from small to vast, you know, look at clouds, look at the whole pattern of clouds, look at the whole pattern of clouds, look at the whole pattern of clouds, just slow it down. Look at clouds, just slow it down. Look at clouds, just slow it down. Look at trees, look at the light on the trees, look at the light on the trees, look at the light on the trees, and look at points of light and then and look at points of light and then and look at points of light and then patterns of light. Look at you know, I patterns of light. Look at you know, I patterns of light. Look at you know, I love walking past playgrounds, it's one love walking past playgrounds, it's one love walking past playgrounds, it's one of my favorite sources of awe. of my favorite sources of awe. of my favorite sources of awe. Listen to one laugh and listen to the Listen to one laugh and listen to the Listen to one laugh and listen to the whole symphony of laughter of kids, whole symphony of laughter of kids, whole symphony of laughter of kids, right? That's all. And they walk through right? That's all. And they walk through right? That's all. And they walk through uh they do that for half an hour, and uh they do that for half an hour, and uh they do that for half an hour, and what we find in that study what we find in that study what we find in that study is they become more vast in their is they become more vast in their is they become more vast in their consciousness. They're more aware consciousness. They're more aware consciousness. They're more aware in the photographs that they provided of in the photographs that they provided of in the photographs that they provided of what's around them. what's around them. what's around them. They feel more kindness over the 8 They feel more kindness over the 8 They feel more kindness over the 8 weeks. They feel more awe over an 8-week weeks. They feel more awe over an 8-week weeks. They feel more awe over an 8-week period. It rises. And then the period. It rises. And then the period. It rises. And then the finding that was finding that was finding that was you know, important for people who are you know, important for people who are you know, important for people who are elderly is less physical pain. You know, elderly is less physical pain. You know, elderly is less physical pain. You know, your body starts to ache when you're 75, your body starts to ache when you're 75, your body starts to ache when you're 75, you know, you know, you know, uh or earlier, and awe uh or earlier, and awe uh or earlier, and awe I think through the inflammation I think through the inflammation I think through the inflammation process, you know, and reducing it, process, you know, and reducing it, process, you know, and reducing it, caused less pain. You know, this caused less pain. You know, this caused less pain. You know, this dovetails with other health benefits. dovetails with other health benefits. dovetails with other health benefits. Awe is good for Awe is good for Awe is good for reduced inflammation, reduced inflammation, reduced inflammation, elevated vagal tone, elevated vagal tone, elevated vagal tone, reduced long COVID symptoms. We have reduced long COVID symptoms. We have reduced long COVID symptoms. We have people with long COVID, just a minute of people with long COVID, just a minute of people with long COVID, just a minute of awe a day awe a day awe a day reduces long COVID symptoms. It's good reduces long COVID symptoms. It's good reduces long COVID symptoms. It's good news, right? And and there's so much news, right? And and there's so much news, right? And and there's so much science on it that I just Now science on it that I just Now science on it that I just Now I think medical doctors are starting to I think medical doctors are starting to I think medical doctors are starting to think like, I'm going to prescribe think like, I'm going to prescribe think like, I'm going to prescribe nature, I'll prescribe music nature, I'll prescribe music nature, I'll prescribe music through awe, right? Um as a mechanism. through awe, right? Um as a mechanism. through awe, right? Um as a mechanism. I have a lot of thoughts about um this I have a lot of thoughts about um this I have a lot of thoughts about um this going from uh small to large. Yeah, I'd going from uh small to large. Yeah, I'd going from uh small to large. Yeah, I'd love to hear them. But before I love to hear them. But before I love to hear them. But before I &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I do, um I have a I have another &gt;&gt; I do, um I have a I have another &gt;&gt; I do, um I have a I have another question. I have another question. I question. I have another question. I question. I have another question. I think for a lot of people, think for a lot of people, think for a lot of people, um, including myself, um, including myself, um, including myself, we assume that awe is this kind of we assume that awe is this kind of we assume that awe is this kind of forgetting of our self. Like getting forgetting of our self. Like getting forgetting of our self. Like getting outside of ourselves. outside of ourselves. outside of ourselves. But I'm starting to think based on But I'm starting to think based on But I'm starting to think based on the way you're describing it that it's the way you're describing it that it's the way you're describing it that it's about being tethered to the larger about being tethered to the larger about being tethered to the larger picture. That it's not a picture. That it's not a picture. That it's not a Yes, it's getting out of our heads, Yes, it's getting out of our heads, Yes, it's getting out of our heads, quote unquote, but it's actually very quote unquote, but it's actually very quote unquote, but it's actually very much an embodied experience. It's very much an embodied experience. It's very much an embodied experience. It's very It's almost like full body. It's almost like full body. It's almost like full body. And so now I'll answer your question. And so now I'll answer your question. And so now I'll answer your question. Uh, this is usually where people start Uh, this is usually where people start Uh, this is usually where people start putting in the comments like you talk putting in the comments like you talk putting in the comments like you talk too much, let your guest talk, but too much, let your guest talk, but too much, let your guest talk, but [laughter] I Try and folks, he asked me. [laughter] I Try and folks, he asked me. [laughter] I Try and folks, he asked me. &gt;&gt; And twice. &gt;&gt; And twice. &gt;&gt; And twice. &gt;&gt; So you asked me a question, I'm going to &gt;&gt; So you asked me a question, I'm going to &gt;&gt; So you asked me a question, I'm going to answer it. Anyone that knows me, you answer it. Anyone that knows me, you answer it. Anyone that knows me, you know, if I know, if I know, if I Okay, so I've thought about this Okay, so I've thought about this Okay, so I've thought about this relationship between visual aperture and relationship between visual aperture and relationship between visual aperture and a time perception for a long time. This a time perception for a long time. This a time perception for a long time. This is my deepest obsession and it gets a is my deepest obsession and it gets a is my deepest obsession and it gets a little bit into the book I'm writing, little bit into the book I'm writing, little bit into the book I'm writing, but it but it but it but it but it but it it's probably reserved for after there's it's probably reserved for after there's it's probably reserved for after there's some experiments. And and I some experiments. And and I some experiments. And and I um, to the fear of my podcast crew, I um, to the fear of my podcast crew, I um, to the fear of my podcast crew, I actually am considering going back into actually am considering going back into actually am considering going back into the lab to do the this experiment. So we the lab to do the this experiment. So we the lab to do the this experiment. So we know what What do we know for certain? know what What do we know for certain? know what What do we know for certain? We know for certain that when your We know for certain that when your We know for certain that when your visual aperture is small, like looking visual aperture is small, like looking visual aperture is small, like looking through a soda straw view or watch um, through a soda straw view or watch um, through a soda straw view or watch um, maker type aperture or um, you're in a maker type aperture or um, you're in a maker type aperture or um, you're in a let's just say a could be a pleasant or let's just say a could be a pleasant or let's just say a could be a pleasant or unpleasant text communication going back unpleasant text communication going back unpleasant text communication going back and forth that your perception of time and forth that your perception of time and forth that your perception of time is different. You're fine slicing. Those is different. You're fine slicing. Those is different. You're fine slicing. Those dot dots coming through? dot dots coming through? dot dots coming through? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's just like this. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's just like this. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's just like this. &gt;&gt; like an eternity. Yeah. And it's &gt;&gt; like an eternity. Yeah. And it's &gt;&gt; like an eternity. Yeah. And it's bidirectional with your let's just call bidirectional with your let's just call bidirectional with your let's just call it level of alertness. It doesn't even it level of alertness. It doesn't even it level of alertness. It doesn't even have to be stressed, but sympathetic have to be stressed, but sympathetic have to be stressed, but sympathetic nervous system, right? So if I'm in line nervous system, right? So if I'm in line nervous system, right? So if I'm in line at the store and I have some place at the store and I have some place at the store and I have some place to be, my visual aperture shrinks and to be, my visual aperture shrinks and to be, my visual aperture shrinks and then it feels like the person in front then it feels like the person in front then it feels like the person in front of me is taking forever. of me is taking forever. of me is taking forever. &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz you're in these little micro &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz you're in these little micro &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz you're in these little micro &gt;&gt; I'm relaxed it feels like I'm &gt;&gt; I'm relaxed it feels like I'm &gt;&gt; I'm relaxed it feels like I'm slicing time differently. Okay, when we slicing time differently. Okay, when we slicing time differently. Okay, when we see a horizon and our aperture opens see a horizon and our aperture opens see a horizon and our aperture opens up as I mentioned then we relax. up as I mentioned then we relax. up as I mentioned then we relax. But we also are taking But we also are taking But we also are taking fewer time bit snapshots. So people fewer time bit snapshots. So people fewer time bit snapshots. So people might think oh fewer you're in slow might think oh fewer you're in slow might think oh fewer you're in slow motion cuz they were no you're motion cuz they were no you're motion cuz they were no you're it's the opposite right? Slow motion is it's the opposite right? Slow motion is it's the opposite right? Slow motion is high frame rate. But the same by video high frame rate. But the same by video high frame rate. But the same by video where you can catch slow motion you need where you can catch slow motion you need where you can catch slow motion you need a high frame rate. a high frame rate. a high frame rate. This is why when people experience like This is why when people experience like This is why when people experience like a car crash they'll often say that a car crash they'll often say that a car crash they'll often say that things felt like they were slowing down. things felt like they were slowing down. things felt like they were slowing down. More snapshots. More snapshots. More snapshots. &gt;&gt; That's cool. So &gt;&gt; That's cool. So &gt;&gt; That's cool. So when I think about this relationship when I think about this relationship when I think about this relationship between visual aperture and time and it between visual aperture and time and it between visual aperture and time and it also exists in the auditory domain. So also exists in the auditory domain. So also exists in the auditory domain. So if I'm listening to a specific if I'm listening to a specific if I'm listening to a specific conversation in a party I'm fine slicing conversation in a party I'm fine slicing conversation in a party I'm fine slicing my perception of auditory space. Our my perception of auditory space. Our my perception of auditory space. Our friend Irv Hafter taught me this. When I friend Irv Hafter taught me this. When I friend Irv Hafter taught me this. When I listen to everything and I take it in as listen to everything and I take it in as listen to everything and I take it in as a whole it's a more relaxed a whole it's a more relaxed a whole it's a more relaxed experience but okay. Cool. So a long experience but okay. Cool. So a long experience but okay. Cool. So a long time ago I was because I was time ago I was because I was time ago I was because I was experiencing stress I started reading experiencing stress I started reading experiencing stress I started reading about meditation types and different about meditation types and different about meditation types and different things and I things and I things and I came up with this meditation. It's but came up with this meditation. It's but came up with this meditation. It's but it's not a meditation at all and some of it's not a meditation at all and some of it's not a meditation at all and some of my listeners will be familiar with it. I my listeners will be familiar with it. I my listeners will be familiar with it. I decided to call it decided to call it decided to call it for lack of a better term space-time for lack of a better term space-time for lack of a better term space-time bridging. The meditation is very simple. bridging. The meditation is very simple. bridging. The meditation is very simple. You close your eyes and you do three You close your eyes and you do three You close your eyes and you do three breaths thinking about your skin inward. breaths thinking about your skin inward. breaths thinking about your skin inward. So interoception. You open your eyes and So interoception. You open your eyes and So interoception. You open your eyes and you look at your hand you take three you look at your hand you take three you look at your hand you take three breaths. But you're creating a visual breaths. But you're creating a visual breaths. But you're creating a visual tether between you and your hand. Then tether between you and your hand. Then tether between you and your hand. Then you look some distance maybe 8 or 10 you look some distance maybe 8 or 10 you look some distance maybe 8 or 10 feet away you do the same. Then you find feet away you do the same. Then you find feet away you do the same. Then you find a horizon and then you think about the a horizon and then you think about the a horizon and then you think about the sort of pale blue dot phenomenon you're sort of pale blue dot phenomenon you're sort of pale blue dot phenomenon you're just on a planet it's floating in space just on a planet it's floating in space just on a planet it's floating in space and like every single one of these and like every single one of these and like every single one of these things is a form of meditation or a meme things is a form of meditation or a meme things is a form of meditation or a meme or whatever. And then you get right or whatever. And then you get right or whatever. And then you get right back to yourself. And so what the idea back to yourself. And so what the idea back to yourself. And so what the idea here is that it helped me a lot because here is that it helped me a lot because here is that it helped me a lot because I noticed that meditations where I was I noticed that meditations where I was I noticed that meditations where I was completely focused inward made me more completely focused inward made me more completely focused inward made me more focused inward. Going for a run I could focused inward. Going for a run I could focused inward. Going for a run I could get outside my head but it and I started get outside my head but it and I started get outside my head but it and I started to play with the idea that maybe it's to play with the idea that maybe it's to play with the idea that maybe it's not about having a small aperture or a not about having a small aperture or a not about having a small aperture or a big aperture per se big aperture per se big aperture per se but it's the like every great thing in but it's the like every great thing in but it's the like every great thing in biology or psychology, it's the process. biology or psychology, it's the process. biology or psychology, it's the process. It's not an event. It's the process of It's not an event. It's the process of It's not an event. It's the process of going from one aperture to the next. And going from one aperture to the next. And going from one aperture to the next. And that's kind of what life is about. that's kind of what life is about. that's kind of what life is about. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Like when this too shall pass is really &gt;&gt; Like when this too shall pass is really &gt;&gt; Like when this too shall pass is really about taking a broader time about taking a broader time about taking a broader time snapshot. Like eventually this thing snapshot. Like eventually this thing snapshot. Like eventually this thing &gt;&gt; visual as well. &gt;&gt; visual as well. &gt;&gt; visual as well. &gt;&gt; visual. And so this is a long answer to &gt;&gt; visual. And so this is a long answer to &gt;&gt; visual. And so this is a long answer to your question, but It's really your question, but It's really your question, but It's really interesting. &gt;&gt; this is why it's so important for me to &gt;&gt; this is why it's so important for me to &gt;&gt; this is why it's so important for me to see a horizon if I can in the morning. see a horizon if I can in the morning. see a horizon if I can in the morning. Um but it's also very important to go Um but it's also very important to go Um but it's also very important to go indoors and just like focus on what I'm indoors and just like focus on what I'm indoors and just like focus on what I'm working on. Like there is no place or working on. Like there is no place or working on. Like there is no place or event in a day or in life that that's event in a day or in life that that's event in a day or in life that that's actually the right way to live. Like you actually the right way to live. Like you actually the right way to live. Like you can go to Big Sur, and if you're lucky can go to Big Sur, and if you're lucky can go to Big Sur, and if you're lucky enough to go to Esalen, like you're like enough to go to Esalen, like you're like enough to go to Esalen, like you're like this is it. But it's only it because you this is it. But it's only it because you this is it. But it's only it because you came from your office, in my opinion. came from your office, in my opinion. came from your office, in my opinion. And then you go back again. And then you go back again. And then you go back again. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You &gt;&gt; Yeah. You &gt;&gt; Yeah. You figure this out. Like you the title of figure this out. Like you the title of figure this out. Like you the title of this paper, which for which you're the this paper, which for which you're the this paper, which for which you're the senior author, is a balanced mind all senior author, is a balanced mind all senior author, is a balanced mind all fosters equanimity via temporal fosters equanimity via temporal fosters equanimity via temporal distancing. &gt;&gt; Yeah, no, it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, no, it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, no, it's cool. &gt;&gt; time, not about space. &gt;&gt; time, not about space. &gt;&gt; time, not about space. &gt;&gt; It is. That's fascinating. &gt;&gt; It is. That's fascinating. &gt;&gt; It is. That's fascinating. &gt;&gt; Okay. So that's how I think about &gt;&gt; Okay. So that's how I think about &gt;&gt; Okay. So that's how I think about this. Now maybe you can tell us about this. Now maybe you can tell us about this. Now maybe you can tell us about this paper because I'm getting this paper because I'm getting this paper because I'm getting embarrassed that I've been going way too embarrassed that I've been going way too embarrassed that I've been going way too long. This is why we're in conversation, long. This is why we're in conversation, long. This is why we're in conversation, Andrew, which is, you know, you study Andrew, which is, you know, you study Andrew, which is, you know, you study the visual system and we need more the visual system and we need more the visual system and we need more of that knowledge in the science of awe. of that knowledge in the science of awe. of that knowledge in the science of awe. And I will just make one parenthetical And I will just make one parenthetical And I will just make one parenthetical note, which is note, which is note, which is I was interviewing Matthias Tarnopolsky, I was interviewing Matthias Tarnopolsky, I was interviewing Matthias Tarnopolsky, who was at Berkeley, ran and then went who was at Berkeley, ran and then went who was at Berkeley, ran and then went to the Philadelphia Symphony. He was a to the Philadelphia Symphony. He was a to the Philadelphia Symphony. He was a music director there and he said I was music director there and he said I was music director there and he said I was like and he was he studies the great and like and he was he studies the great and like and he was he studies the great and he's a conductor of symphonies. And I he's a conductor of symphonies. And I he's a conductor of symphonies. And I was like was like was like what's the music's hard to understand what's the music's hard to understand what's the music's hard to understand scientifically. It is complicated. I was scientifically. It is complicated. I was scientifically. It is complicated. I was like what's the why awe and music? Why like what's the why awe and music? Why like what's the why awe and music? Why do we cry? do we cry? do we cry? Why do we get goosebumps? Why do I mean Why do we get goosebumps? Why do I mean Why do we get goosebumps? Why do I mean profound and he's like time. profound and he's like time. profound and he's like time. It's all about what it does to our sense It's all about what it does to our sense It's all about what it does to our sense of time. And so I think there's a of time. And so I think there's a of time. And so I think there's a hypothesis there to explore. hypothesis there to explore. hypothesis there to explore. What awe does to the self, and I'm What awe does to the self, and I'm What awe does to the self, and I'm putting together a couple of your putting together a couple of your putting together a couple of your comments, is and Jane Goodall got it comments, is and Jane Goodall got it comments, is and Jane Goodall got it most right, and it's, you know, it's most right, and it's, you know, it's most right, and it's, you know, it's so great to study things with science, so great to study things with science, so great to study things with science, and then you see someone you really and then you see someone you really and then you see someone you really revere say something, and she was she felt that say something, and she was she felt that say something, and she was she felt that chimpanzees feel awe. I do, too. Believe chimpanzees feel awe. I do, too. Believe chimpanzees feel awe. I do, too. Believe that. So, compo- it's a controversial that. So, compo- it's a controversial that. So, compo- it's a controversial issue. Uh chimps show, and Frans de Waal alerted chimps show, and Frans de Waal alerted chimps show, and Frans de Waal alerted me to this, who recently passed away, me to this, who recently passed away, me to this, who recently passed away, and I just want to pay reverence to him and I just want to pay reverence to him and I just want to pay reverence to him or homage to him. Um a great or homage to him. Um a great or homage to him. Um a great primatologist. So, he said, "You got to primatologist. So, he said, "You got to primatologist. So, he said, "You got to look at Jane Goodall and writing about look at Jane Goodall and writing about look at Jane Goodall and writing about chimps and the waterfall display they show when and the waterfall display they show when and the waterfall display they show when they are around vast nature. they are around vast nature. they are around vast nature. They sit quietly, like around rivers, They sit quietly, like around rivers, They sit quietly, like around rivers, like that waterfall in Berkeley. like that waterfall in Berkeley. like that waterfall in Berkeley. They look at things. They get They look at things. They get They look at things. They get goosebumps. They touch things, like we goosebumps. They touch things, like we goosebumps. They touch things, like we would out in nature. would out in nature. would out in nature. Uh they rock, uh and they Jane Goodall Uh they rock, uh and they Jane Goodall Uh they rock, uh and they Jane Goodall said, "Why wouldn't they feel awe?" said, "Why wouldn't they feel awe?" said, "Why wouldn't they feel awe?" Uh or big the beginnings of Uh or big the beginnings of Uh or big the beginnings of spirituality, which is really being spirituality, which is really being spirituality, which is really being amazed at things outside of the self. amazed at things outside of the self. amazed at things outside of the self. So, with awe, we have a sense of So, with awe, we have a sense of So, with awe, we have a sense of self, intersection, and the like, and self, intersection, and the like, and self, intersection, and the like, and then we connect to vast things out then we connect to vast things out then we connect to vast things out there. And that's what our research documented And that's what our research documented And that's what our research documented as kind of a central mechanism of awe or as kind of a central mechanism of awe or as kind of a central mechanism of awe or transformation is like transformation is like transformation is like when you're at Yosemite or when you are when you're at Yosemite or when you are when you're at Yosemite or when you are standing next to that T-Rex skeleton or standing next to that T-Rex skeleton or standing next to that T-Rex skeleton or when you've, when you've, when you've, you know, when you've thought about you know, when you've thought about you know, when you've thought about the passage of time that happens with the passage of time that happens with the passage of time that happens with life, right? And there are new life, right? And there are new life, right? And there are new meditations around that. meditations around that. meditations around that. You're like, "Wow, I am part of You're like, "Wow, I am part of You're like, "Wow, I am part of something vast. I'm part of evolution. something vast. I'm part of evolution. something vast. I'm part of evolution. I'm part of nature. I'm part of an I'm part of nature. I'm part of an I'm part of nature. I'm part of an ecosystem." Uh ecosystem." Uh ecosystem." Uh and it changes and it changes and it changes your whole mind, right? It your whole mind, right? It your whole mind, right? It changes the neurophysiology of the mind, changes the neurophysiology of the mind, changes the neurophysiology of the mind, default mode network starts to quiet default mode network starts to quiet default mode network starts to quiet down, activates vagal tone, and you do down, activates vagal tone, and you do down, activates vagal tone, and you do feel like you're tethered, as you said, to like you're tethered, as you said, to like you're tethered, as you said, to like music or like music or like music or a culture or a political movement or the a culture or a political movement or the a culture or a political movement or the team you love, right? And it's team you love, right? And it's team you love, right? And it's transcendent. Um transcendent. Um transcendent. Um and if you look at where we are today, and if you look at where we are today, and if you look at where we are today, we need more of that. You know, we need we need more of that. You know, we need we need more of that. You know, we need to get our young people to be to get our young people to be to get our young people to be connecting to big things. connecting to big things. connecting to big things. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The reason I started taking it, and the reason I started taking it, and the reason I started taking it, and the reason I still take it, is because AG1 reason I still take it, is because AG1 reason I still take it, is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality is, to my knowledge, the highest quality is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every day. But, I'm often asked if you could day. But, I'm often asked if you could day. But, I'm often asked if you could take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is always AG1, because it has just been oh always AG1, because it has just been oh always AG1, because it has just been oh so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, that's drinkag1, with the numeral one, that's drinkag1, with the numeral one, that's drinkag1, with the numeral one, .com/huberman to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. I didn't expect that we subscription. I didn't expect that we subscription. I didn't expect that we would land here, at least not so early would land here, at least not so early would land here, at least not so early in the conversation, but there you know in the conversation, but there you know in the conversation, but there you know we we've had Kristoff Koch on this we we've had Kristoff Koch on this we we've had Kristoff Koch on this podcast talking about consciousness, you podcast talking about consciousness, you podcast talking about consciousness, you know, an incredible neuroscientist and a know, an incredible neuroscientist and a know, an incredible neuroscientist and a really thinker. I mean I've watched his really thinker. I mean I've watched his really thinker. I mean I've watched his career evolve over the years and he's career evolve over the years and he's career evolve over the years and he's continued to evolve his concepts of how continued to evolve his concepts of how continued to evolve his concepts of how to think about consciousness and to think about consciousness and to think about consciousness and you know, we'll hear nowadays about and you know, we'll hear nowadays about and you know, we'll hear nowadays about oh like maybe consciousness is outside oh like maybe consciousness is outside oh like maybe consciousness is outside the brain and I think if nothing else the brain and I think if nothing else the brain and I think if nothing else our brains are important components in our brains are important components in our brains are important components in it. May maybe not. I don't know. I don't it. May maybe not. I don't know. I don't it. May maybe not. I don't know. I don't want to do the experiment on myself to want to do the experiment on myself to want to do the experiment on myself to find out like I was decerebrated or find out like I was decerebrated or find out like I was decerebrated or something which basically means having something which basically means having something which basically means having your cortex removed for folks. Sorry for your cortex removed for folks. Sorry for your cortex removed for folks. Sorry for the nerd speak, but the idea is the nerd speak, but the idea is the nerd speak, but the idea is connecting through time like in our own connecting through time like in our own connecting through time like in our own lives is a very unique form of awe. lives is a very unique form of awe. lives is a very unique form of awe. So like if I hear a song So like if I hear a song So like if I hear a song and it reminds me when I was like 15 and it reminds me when I was like 15 and it reminds me when I was like 15 and then all of a sudden all the then all of a sudden all the then all of a sudden all the ma I call it like the magic library the ma I call it like the magic library the ma I call it like the magic library come that's how the brain works, right? come that's how the brain works, right? come that's how the brain works, right? It's like it's like a Harry Potter like It's like it's like a Harry Potter like It's like it's like a Harry Potter like you take out a book you see a subject you take out a book you see a subject you take out a book you see a subject and then all of a sudden the library the and then all of a sudden the library the and then all of a sudden the library the books around it change and so I'm books around it change and so I'm books around it change and so I'm thinking about the time we did this and thinking about the time we did this and thinking about the time we did this and the time we did that and everyone has the time we did that and everyone has the time we did that and everyone has these notions, but they're very much these notions, but they're very much these notions, but they're very much linked to them. linked to them. linked to them. That's one form of linking up through That's one form of linking up through That's one form of linking up through time. And then there's this other one where And then there's this other one where And then there's this other one where you feel something with someone else you feel something with someone else you feel something with someone else you know you're connected you know you're connected you know you're connected in that moment, but there's this idea in that moment, but there's this idea in that moment, but there's this idea forgive me for getting squishy on here, forgive me for getting squishy on here, forgive me for getting squishy on here, but there's this idea that maybe your but there's this idea that maybe your but there's this idea that maybe your past, present and future is connected to past, present and future is connected to past, present and future is connected to their past and present and future. And their past and present and future. And their past and present and future. And then you if you let yourself go there, then you if you let yourself go there, then you if you let yourself go there, no drugs required. no drugs required. no drugs required. If you let yourself go there, you're If you let yourself go there, you're If you let yourself go there, you're like oh we're part of this together. like oh we're part of this together. like oh we're part of this together. And that they're we're sort of moving And that they're we're sort of moving And that they're we're sort of moving more now as a as a conscious fleet more now as a as a conscious fleet more now as a as a conscious fleet than as individuals. I think that's a than as individuals. I think that's a than as individuals. I think that's a very real experience even for people very real experience even for people very real experience even for people that are like very resistant to kind of that are like very resistant to kind of that are like very resistant to kind of the like even the language of the like even the language of the like even the language of collective consciousness and things like collective consciousness and things like collective consciousness and things like that. And I think concerts are where we that. And I think concerts are where we that. And I think concerts are where we generally feel that because we're it generally feel that because we're it generally feel that because we're it requires a sort of shared perceptual requires a sort of shared perceptual requires a sort of shared perceptual experience or emotional experience. experience or emotional experience. experience or emotional experience. &gt;&gt; Yep. And so when you say getting young &gt;&gt; Yep. And so when you say getting young &gt;&gt; Yep. And so when you say getting young people connected that way, people connected that way, people connected that way, &gt;&gt; Yeah. it's very different than like node &gt;&gt; Yeah. it's very different than like node &gt;&gt; Yeah. it's very different than like node to node. It's it's sort of like it's an to node. It's it's sort of like it's an to node. It's it's sort of like it's an openness that comes First you have to openness that comes First you have to openness that comes First you have to connect to your past, present, and connect to your past, present, and connect to your past, present, and future. And then you're kind of open to future. And then you're kind of open to future. And then you're kind of open to it. I feel like then that window it. I feel like then that window it. I feel like then that window opens. And then if there's one person there or And then if there's one person there or And then if there's one person there or a thousand people standing there, like a thousand people standing there, like a thousand people standing there, like it's on. Yeah. it's on. Yeah. it's on. Yeah. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; But if not, and you're just in your &gt;&gt; But if not, and you're just in your &gt;&gt; But if not, and you're just in your experience, you're the person at the experience, you're the person at the experience, you're the person at the party wondering whether or not um you party wondering whether or not um you party wondering whether or not um you have something between your teeth, which have something between your teeth, which have something between your teeth, which is the lamest way to be at a party, but is the lamest way to be at a party, but is the lamest way to be at a party, but we've all been there, right? [laughter] we've all been there, right? [laughter] we've all been there, right? [laughter] Anyway, I'm getting a little outside the Anyway, I'm getting a little outside the Anyway, I'm getting a little outside the box here, but what are your thoughts box here, but what are your thoughts box here, but what are your thoughts What are your thoughts about individual What are your thoughts about individual What are your thoughts about individual uh experiences, like on the awe walk uh experiences, like on the awe walk uh experiences, like on the awe walk versus a couple on an awe walk versus a couple on an awe walk versus a couple on an awe walk versus connecting to a whole mess of people, connecting to a whole mess of people, connecting to a whole mess of people, some of whom you've never met? I mean, some of whom you've never met? I mean, some of whom you've never met? I mean, you've highlighted, you've highlighted, you've highlighted, you know, this temporal this you know, this temporal this you know, this temporal this dynamic that you're pointing to dynamic that you're pointing to dynamic that you're pointing to uh with respect to awe and the uh with respect to awe and the uh with respect to awe and the experience of awe. And and we're so experience of awe. And and we're so experience of awe. And and we're so limited in how we measure experience, limited in how we measure experience, limited in how we measure experience, and I and I and I uh I think you're right. I think that uh I think you're right. I think that uh I think you're right. I think that you know, your first sense of like one you know, your first sense of like one you know, your first sense of like one of the most awesome qualities of awe of the most awesome qualities of awe of the most awesome qualities of awe is connecting in your mind through the is connecting in your mind through the is connecting in your mind through the layers of consciousness and experience layers of consciousness and experience layers of consciousness and experience that shifts out of the micro to this that shifts out of the micro to this that shifts out of the micro to this expansive narrative about your mind, expansive narrative about your mind, expansive narrative about your mind, right? And so I grew up around the UCLA right? And so I grew up around the UCLA right? And so I grew up around the UCLA campus cuz my mom got her PhD there uh campus cuz my mom got her PhD there uh campus cuz my mom got her PhD there uh at UCLA at UCLA in the late '60s. at UCLA at UCLA in the late '60s. at UCLA at UCLA in the late '60s. And there were eucalyptus trees, and And there were eucalyptus trees, and And there were eucalyptus trees, and then I went to Northern California where then I went to Northern California where then I went to Northern California where there were not as many eucalyptus trees. there were not as many eucalyptus trees. there were not as many eucalyptus trees. And I First day I was at UC Santa And I First day I was at UC Santa And I First day I was at UC Santa Barbara as an undergrad, Barbara as an undergrad, Barbara as an undergrad, I smelled the eucalyptus, and I it was I smelled the eucalyptus, and I it was I smelled the eucalyptus, and I it was awe. It was just like, "Ah." All of awe. It was just like, "Ah." All of awe. It was just like, "Ah." All of these experiences through the olfactory these experiences through the olfactory these experiences through the olfactory process, you know, I was awestruck by that smell, you know, I was awestruck by that smell, you know, I was awestruck by that smell, right? And that's through the connecting right? And that's through the connecting right? And that's through the connecting through time. I am very persuaded by the through time. I am very persuaded by the through time. I am very persuaded by the new literature on brain synchronization. new literature on brain synchronization. new literature on brain synchronization. Uh that we are and I talk about this a Uh that we are and I talk about this a Uh that we are and I talk about this a bit in awe and there's just new bit in awe and there's just new bit in awe and there's just new science coming out. We're always syncing science coming out. We're always syncing science coming out. We're always syncing up with other people. You know, when an up with other people. You know, when an up with other people. You know, when an 9-month-old listens to music, they are 9-month-old listens to music, they are 9-month-old listens to music, they are syncing up syncing up syncing up to the sounds and rhythms of their to the sounds and rhythms of their to the sounds and rhythms of their culture's music and they're synced up culture's music and they're synced up culture's music and they're synced up physiologically with whomever is in physiologically with whomever is in physiologically with whomever is in their midst. When we go to a concert or their midst. When we go to a concert or their midst. When we go to a concert or we watch a sporting event, you know, if we watch a sporting event, you know, if we watch a sporting event, you know, if you're if you like sports, your heart you're if you like sports, your heart you're if you like sports, your heart rate is syncing up, your brains are rate is syncing up, your brains are rate is syncing up, your brains are synchronizing. That it's synchronizing. That it's synchronizing. That it's And and that in some sense is the And and that in some sense is the And and that in some sense is the materialistic account of collective materialistic account of collective materialistic account of collective consciousness. We're all sharing brain consciousness. We're all sharing brain consciousness. We're all sharing brain patterns and awareness. patterns and awareness. patterns and awareness. Um and I think that it's part of Um and I think that it's part of Um and I think that it's part of some of our deepest forms of awe, you some of our deepest forms of awe, you some of our deepest forms of awe, you know, and music. Now, the current know, and music. Now, the current know, and music. Now, the current science of music is like science of music is like science of music is like it is very hard to get people to think it is very hard to get people to think it is very hard to get people to think collectively in the same way. You know, collectively in the same way. You know, collectively in the same way. You know, when you teach a classroom, it's when you teach a classroom, it's when you teach a classroom, it's impossible. But music does it within impossible. But music does it within impossible. But music does it within milliseconds, right? When you talk to milliseconds, right? When you talk to milliseconds, right? When you talk to people who've been to Taylor Swift people who've been to Taylor Swift people who've been to Taylor Swift shows, who are Swifties, it's serious, right? it's serious, right? it's serious, right? &gt;&gt; They are instantly &gt;&gt; They are instantly &gt;&gt; They are instantly bonded. That's that's the United in a bonded. That's that's the United in a bonded. That's that's the United in a like a moral cause almost or a identity like a moral cause almost or a identity like a moral cause almost or a identity cause. So, that's profound. That's very cause. So, that's profound. That's very cause. So, that's profound. That's very hard work to do. And when Jonathan Haidt hard work to do. And when Jonathan Haidt hard work to do. And when Jonathan Haidt and I wrote about awe early in our and I wrote about awe early in our and I wrote about awe early in our careers, um you know, we were like we careers, um you know, we were like we careers, um you know, we were like we need these emotions to make us be part need these emotions to make us be part need these emotions to make us be part of collectives because we are a very of collectives because we are a very of collectives because we are a very collective species. It was one of our collective species. It was one of our collective species. It was one of our signature strengths is to fold into signature strengths is to fold into signature strengths is to fold into groups and to cooperate and share. It's groups and to cooperate and share. It's groups and to cooperate and share. It's hard work. It's vulnerable to hard work. It's vulnerable to hard work. It's vulnerable to exploitation. And awe is one of the fastest pathways And awe is one of the fastest pathways And awe is one of the fastest pathways through what you're talking through what you're talking through what you're talking about through about through about through physical dancing together, chanting physical dancing together, chanting physical dancing together, chanting together, sporting events together, what together, sporting events together, what together, sporting events together, what Emile Durkheim called collective Emile Durkheim called collective Emile Durkheim called collective effervescence, right? Music, just effervescence, right? Music, just effervescence, right? Music, just sinking up with each other, sinking up with each other, sinking up with each other, feeling like we're part of feeling like we're part of feeling like we're part of this vast group, sharing a sense of this vast group, sharing a sense of this vast group, sharing a sense of humanity, a sense that we all suffer in the same a sense that we all suffer in the same a sense that we all suffer in the same way or exalt in the same way and way or exalt in the same way and way or exalt in the same way and it's profound, you know? I don't think it's profound, you know? I don't think it's profound, you know? I don't think we'll ever get this with science, but I we'll ever get this with science, but I we'll ever get this with science, but I love you know, love you know, love you know, you know, I've had all these you know, I've had all these you know, I've had all these conversations about awe and musical conversations about awe and musical conversations about awe and musical awe and like awe and like awe and like when's the time, and I could ask you when's the time, and I could ask you when's the time, and I could ask you this question, this question, this question, when being at a concert has changed your being at a concert has changed your being at a concert has changed your life? Oh, I mean, they're some of the life? Oh, I mean, they're some of the life? Oh, I mean, they're some of the most important and not just memorable, most important and not just memorable, most important and not just memorable, but important experiences of my entire but important experiences of my entire but important experiences of my entire life. &gt;&gt; So, tell me about one or two. My sister &gt;&gt; So, tell me about one or two. My sister &gt;&gt; So, tell me about one or two. My sister listened to the Grateful Dead and Cat listened to the Grateful Dead and Cat listened to the Grateful Dead and Cat Stevens and all that kind of stuff. Stevens and all that kind of stuff. Stevens and all that kind of stuff. Uh-huh. And from the first time Uh-huh. And from the first time Uh-huh. And from the first time I heard people immediately think bullet I heard people immediately think bullet I heard people immediately think bullet belts and mohawks, but I was I bullet belts and mohawks, but I was I bullet belts and mohawks, but I was I was a punk rock kid. I mean, I'll never was a punk rock kid. I mean, I'll never was a punk rock kid. I mean, I'll never forget like forget like forget like uh my friend, who's now well-known in uh my friend, who's now well-known in uh my friend, who's now well-known in the skateboard community, Jim Thiebaud. the skateboard community, Jim Thiebaud. the skateboard community, Jim Thiebaud. I know Jim. You know Jim? Yeah. He's a I know Jim. You know Jim? Yeah. He's a I know Jim. You know Jim? Yeah. He's a close friend of mine. I take saunas with close friend of mine. I take saunas with close friend of mine. I take saunas with Jim. Do you? Yeah. I texted with him Jim. Do you? Yeah. I texted with him Jim. Do you? Yeah. I texted with him this morning. this morning. this morning. &gt;&gt; hi. We text each other every morning. &gt;&gt; hi. We text each other every morning. &gt;&gt; hi. We text each other every morning. The great Jim Thiebaud. He basically The great Jim Thiebaud. He basically The great Jim Thiebaud. He basically runs skateboard. He's the dean of runs skateboard. He's the dean of runs skateboard. He's the dean of skateboard, the quiet dean of skateboard, the quiet dean of skateboard, the quiet dean of skateboard. He's good friends with Tommy skateboard. He's good friends with Tommy skateboard. He's good friends with Tommy Guerrero. Good friends with Tommy Guerrero. Good friends with Tommy Guerrero. Good friends with Tommy Guerrero. Uh Jim gave me Guerrero. Uh Jim gave me Guerrero. Uh Jim gave me my first cup of black coffee. He was the my first cup of black coffee. He was the my first cup of black coffee. He was the person who inspired me to uh to start person who inspired me to uh to start person who inspired me to uh to start journaling when I was 14. I was put on journaling when I was 14. I was put on journaling when I was 14. I was put on out of sympathy onto uh Thunder Trucks out of sympathy onto uh Thunder Trucks out of sympathy onto uh Thunder Trucks and he at the time he was around the and he at the time he was around the and he at the time he was around the factory, which at that time was over in factory, which at that time was over in factory, which at that time was over in Third Street where all the Third Street where all the Third Street where all the uh Hunters Point. Um on Yosemite. But uh Hunters Point. Um on Yosemite. But uh Hunters Point. Um on Yosemite. But anyway, Jim gave me a tape, cuz back anyway, Jim gave me a tape, cuz back anyway, Jim gave me a tape, cuz back then it was tapes. then it was tapes. then it was tapes. A a called Crimpshrine, which is from A a called Crimpshrine, which is from A a called Crimpshrine, which is from Berkeley. Uh-huh. Um Berkeley. Uh-huh. Um Berkeley. Uh-huh. Um and uh they were on Lookout Records, and uh they were on Lookout Records, and uh they were on Lookout Records, which eventually were first releases of which eventually were first releases of which eventually were first releases of Green Day. I wasn't so much Forgive me, Green Day. I wasn't so much Forgive me, Green Day. I wasn't so much Forgive me, I like those guys. Um I know some of I like those guys. Um I know some of I like those guys. Um I know some of them, but I was super I heard that tape. them, but I was super I heard that tape. them, but I was super I heard that tape. I was like, "This is amazing. Like this I was like, "This is amazing. Like this I was like, "This is amazing. Like this is amazing. Like I've never heard is amazing. Like I've never heard is amazing. Like I've never heard anything quite like it." It was super anything quite like it." It was super anything quite like it." It was super raw. It was um raw. It was um raw. It was um And then And then And then I was like, "I need more of this." It I was like, "I need more of this." It I was like, "I need more of this." It was like It was like a drug. I was like, was like It was like a drug. I was like, was like It was like a drug. I was like, "I need more of this. Whatever this is." "I need more of this. Whatever this is." "I need more of this. Whatever this is." And so he gave me a Stik Lok Fingers And so he gave me a Stik Lok Fingers And so he gave me a Stik Lok Fingers tape. And that was just it. And then it tape. And that was just it. And then it tape. And that was just it. And then it was Stik Lok Fingers, Operation Ivy, was Stik Lok Fingers, Operation Ivy, was Stik Lok Fingers, Operation Ivy, Rancid. I mean, I could easily like do a Rancid. I mean, I could easily like do a Rancid. I mean, I could easily like do a whole literally a thesis on that whole literally a thesis on that whole literally a thesis on that whole kind of era and genre of punk rock. I'm kind of era and genre of punk rock. I'm kind of era and genre of punk rock. I'm a huge Joe Strummer fan. Yeah. Um Heck a huge Joe Strummer fan. Yeah. Um Heck a huge Joe Strummer fan. Yeah. Um Heck yeah. Mescaleros and uh Yeah. Biggest yeah. Mescaleros and uh Yeah. Biggest yeah. Mescaleros and uh Yeah. Biggest Rancid fan there ever was. I'm blessed Rancid fan there ever was. I'm blessed Rancid fan there ever was. I'm blessed to be good friends with Tim Armstrong to be good friends with Tim Armstrong to be good friends with Tim Armstrong these days, but I only met him later in these days, but I only met him later in these days, but I only met him later in life. And that still freaks me out cuz life. And that still freaks me out cuz life. And that still freaks me out cuz we're close friends. we're close friends. we're close friends. But whenever I see him, it's still I'm But whenever I see him, it's still I'm But whenever I see him, it's still I'm like, "That's Tim Armstrong." because like, "That's Tim Armstrong." because like, "That's Tim Armstrong." because there's the four Talk about time travel. there's the four Talk about time travel. there's the four Talk about time travel. That's the 14 15-year-old version of me. That's the 14 15-year-old version of me. That's the 14 15-year-old version of me. Those guys are a bit older. They were Those guys are a bit older. They were Those guys are a bit older. They were like gods in the Bay Area for our scene, like gods in the Bay Area for our scene, like gods in the Bay Area for our scene, you know? And then when they made it, you know? And then when they made it, you know? And then when they made it, you know, and they're just still so you know, and they're just still so you know, and they're just still so good. Yeah. The show that changed good. Yeah. The show that changed good. Yeah. The show that changed everything for me was This would be everything for me was This would be everything for me was This would be summer between '93 and '94. summer between '93 and '94. summer between '93 and '94. Uh a little club It was either called Uh a little club It was either called Uh a little club It was either called the Stage House or the Stagecoach in the Stage House or the Stagecoach in the Stage House or the Stagecoach in Santa Barbara that was near the railroad Santa Barbara that was near the railroad Santa Barbara that was near the railroad tracks downtown. tracks downtown. tracks downtown. And it was um And it was um And it was um Rancid playing with Sick of It All, Rancid playing with Sick of It All, Rancid playing with Sick of It All, which was a East Coast hardcore band, which was a East Coast hardcore band, which was a East Coast hardcore band, which you know, and my now good friend you know, and my now good friend you know, and my now good friend Toby Morse was there. And I remember Toby Morse was there. And I remember Toby Morse was there. And I remember going there and being kind of scared. going there and being kind of scared. going there and being kind of scared. I mean, I'm kind of like knew my I mean, I'm kind of like knew my I mean, I'm kind of like knew my way around. Um It was just Like those way around. Um It was just Like those way around. Um It was just Like those guys were older. It was like had a kind guys were older. It was like had a kind guys were older. It was like had a kind of violent feel. They were from Albany of violent feel. They were from Albany of violent feel. They were from Albany and West Oakland and Some of Some of and West Oakland and Some of Some of and West Oakland and Some of Some of Some of There was an edge there, and I Some of There was an edge there, and I Some of There was an edge there, and I remember thinking, remember thinking, remember thinking, "This is exciting. "This is exciting. "This is exciting. I feel very much a part of this. I love I feel very much a part of this. I love I feel very much a part of this. I love the music. I know every lyric. the music. I know every lyric. the music. I know every lyric. And I'm a little bit frightened and I And I'm a little bit frightened and I And I'm a little bit frightened and I love it. love it. love it. And I think it was just that you know, And I think it was just that you know, And I think it was just that you know, the I just got the adrenaline back. the I just got the adrenaline back. the I just got the adrenaline back. And there's a little bit of you don't And there's a little bit of you don't And there's a little bit of you don't know what it is going to happen know what it is going to happen know what it is going to happen and it feels a little dangerous. and it feels a little dangerous. and it feels a little dangerous. But it's mostly benevolent. But it's mostly benevolent. But it's mostly benevolent. And um And um And um it's an irreplaceable feeling and I it's an irreplaceable feeling and I it's an irreplaceable feeling and I think about sometime think about sometime think about sometime uh I think about a lot of the time. uh I think about a lot of the time. uh I think about a lot of the time. Yeah, and you know, thank you. And I you Yeah, and you know, thank you. And I you Yeah, and you know, thank you. And I you know, when I was writing this book on know, when I was writing this book on know, when I was writing this book on awe, some forms of awe, you know, there are some forms of awe, you know, there are some forms of awe, you know, there are eight wonders that give us awe, you eight wonders that give us awe, you eight wonders that give us awe, you know, some are know, some are know, some are you kind of understand them. Nature's you kind of understand them. Nature's you kind of understand them. Nature's pretty straightforward, spirituality, pretty straightforward, spirituality, pretty straightforward, spirituality, medit- meditation, you know, and music medit- meditation, you know, and music medit- meditation, you know, and music and your description of it exactly and your description of it exactly and your description of it exactly captures exactly captures exactly captures how rich it is and complicated, which is how rich it is and complicated, which is how rich it is and complicated, which is there is something there is something there is something about that sound about that sound about that sound and the acoustic patterns that come and the acoustic patterns that come and the acoustic patterns that come through your ear drums and head into through your ear drums and head into through your ear drums and head into your auditory cortex and you give it your auditory cortex and you give it your auditory cortex and you give it meaning and suddenly you're remembering meaning and suddenly you're remembering meaning and suddenly you're remembering things and bonding with people and insta things and bonding with people and insta things and bonding with people and insta friends like you said friends like you said friends like you said for life. for life. for life. You know, brothers and sisters almost You know, brothers and sisters almost You know, brothers and sisters almost that and you're like this is what life's that and you're like this is what life's that and you're like this is what life's about. And Susan Langer about. And Susan Langer about. And Susan Langer uh a philosopher really got it right. uh a philosopher really got it right. uh a philosopher really got it right. She's like music is this tonal language She's like music is this tonal language She's like music is this tonal language of emotion and identity. of emotion and identity. of emotion and identity. And awe in music And awe in music And awe in music very fitting with our conversation is very fitting with our conversation is very fitting with our conversation is when those sounds come into you, when those sounds come into you, when those sounds come into you, move you, and connect you to something move you, and connect you to something move you, and connect you to something that is what you care about in life, you is what you care about in life, you is what you care about in life, you know? I remember I grew up I was very know? I remember I grew up I was very know? I remember I grew up I was very lucky to grow up in Laurel Canyon lucky to grow up in Laurel Canyon lucky to grow up in Laurel Canyon in the late '60s and there was more in the late '60s and there was more in the late '60s and there was more music there music there music there than I almost anywhere in human history, than I almost anywhere in human history, than I almost anywhere in human history, you know, from you know, the Mamas and you know, from you know, the Mamas and you know, from you know, the Mamas and the and Frank Zappa and Jim Morrison was the and Frank Zappa and Jim Morrison was the and Frank Zappa and Jim Morrison was out there. out there. out there. &gt;&gt; was living there and the Doors and the &gt;&gt; was living there and the Doors and the &gt;&gt; was living there and the Doors and the you know, Bob Dylan was passing through you know, Bob Dylan was passing through you know, Bob Dylan was passing through and the Byrds is a joke, you know, it and the Byrds is a joke, you know, it and the Byrds is a joke, you know, it was everywhere. was everywhere. was everywhere. That's wild just to think about how much That's wild just to think about how much That's wild just to think about how much incredible music was being created. incredible music was being created. incredible music was being created. &gt;&gt; Oh man, you know, the Beach Boys were &gt;&gt; Oh man, you know, the Beach Boys were &gt;&gt; Oh man, you know, the Beach Boys were you know, at I mean, weren't Fleetwood you know, at I mean, weren't Fleetwood you know, at I mean, weren't Fleetwood Mac back in Topanga? Mac back in Topanga? Mac back in Topanga? &gt;&gt; I mean, it was like and I was eight and &gt;&gt; I mean, it was like and I was eight and &gt;&gt; I mean, it was like and I was eight and nine and just a you know, to grow up on nine and just a you know, to grow up on nine and just a you know, to grow up on Bob Dylan Bob Dylan Bob Dylan and when I saw about the recent film and when I saw about the recent film and when I saw about the recent film with Timothy Chalamet, I start crying, with Timothy Chalamet, I start crying, with Timothy Chalamet, I start crying, you know, I was just like this is life, you know, I was just like this is life, you know, I was just like this is life, you know. Yeah, and so that's why we you know. Yeah, and so that's why we you know. Yeah, and so that's why we study awe, you know, it and you study awe, you know, it and you study awe, you know, it and you know, music is one of our great know, music is one of our great know, music is one of our great technologies. Uh there's now research showing it's Uh there's now research showing it's Uh there's now research showing it's good for chronic pain. I think it's a good for chronic pain. I think it's a good for chronic pain. I think it's a frontier in healthcare and you know, frontier in healthcare and you know, frontier in healthcare and you know, just giving people contemplative just giving people contemplative just giving people contemplative meditative approaches to music and meditative approaches to music and meditative approaches to music and awe is part of the answer. And you and awe is part of the answer. And you and awe is part of the answer. And you and I share yet another thing, Andrew. and I share yet another thing, Andrew. and I share yet another thing, Andrew. You know, when I uh grew up in the You know, when I uh grew up in the You know, when I uh grew up in the foothills of the Sierras as a teenager foothills of the Sierras as a teenager foothills of the Sierras as a teenager Ted Nugent and you know, it was poor you Ted Nugent and you know, it was poor you Ted Nugent and you know, it was poor you know, area Ted Nugent AC/DC and that's know, area Ted Nugent AC/DC and that's know, area Ted Nugent AC/DC and that's all fine. all fine. all fine. And when I first heard the Sex Pistols And when I first heard the Sex Pistols And when I first heard the Sex Pistols in I was lucky to be in England when in I was lucky to be in England when in I was lucky to be in England when Never Mind the Bollocks came out and I Never Mind the Bollocks came out and I Never Mind the Bollocks came out and I was in a working class fighting town was in a working class fighting town was in a working class fighting town and I heard that, I was like and I heard that, I was like and I heard that, I was like that's it. Yeah. And then that led me to that's it. Yeah. And then that led me to that's it. Yeah. And then that led me to Iggy Pop who's one of my moral heroes. Iggy Pop who's one of my moral heroes. Iggy Pop who's one of my moral heroes. So, you know, amazing Who's really into So, you know, amazing Who's really into So, you know, amazing Who's really into Qigong apparently. I heard [laughter] Qigong apparently. I heard [laughter] Qigong apparently. I heard [laughter] him like years ago on the radio and him like years ago on the radio and him like years ago on the radio and someone was asking him like how does he someone was asking him like how does he someone was asking him like how does he stay in such good shape and he just does stay in such good shape and he just does stay in such good shape and he just does a tons of Qigong breathing. a tons of Qigong breathing. a tons of Qigong breathing. Wild wild wild. You know, it's Wild wild wild. You know, it's Wild wild wild. You know, it's interesting because a lot of music has interesting because a lot of music has interesting because a lot of music has lyrics and a lot doesn't. Yeah, but lyrics and a lot doesn't. Yeah, but lyrics and a lot doesn't. Yeah, but there's something that feels kind of there's something that feels kind of there's something that feels kind of um divorced from language about the divorced from language about the divorced from language about the experience that we're talking about even experience that we're talking about even experience that we're talking about even though there's lyrics tied in there. And though there's lyrics tied in there. And though there's lyrics tied in there. And what brings that to mind is there's And what brings that to mind is there's And what brings that to mind is there's a really good book, one that I like, a really good book, one that I like, a really good book, one that I like, anyway, um called The Fighter's Heart by anyway, um called The Fighter's Heart by anyway, um called The Fighter's Heart by a guy named Sam Sheridan. a guy named Sam Sheridan. a guy named Sam Sheridan. His wife actually wrote that movie His wife actually wrote that movie His wife actually wrote that movie Monster uh with Charlize Theron, I think is uh with Charlize Theron, I think is uh with Charlize Theron, I think is uh the actress that played her. And um the actress that played her. And um the actress that played her. And um And I don't know Sam, but there's And I don't know Sam, but there's And I don't know Sam, but there's this description of all these different this description of all these different this description of all these different martial arts forms, and he explores them martial arts forms, and he explores them martial arts forms, and he explores them all, and um there's this great line in all, and um there's this great line in all, and um there's this great line in there, cuz I've done a little bit of there, cuz I've done a little bit of there, cuz I've done a little bit of boxing and um and sparred a bit. I don't boxing and um and sparred a bit. I don't boxing and um and sparred a bit. I don't recommend As a neuroscientist, how can I recommend As a neuroscientist, how can I recommend As a neuroscientist, how can I recommend it, right? You get hit. Oh, I recommend it, right? You get hit. Oh, I recommend it, right? You get hit. Oh, I was And that I was actually in my 30s, was And that I was actually in my 30s, was And that I was actually in my 30s, but anyway, I was working some stuff but anyway, I was working some stuff but anyway, I was working some stuff out. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; But uh do not recommend uh &gt;&gt; But uh do not recommend uh &gt;&gt; But uh do not recommend uh the sport, yeah, the training, yeah, but the sport, yeah, the training, yeah, but the sport, yeah, the training, yeah, but you don't want to get hit in the head. you don't want to get hit in the head. you don't want to get hit in the head. Not good for your brain whatsoever. But Not good for your brain whatsoever. But Not good for your brain whatsoever. But he talks about how um he talks about how um he talks about how um fighting with someone, sparring, or fighting with someone, sparring, or fighting with someone, sparring, or fighting with someone is uh fighting with someone is uh fighting with someone is uh he said it's like a he said it's like a he said it's like a it's one of the most bonding experiences it's one of the most bonding experiences it's one of the most bonding experiences that you'll ever have, because you're in that you'll ever have, because you're in that you'll ever have, because you're in this primitive, non-language state. this primitive, non-language state. this primitive, non-language state. Yeah. I mean, he actually likens it to a Yeah. I mean, he actually likens it to a Yeah. I mean, he actually likens it to a one-night stand. He says something like, one-night stand. He says something like, one-night stand. He says something like, uh you know, you're sharing bodily uh you know, you're sharing bodily uh you know, you're sharing bodily fluids with somebody that you barely fluids with somebody that you barely fluids with somebody that you barely know, but you feel connected, you know, but you feel connected, you know, but you feel connected, you know? So, I don't know if that's the know? So, I don't know if that's the know? So, I don't know if that's the best It's certainly not the most best It's certainly not the most best It's certainly not the most politically correct uh way to put it, politically correct uh way to put it, politically correct uh way to put it, but I understand what he's talking but I understand what he's talking but I understand what he's talking about, right? You You're in this about, right? You You're in this about, right? You You're in this moment of you're both vulnerable. Yeah. moment of you're both vulnerable. Yeah. moment of you're both vulnerable. Yeah. In the case of the fighting, you're both In the case of the fighting, you're both In the case of the fighting, you're both vulnerable, you're trying to hurt each vulnerable, you're trying to hurt each vulnerable, you're trying to hurt each other. You're also obeying some rules. You're also obeying some rules. You're also obeying some rules. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right, it's not anything goes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right, it's not anything goes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right, it's not anything goes. And he talks about how it transcends And he talks about how it transcends And he talks about how it transcends language, yeah, and that creates a language, yeah, and that creates a language, yeah, and that creates a forever bond. forever bond. forever bond. And it's true, right? Didn't do a ton of And it's true, right? Didn't do a ton of And it's true, right? Didn't do a ton of sparring, but you have a respect. Yep. sparring, but you have a respect. Yep. sparring, but you have a respect. Yep. You went through something hard You went through something hard You went through something hard together, even if it's only three together, even if it's only three together, even if it's only three three-minute rounds. three-minute rounds. three-minute rounds. Like that's it it's that's it it's that's it it's real. But it's separate from language. real. But it's separate from language. real. But it's separate from language. And earlier we were talking about the And earlier we were talking about the And earlier we were talking about the exper- the experience of emotion exper- the experience of emotion exper- the experience of emotion uh this kind of triad of the feeling, this kind of triad of the feeling, this kind of triad of the feeling, the motor component to it, and language, the motor component to it, and language, the motor component to it, and language, but I do think that maybe the language but I do think that maybe the language but I do think that maybe the language piece can go. I'm with you in some piece can go. I'm with you in some piece can go. I'm with you in some sense. Darwin wrote about the motor sense. Darwin wrote about the motor sense. Darwin wrote about the motor components, got a lot of it right. components, got a lot of it right. components, got a lot of it right. William James was about the body, you William James was about the body, you William James was about the body, you know, and the physiology, and know, and the physiology, and know, and the physiology, and you know, you know, you know, language is what we rely on as social language is what we rely on as social language is what we rely on as social scientists, but it I think it's as scientists, but it I think it's as scientists, but it I think it's as William James said when he tried to William James said when he tried to William James said when he tried to describe his experience of transcendence describe his experience of transcendence describe his experience of transcendence when he took laughing gas and it led him when he took laughing gas and it led him when he took laughing gas and it led him down the path to understand down the path to understand down the path to understand spirituality. He's like, "Words are spirituality. He's like, "Words are spirituality. He's like, "Words are tattered fragments. They barely tattered fragments. They barely tattered fragments. They barely touch the real thing." the real thing." the real thing." Yeah, and I just want to dwell for a Yeah, and I just want to dwell for a Yeah, and I just want to dwell for a moment, you know, moment, you know, moment, you know, part of awe, part of awe, part of awe, and I learned this like talking to and I learned this like talking to and I learned this like talking to veterans, you know, and I did work veterans, you know, and I did work veterans, you know, and I did work with Stacy Bear, and we did this Sierra with Stacy Bear, and we did this Sierra with Stacy Bear, and we did this Sierra Club research getting veterans out on Club research getting veterans out on Club research getting veterans out on the rivers, and he's one of my heroes in the rivers, and he's one of my heroes in the rivers, and he's one of my heroes in the book the book the book of getting tens of thousands of veterans of getting tens of thousands of veterans of getting tens of thousands of veterans to find their awe in nature, you know, to find their awe in nature, you know, to find their awe in nature, you know, and these are guys and these are guys and these are guys who've lost limbs and they're rock who've lost limbs and they're rock who've lost limbs and they're rock climbing, you know, and it's just like climbing, you know, and it's just like climbing, you know, and it's just like there's a lot of awe when you're like there's a lot of awe when you're like there's a lot of awe when you're right at the edge of life, and there's right at the edge of life, and there's right at the edge of life, and there's violence, and there's a lot of violence, and there's a lot of violence, and there's a lot of horror, carnage, etc., but there's awe. carnage, etc., but there's awe. carnage, etc., but there's awe. And I love your idea, and I think And I love your idea, and I think And I love your idea, and I think any teacher of the martial arts would say teacher of the martial arts would say teacher of the martial arts would say that's the point. that's the point. that's the point. Is that we can transcend death or Is that we can transcend death or Is that we can transcend death or violence by violence by violence by martial arts, by performing them, and martial arts, by performing them, and martial arts, by performing them, and putting them into putting them into putting them into a contemplative form for the body. a contemplative form for the body. a contemplative form for the body. One of my favorite movies, if not my One of my favorite movies, if not my One of my favorite movies, if not my favorite movie, is favorite movie, is favorite movie, is Raging Bull, man, and Martin Scorsese, Raging Bull, man, and Martin Scorsese, Raging Bull, man, and Martin Scorsese, like Jake LaMotta and Sugar Ray Jake LaMotta and Sugar Ray Jake LaMotta and Sugar Ray have these epic battles, and they look have these epic battles, and they look have these epic battles, and they look at each other, at each other, at each other, you know, in one of the great scenes, you know, in one of the great scenes, you know, in one of the great scenes, and they're just like, and they're just like, and they're just like, "We're united. This is all we're way "We're united. This is all we're way "We're united. This is all we're way beyond the fight, you know? I think you're the fight, you know? I think you're the fight, you know? I think you're right. I think it's right. I think it's right. I think it's part of part of part of this transcendent moment that of this transcendent moment that of this transcendent moment that of people crashing into each other. Mosh people crashing into each other. Mosh people crashing into each other. Mosh pits. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; They are one of my favorite objects of &gt;&gt; They are one of my favorite objects of &gt;&gt; They are one of my favorite objects of study and awe and mosh pits have a law a study and awe and mosh pits have a law a study and awe and mosh pits have a law a set of laws to them. set of laws to them. set of laws to them. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah, people will study like the &gt;&gt; Yeah, people will study like the &gt;&gt; Yeah, people will study like the sort of the physics of it. Yeah, I know. sort of the physics of it. Yeah, I know. sort of the physics of it. Yeah, I know. It's like and you think you're crashing It's like and you think you're crashing It's like and you think you're crashing you are. You're bruising yourself, you are. You're bruising yourself, you are. You're bruising yourself, you know? But there's something transcendent know? But there's something transcendent know? But there's something transcendent there about what we find. there about what we find. there about what we find. I could be wrong, but I think um Raging I could be wrong, but I think um Raging I could be wrong, but I think um Raging Bull, I think that the soundtrack was Bull, I think that the soundtrack was Bull, I think that the soundtrack was Clash inspired. There's something about Clash inspired. There's something about Clash inspired. There's something about it in the documentary which I highly it in the documentary which I highly it in the documentary which I highly recommend uh called The Future Is recommend uh called The Future Is recommend uh called The Future Is Unwritten which is about the Joe Unwritten which is about the Joe Unwritten which is about the Joe Strummer thing where some there's some Strummer thing where some there's some Strummer thing where some there's some link up between The Clash. I think link up between The Clash. I think link up between The Clash. I think Scorsese says, you know, The Clash Scorsese says, you know, The Clash Scorsese says, you know, The Clash inspired the soundtrack to Raging Bull inspired the soundtrack to Raging Bull inspired the soundtrack to Raging Bull or something like that. Anyway, he's a or something like that. Anyway, he's a or something like that. Anyway, he's a big Clash fan, so um or yeah. All right, big Clash fan, so um or yeah. All right, big Clash fan, so um or yeah. All right, Andrew, I get to ask you one more Andrew, I get to ask you one more Andrew, I get to ask you one more question. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. So, why is Joe Strummer a &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. So, why is Joe Strummer a &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. So, why is Joe Strummer a person of moral beauty to you? One of person of moral beauty to you? One of person of moral beauty to you? One of the sources of awe the sources of awe the sources of awe is we're amazed by people's courage and is we're amazed by people's courage and is we're amazed by people's courage and strength and kindness and justice. So, strength and kindness and justice. So, strength and kindness and justice. So, why Joe Strummer? why Joe Strummer? why Joe Strummer? Oof, man. [snorts] All right, I'm going Oof, man. [snorts] All right, I'm going Oof, man. [snorts] All right, I'm going to try and keep this brief. to try and keep this brief. to try and keep this brief. Um I mean, just to give you a sense of how I mean, just to give you a sense of how I mean, just to give you a sense of how what an impact he's had on me. I how what an impact he's had on me. I how what an impact he's had on me. I mean, I've always worn these button-down mean, I've always worn these button-down mean, I've always worn these button-down black shirts even before I was public black shirts even before I was public black shirts even before I was public facing um cuz I saw him do a show um cuz I saw him do a show um cuz I saw him do a show uh Mescaleros show. I wasn't there, but uh Mescaleros show. I wasn't there, but uh Mescaleros show. I wasn't there, but he By the way, Joe Strummer and the By the way, Joe Strummer and the By the way, Joe Strummer and the Mescaleros I actually think is better Mescaleros I actually think is better Mescaleros I actually think is better than The Clash. Wow. Clash was a short than The Clash. Wow. Clash was a short than The Clash. Wow. Clash was a short run. It was only 5 years. run. It was only 5 years. run. It was only 5 years. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Only 5 years pretty much and then &gt;&gt; Yeah. Only 5 years pretty much and then &gt;&gt; Yeah. Only 5 years pretty much and then they're done. So, it's one of the they're done. So, it's one of the they're done. So, it's one of the winners Clash and then and then he came winners Clash and then and then he came winners Clash and then and then he came back with the Mescaleros and just back with the Mescaleros and just back with the Mescaleros and just incredible I mean, they're masterpieces. incredible I mean, they're masterpieces. incredible I mean, they're masterpieces. Yeah. Produced in part by my friend Tim Yeah. Produced in part by my friend Tim Yeah. Produced in part by my friend Tim Armstrong. He won at Hellcat Records. He Armstrong. He won at Hellcat Records. He Armstrong. He won at Hellcat Records. He went to a small label. went to a small label. went to a small label. Um he also sang songs with Johnny Cash Um he also sang songs with Johnny Cash Um he also sang songs with Johnny Cash for where with Rick Rubin. I actually for where with Rick Rubin. I actually for where with Rick Rubin. I actually know the story of that cuz I'm friends know the story of that cuz I'm friends know the story of that cuz I'm friends with Rick and I insisted on him telling with Rick and I insisted on him telling with Rick and I insisted on him telling me the story. So sometime I can tell you me the story. So sometime I can tell you me the story. So sometime I can tell you that, but I mean masterpieces late in that, but I mean masterpieces late in that, but I mean masterpieces late in life. And there was a show that life. And there was a show that life. And there was a show that Strummer played where he was wearing his Strummer played where he was wearing his Strummer played where he was wearing his black button-down soaking in sweat like black button-down soaking in sweat like black button-down soaking in sweat like soaked in sweat. And he just wouldn't soaked in sweat. And he just wouldn't soaked in sweat. And he just wouldn't take the thing off. I think he might take the thing off. I think he might take the thing off. I think he might have rolled up like one cuff. And I was have rolled up like one cuff. And I was have rolled up like one cuff. And I was like, that's punk as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I was like, that's punk as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I was like, that's punk as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I was [laughter] like, that guy is so rad. And [laughter] like, that guy is so rad. And [laughter] like, that guy is so rad. And he was in and he died at 50. Where the he was in and he died at 50. Where the he was in and he died at 50. Where the I'm 50 now. I'm 50 now. I'm 50 now. He died at 50. I go see the mural of him He died at 50. I go see the mural of him He died at 50. I go see the mural of him right off right off right off It's right off Tompkins Square Park It's right off Tompkins Square Park It's right off Tompkins Square Park in Alphabet City every time I'm in New in Alphabet City every time I'm in New in Alphabet City every time I'm in New York. Just go like see it. The aviator York. Just go like see it. The aviator York. Just go like see it. The aviator says future is unwritten. You can go says future is unwritten. You can go says future is unwritten. You can go there pay your respects. I've talked to there pay your respects. I've talked to there pay your respects. I've talked to Rick about this a lot. Like what was it Rick about this a lot. Like what was it Rick about this a lot. Like what was it about him? Yeah. about him? Yeah. about him? Yeah. Cuz they were close friends. I never met Cuz they were close friends. I never met Cuz they were close friends. I never met Strummer. But I think But I think But I think there's three reasons. One is he had there's three reasons. One is he had there's three reasons. One is he had that Bob Dylan-like ability to write that Bob Dylan-like ability to write that Bob Dylan-like ability to write lyrics that you're not especially with lyrics that you're not especially with lyrics that you're not especially with Mescaleros where you're not really sure Mescaleros where you're not really sure Mescaleros where you're not really sure what the song is about, but it makes what the song is about, but it makes what the song is about, but it makes sense not just because it's beautiful, sense not just because it's beautiful, sense not just because it's beautiful, but you feel like he's tapping into but you feel like he's tapping into but you feel like he's tapping into something more fundamental than what the something more fundamental than what the something more fundamental than what the lyrics actually saying. lyrics actually saying. lyrics actually saying. A great song A great song A great song for instance would be like on the road for instance would be like on the road for instance would be like on the road to rock and roll. Like it that could be to rock and roll. Like it that could be to rock and roll. Like it that could be about being on tour or something, but it about being on tour or something, but it about being on tour or something, but it transcends something obvious. Nice. The transcends something obvious. Nice. The transcends something obvious. Nice. The other thing is the way he used his other thing is the way he used his other thing is the way he used his breath was um was um was um like there's a his intonation is like there's a his intonation is like there's a his intonation is like unparalleled. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then Rick was the one who &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then Rick was the one who &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then Rick was the one who really helped me understand cuz really helped me understand cuz really helped me understand cuz during the summer I go hang out with during the summer I go hang out with during the summer I go hang out with Rick whenever I can. And uh winter too. Rick whenever I can. And uh winter too. Rick whenever I can. And uh winter too. Um and we watch documentaries including and we watch documentaries including and we watch documentaries including Clash documentaries. And I asked him I Clash documentaries. And I asked him I Clash documentaries. And I asked him I was like, what was it? Like why does he was like, what was it? Like why does he was like, what was it? Like why does he have this thing? Cuz he says these have this thing? Cuz he says these have this thing? Cuz he says these incredible things. You know, he would incredible things. You know, he would incredible things. You know, he would say things like, you know, you got to say things like, you know, you got to say things like, you know, you got to bring humanity back into the center of bring humanity back into the center of bring humanity back into the center of the And those are really beautiful the And those are really beautiful the And those are really beautiful quotes, but like a lot of people will quotes, but like a lot of people will quotes, but like a lot of people will give beautiful quotes. give beautiful quotes. give beautiful quotes. And Rick, in very Rick Rubin style, said And Rick, in very Rick Rubin style, said And Rick, in very Rick Rubin style, said "Everything he said, he brought his "Everything he said, he brought his "Everything he said, he brought his whole life experience into those whole life experience into those whole life experience into those statements." And I was like, "Just the statements? And I was like, "Just the statements? And I was like, "Just the statements? Like the quotes? You know, like the you Like the quotes? You know, like the you Like the quotes? You know, like the you know, we got to bring the humanity back know, we got to bring the humanity back know, we got to bring the humanity back into the And he goes, "No, everything he into the And he goes, "No, everything he into the And he goes, "No, everything he said." It was like you got the sense said." It was like you got the sense said." It was like you got the sense that he was bringing all of himself to that he was bringing all of himself to that he was bringing all of himself to it. Even if he was being kind of quiet. it. Even if he was being kind of quiet. it. Even if he was being kind of quiet. &gt;&gt; That's cool. And I go, "Okay, so this is &gt;&gt; That's cool. And I go, "Okay, so this is &gt;&gt; That's cool. And I go, "Okay, so this is clearly on a plane of understanding that clearly on a plane of understanding that clearly on a plane of understanding that I can't put language to, right?" What I can't put language to, right?" What I can't put language to, right?" What does that even mean? does that even mean? does that even mean? That's like half the things Rick says. That's like half the things Rick says. That's like half the things Rick says. It's like a riddle It's like a riddle It's like a riddle mixed up in a poem, you know, put out mixed up in a poem, you know, put out mixed up in a poem, you know, put out there as you know, there as you know, there as you know, as like a as a principle and you're just as like a as a principle and you're just as like a as a principle and you're just like, "What the hell is that mean?" But like, "What the hell is that mean?" But like, "What the hell is that mean?" But [laughter] but it feels true. [laughter] but it feels true. [laughter] but it feels true. And I think that, you know, in Rick's And I think that, you know, in Rick's And I think that, you know, in Rick's superpower is that Rick superpower is that Rick superpower is that Rick knows what a true feeling feels like. knows what a true feeling feels like. knows what a true feeling feels like. And he knows what a false feeling feels And he knows what a false feeling feels And he knows what a false feeling feels like. And he's only interested in like. And he's only interested in like. And he's only interested in truths. Period. And that's the challenge of the Period. And that's the challenge of the Period. And that's the challenge of the science that I'm part of is exactly science that I'm part of is exactly science that I'm part of is exactly that. It's like there are all these that. It's like there are all these that. It's like there are all these layers of meaning and representation and layers of meaning and representation and layers of meaning and representation and you know, and we try to figure out true you know, and we try to figure out true you know, and we try to figure out true moments of awe with all of our measures moments of awe with all of our measures moments of awe with all of our measures and it is this like it's all coming and it is this like it's all coming and it is this like it's all coming together as a together as a together as a uh a package that tells us it's happened. a package that tells us it's happened. a package that tells us it's happened. So, we can think about things that So, we can think about things that So, we can think about things that promote awe. The awe walk. promote awe. The awe walk. promote awe. The awe walk. Going small to large aperture, maybe Going small to large aperture, maybe Going small to large aperture, maybe back again. back again. back again. You know, like I guess we shouldn't You know, like I guess we shouldn't You know, like I guess we shouldn't assume that it's a unidirectional. assume that it's a unidirectional. assume that it's a unidirectional. You know, coming back into our home You know, coming back into our home You know, coming back into our home after something big is there's nothing after something big is there's nothing after something big is there's nothing like that, right? The dog, the kids, the like that, right? The dog, the kids, the like that, right? The dog, the kids, the spouse, the whatever, you know, the spouse, the whatever, you know, the spouse, the whatever, you know, like the those little things, like the those little things, like the those little things, like plants, you know, you know, the plants, you know, you know, the plants, you know, you know, the you know, so it runs both ways. It's no you know, so it runs both ways. It's no you know, so it runs both ways. It's no fun, but we should probably talk about fun, but we should probably talk about fun, but we should probably talk about some of the inhibitors of awe. some of the inhibitors of awe. some of the inhibitors of awe. Because as I step back from what we're Because as I step back from what we're Because as I step back from what we're talking about today and I think, "Okay, talking about today and I think, "Okay, talking about today and I think, "Okay, language." It can be part of it, but it can also in It can be part of it, but it can also in It can be part of it, but it can also in uh molecular biology or genetics we call uh molecular biology or genetics we call uh molecular biology or genetics we call it a dominant negative. It's like a gene it a dominant negative. It's like a gene it a dominant negative. It's like a gene that basically suppresses a set of that basically suppresses a set of that basically suppresses a set of functions. And there's a joke around molecular labs And there's a joke around molecular labs And there's a joke around molecular labs and neuroscience labs that you'd be like and neuroscience labs that you'd be like and neuroscience labs that you'd be like that person's a dominant negative, you that person's a dominant negative, you that person's a dominant negative, you know. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I now have a new phrase I can use. &gt;&gt; I now have a new phrase I can use. &gt;&gt; I now have a new phrase I can use. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, you don't want to be called &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, you don't want to be called &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, you don't want to be called a dominant negative. I call people that a dominant negative. I call people that a dominant negative. I call people that in my head a lot online. I go, "Oh man, in my head a lot online. I go, "Oh man, in my head a lot online. I go, "Oh man, that person's a dominant negative. that person's a dominant negative. that person's a dominant negative. They're not contributing to the greater They're not contributing to the greater They're not contributing to the greater good. They're just like" So, there's good. They're just like" So, there's good. They're just like" So, there's you know, language can be that you know, language can be that you know, language can be that or be neutral or be positive, but it can or be neutral or be positive, but it can or be neutral or be positive, but it can definitely be that. And then definitely be that. And then definitely be that. And then there's something about being there's something about being there's something about being over-identified with self. over-identified with self. over-identified with self. You know, I so You know, I so You know, I so on the recommendation of Tim Armstrong, on the recommendation of Tim Armstrong, on the recommendation of Tim Armstrong, someone you wouldn't associate with the someone you wouldn't associate with the someone you wouldn't associate with the Grateful Dead, he was like, "You got to Grateful Dead, he was like, "You got to Grateful Dead, he was like, "You got to listen to the Grateful Dead." And I was listen to the Grateful Dead." And I was listen to the Grateful Dead." And I was like, "What like, "What like, "What What?" This is Tim the Tim Armstrong, What?" This is Tim the Tim Armstrong, What?" This is Tim the Tim Armstrong, Transplants, Rancid, Operation Ivy Transplants, Rancid, Operation Ivy Transplants, Rancid, Operation Ivy telling me I should listen to Grateful telling me I should listen to Grateful telling me I should listen to Grateful Dead. He's big He's a huge music fan of Dead. He's big He's a huge music fan of Dead. He's big He's a huge music fan of all sorts of things. all sorts of things. all sorts of things. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I said, "Why?" I said, "Why?" I said, "Why?" And he said, uh And he said, uh And he said, uh He said, "They're punk rockers." And I He said, "They're punk rockers." And I He said, "They're punk rockers." And I said, "What are you talking about?" And said, "What are you talking about?" And said, "What are you talking about?" And he said He said, "Yeah, they played he said He said, "Yeah, they played he said He said, "Yeah, they played a different show every night." a different show every night." a different show every night." That's how they're I'm not going to keep That's how they're I'm not going to keep That's how they're I'm not going to keep doing his I can do a pretty decent Tim doing his I can do a pretty decent Tim doing his I can do a pretty decent Tim for those uh but for those uh but for those uh but apparently they're the people that apparently they're the people that apparently they're the people that followed them, that was a big part of followed them, that was a big part of followed them, that was a big part of it. It was all new, right? it. It was all new, right? it. It was all new, right? &gt;&gt; Every show was unique. Started getting &gt;&gt; Every show was unique. Started getting &gt;&gt; Every show was unique. Started getting really into listening to the Grateful really into listening to the Grateful really into listening to the Grateful Dead in the last couple years, and then Dead in the last couple years, and then Dead in the last couple years, and then I started listening to I started listening to I started listening to documentaries, biographies of them. And documentaries, biographies of them. And documentaries, biographies of them. And there's this amazing moment in one of there's this amazing moment in one of there's this amazing moment in one of them, I can't remember which, where them, I can't remember which, where them, I can't remember which, where somebody says, "What somebody says, "What somebody says, "What killed it? What killed the collective of killed it? What killed the collective of killed it? What killed the collective of music?" Like that feeling. music?" Like that feeling. music?" Like that feeling. The answer someone gave was The answer someone gave was The answer someone gave was cocaine. And then the question was, "Why And then the question was, "Why And then the question was, "Why cocaine?" &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. And someone said, "Cuz cocaine's all And someone said, "Cuz cocaine's all And someone said, "Cuz cocaine's all about me. It's the me drug." me. It's the me drug." me. It's the me drug." &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I was like, "Whoa, I'm a So, I was like, "Whoa, I'm a So, I was like, "Whoa, I'm a neuroscientist, so I can tack that to neuroscientist, so I can tack that to neuroscientist, so I can tack that to You're talking about dopamine and You're talking about dopamine and You're talking about dopamine and adrenaline. And it's when dopamine and adrenaline And it's when dopamine and adrenaline And it's when dopamine and adrenaline are elevated, that's a very I mean, are elevated, that's a very I mean, are elevated, that's a very I mean, amphetamines, especially, Yeah. it's it amphetamines, especially, Yeah. it's it amphetamines, especially, Yeah. it's it becomes a me thing. Every idea that's becomes a me thing. Every idea that's becomes a me thing. Every idea that's &gt;&gt; mine is the thing that needs to happen. &gt;&gt; mine is the thing that needs to happen. &gt;&gt; mine is the thing that needs to happen. It's the important thing. If not out It's the important thing. If not out It's the important thing. If not out there, it needs to happen like that's there, it needs to happen like that's there, it needs to happen like that's the only thing that matters. the only thing that matters. the only thing that matters. Very different than cannabis, very Very different than cannabis, very Very different than cannabis, very different than psychedelics, very different than psychedelics, very different than psychedelics, very different than just the sober different than just the sober different than just the sober experience. Where it's kind of a downer, experience. Where it's kind of a downer, experience. Where it's kind of a downer, but then the non-intoxicated experience but then the non-intoxicated experience but then the non-intoxicated experience of just being with the music, no of just being with the music, no of just being with the music, no substances. So, I'd love your thoughts on how I'd love your thoughts on how I'd love your thoughts on how certain chemical states, and but more certain chemical states, and but more certain chemical states, and but more broadly, how meanness, self-interested broadly, how meanness, self-interested broadly, how meanness, self-interested states, are a dominant negative for us. That was are a dominant negative for us. That was are a dominant negative for us. That was the best entrance into that question the best entrance into that question the best entrance into that question I've ever encountered. You know, it's I've ever encountered. You know, it's I've ever encountered. You know, it's amazing, Andrew. amazing, Andrew. amazing, Andrew. You know, You know, You know, I grew up for 3 years, formative years, I grew up for 3 years, formative years, I grew up for 3 years, formative years, in Laurel Canyon, '68 to '70, and then in Laurel Canyon, '68 to '70, and then in Laurel Canyon, '68 to '70, and then we moved to the foothills of the Sierras we moved to the foothills of the Sierras we moved to the foothills of the Sierras in Northern California. And it was peak in Northern California. And it was peak in Northern California. And it was peak Laurel Canyon, Joni Mitchell and The Laurel Canyon, Joni Mitchell and The Laurel Canyon, Joni Mitchell and The Byrds and The Beach Boys and, you know, Byrds and The Beach Boys and, you know, Byrds and The Beach Boys and, you know, it was just it was just it was just &gt;&gt; Jealous. Yeah, it was incredible. &gt;&gt; Jealous. Yeah, it was incredible. &gt;&gt; Jealous. Yeah, it was incredible. &gt;&gt; Envious in a positive way. When my &gt;&gt; Envious in a positive way. When my &gt;&gt; Envious in a positive way. When my brother passed away and he was my brother passed away and he was my brother passed away and he was my brother of all, brother of all, brother of all, you know, 14 months younger, and you know, 14 months younger, and you know, 14 months younger, and I was in this reflective period, I was in this reflective period, I was in this reflective period, I started reading a lot about Laurel started reading a lot about Laurel started reading a lot about Laurel Canyon, and they made the same point, which is and they made the same point, which is and they made the same point, which is kind of things shifted after we, you kind of things shifted after we, you kind of things shifted after we, you know, in the early '70s, and the know, in the early '70s, and the know, in the early '70s, and the historian said it's cocaine. historian said it's cocaine. historian said it's cocaine. That it moved from, That it moved from, That it moved from, you know, you know, you know, marijuana and marijuana and marijuana and mushrooms and psychedelics a bit, but mushrooms and psychedelics a bit, but mushrooms and psychedelics a bit, but really, you know, people playing music, really, you know, people playing music, really, you know, people playing music, you know, Joni Mitchell or you know, Joni Mitchell or you know, Joni Mitchell or Graham Nash or whomever it is, and then Graham Nash or whomever it is, and then Graham Nash or whomever it is, and then suddenly cocaine comes, and the suddenly cocaine comes, and the suddenly cocaine comes, and the whole spirit changed. whole spirit changed. whole spirit changed. Yeah, I think the great enemy of awe is Yeah, I think the great enemy of awe is Yeah, I think the great enemy of awe is meanness, is what Ralph Waldo Emerson, meanness, is what Ralph Waldo Emerson, meanness, is what Ralph Waldo Emerson, who was one of our great writers of awe, who was one of our great writers of awe, who was one of our great writers of awe, you know, he has this moment out in you know, he has this moment out in you know, he has this moment out in nature, cold day in Massachusetts, sees nature, cold day in Massachusetts, sees nature, cold day in Massachusetts, sees this forest, and he, you know, he's this forest, and he, you know, he's this forest, and he, you know, he's like, "Standing on the bare ground, like, "Standing on the bare ground, like, "Standing on the bare ground, my head bathed by there, and uplifted my head bathed by there, and uplifted my head bathed by there, and uplifted into infinite space." There's that into infinite space." There's that into infinite space." There's that uplift that you described earlier of uplift that you described earlier of uplift that you described earlier of awe. Uh all mean egotism vanishes. Uh all mean egotism vanishes. Uh all mean egotism vanishes. And that's awe, you know, awe quiets the And that's awe, you know, awe quiets the And that's awe, you know, awe quiets the self. And when you look at where we are, you And when you look at where we are, you And when you look at where we are, you know, Jean Twenge, you know, Jean Twenge, you know, Jean Twenge, you know, longitudinal data, longitudinal data, longitudinal data, we're more self-focused, you know, we're more self-focused, you know, we're more self-focused, you know, we're taking a quarter of the pictures that we taking a quarter of the pictures that we taking a quarter of the pictures that we take are of the self. It's a It's take are of the self. It's a It's take are of the self. It's a It's preposterous. It's pretty crazy. It's preposterous. It's pretty crazy. It's preposterous. It's pretty crazy. It's half of the photos we take are of the half of the photos we take are of the half of the photos we take are of the self or the self with another person or self or the self with another person or self or the self with another person or another thing. It's perverse, you know, another thing. It's perverse, you know, another thing. It's perverse, you know, uh the world has become more uh the world has become more uh the world has become more narcissistic. We're led by narcissists. narcissistic. We're led by narcissists. narcissistic. We're led by narcissists. It's been, you know, it's just taken as It's been, you know, it's just taken as It's been, you know, it's just taken as a default, and it's not a default. It's a default, and it's not a default. It's a default, and it's not a default. It's a It's a corruption of our minds. a It's a corruption of our minds. a It's a corruption of our minds. Because the mind, as you described Because the mind, as you described Because the mind, as you described earlier, is very good at looking at earlier, is very good at looking at earlier, is very good at looking at other people, at making eye contact, at other people, at making eye contact, at other people, at making eye contact, at seeing their beauty, at hearing their seeing their beauty, at hearing their seeing their beauty, at hearing their words, at looking at collectives, words, at looking at collectives, words, at looking at collectives, discerning patterns of nature, discerning patterns of nature, discerning patterns of nature, collectives. And all of that works against awe, And all of that works against awe, And all of that works against awe, right? That, you know, if I right? That, you know, if I right? That, you know, if I uh am focused on myself, I'll feel less am focused on myself, I'll feel less am focused on myself, I'll feel less awe. If I uh awe. If I uh awe. If I uh am worried about my striving in society am worried about my striving in society am worried about my striving in society or my bottom line of my bank or my bottom line of my bank or my bottom line of my bank account, you know, or thinking about account, you know, or thinking about account, you know, or thinking about money, it countervails awe. So, yeah, I money, it countervails awe. So, yeah, I money, it countervails awe. So, yeah, I think, you know, that's why awe is I think, you know, that's why awe is I think, you know, that's why awe is important for our times. We are in this important for our times. We are in this important for our times. We are in this for various reasons this period of for various reasons this period of for various reasons this period of too much self-focus. too much self-focus. too much self-focus. Uh it's costing young people. It makes Uh it's costing young people. It makes Uh it's costing young people. It makes them anxious, you know? And they got to them anxious, you know? And they got to them anxious, you know? And they got to they got to they got to they got to they got to go dance, they got to hear they got to go dance, they got to hear they got to go dance, they got to hear some music, they got to share stuff, and some music, they got to share stuff, and some music, they got to share stuff, and go backpacking or whatever it is, you go backpacking or whatever it is, you go backpacking or whatever it is, you know, and just to get out of the self. know, and just to get out of the self. know, and just to get out of the self. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of your bodily health. your bodily health. your bodily health. This snapshot gives insights into your This snapshot gives insights into your This snapshot gives insights into your heart health, hormone health, autoimmune heart health, hormone health, autoimmune heart health, hormone health, autoimmune function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, it also analyzes these mental health, it also analyzes these mental health, it also analyzes these results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with Function, I learned that some of my Function, I learned that some of my Function, I learned that some of my blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start supplementing with nattokinase, which supplementing with nattokinase, which supplementing with nattokinase, which can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL cholesterol, and it did. In a follow-up cholesterol, and it did. In a follow-up cholesterol, and it did. In a follow-up test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back where I want them, in range. where I want them, in range. where I want them, in range. Comprehensive lab testing of the sort Comprehensive lab testing of the sort Comprehensive lab testing of the sort that Function offers is so important for that Function offers is so important for that Function offers is so important for health, and while I've been doing it for health, and while I've been doing it for health, and while I've been doing it for years, it's always been overly years, it's always been overly years, it's always been overly complicated and expensive. But now with complicated and expensive. But now with complicated and expensive. But now with Function, it's extremely easy and Function, it's extremely easy and Function, it's extremely easy and affordable. To learn more, visit affordable. To learn more, visit affordable. To learn more, visit functionhealth.com/huberman and use the code Huberman for a $50 and use the code Huberman for a $50 and use the code Huberman for a $50 credit towards your membership. The credit towards your membership. The credit towards your membership. The example you gave of sports earlier, I example you gave of sports earlier, I example you gave of sports earlier, I think is an important one, um only think is an important one, um only think is an important one, um only because I think some people not me, but because I think some people not me, but because I think some people not me, but some people will like, all right, I some people will like, all right, I some people will like, all right, I don't really want to go camping or don't really want to go camping or don't really want to go camping or backpacking. I do. I spend as much time backpacking. I do. I spend as much time backpacking. I do. I spend as much time in Yosemite as I can. The dancing, in Yosemite as I can. The dancing, in Yosemite as I can. The dancing, concert, you know, maybe that's not for concert, you know, maybe that's not for concert, you know, maybe that's not for them. I do think I'm not a big them. I do think I'm not a big them. I do think I'm not a big professional sports fan. Um professional sports fan. Um professional sports fan. Um &gt;&gt; I like a few things, but it is &gt;&gt; I like a few things, but it is &gt;&gt; I like a few things, but it is kind of interesting to put this lens on kind of interesting to put this lens on kind of interesting to put this lens on like when I see a game, one of our like when I see a game, one of our like when I see a game, one of our members of our podcast team that's not members of our podcast team that's not members of our podcast team that's not here today is like just here today is like just here today is like just obsessively excited about professional obsessively excited about professional obsessively excited about professional football and uh Seattle Seahawks. So, football and uh Seattle Seahawks. So, football and uh Seattle Seahawks. So, this is a good year for him. And I have this is a good year for him. And I have this is a good year for him. And I have to believe that when he goes to believe that when he goes to believe that when he goes to see his favorite team play in the to see his favorite team play in the to see his favorite team play in the Super Bowl and win the Super Bowl Super Bowl and win the Super Bowl Super Bowl and win the Super Bowl that it's not just about his that it's not just about his that it's not just about his relationship to the team. It's about relationship to the team. It's about relationship to the team. It's about It's about being a kid and It's about being a kid and It's about being a kid and everyone else there in a and everyone else there in a and everyone else there in a Seahawks jersey is like they have They Seahawks jersey is like they have They Seahawks jersey is like they have They must feel a connection. They Because must feel a connection. They Because must feel a connection. They Because they presumably the super fans know that they presumably the super fans know that they presumably the super fans know that the other super fans know the history. the other super fans know the history. the other super fans know the history. They know how important this is. They know how important this is. They know how important this is. They know all the trials and tribulations of know all the trials and tribulations of know all the trials and tribulations of the team and on and on. And so, it's um the team and on and on. And so, it's um the team and on and on. And so, it's um gosh, it's so different. I'm just gosh, it's so different. I'm just gosh, it's so different. I'm just realizing like it's the It's the realizing like it's the It's the realizing like it's the It's the furthest thing from like doing a PhD in furthest thing from like doing a PhD in furthest thing from like doing a PhD in the sciences. the sciences. the sciences. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Folks, doing a PhD in the sciences is a &gt;&gt; Folks, doing a PhD in the sciences is a &gt;&gt; Folks, doing a PhD in the sciences is a lot of fun. It's a hell of a lot of lot of fun. It's a hell of a lot of lot of fun. It's a hell of a lot of work. And there's nothing else quite work. And there's nothing else quite work. And there's nothing else quite like it. I It's irreplaceable. I like it. I It's irreplaceable. I like it. I It's irreplaceable. I wouldn't redo it for it any other way. wouldn't redo it for it any other way. wouldn't redo it for it any other way. But it is a very like you're It's a very But it is a very like you're It's a very But it is a very like you're It's a very solitary thing. Like you don't you don't solitary thing. Like you don't you don't solitary thing. Like you don't you don't even cross You cross finish line and even cross You cross finish line and even cross You cross finish line and your advisor's there. Your family comes, your advisor's there. Your family comes, your advisor's there. Your family comes, but it's It's like it is a tunnel like but it's It's like it is a tunnel like but it's It's like it is a tunnel like this big. Going to the Super Bowl to this big. Going to the Super Bowl to this big. Going to the Super Bowl to watch your favorite team play is you're watch your favorite team play is you're watch your favorite team play is you're going through that the tunnel with going through that the tunnel with going through that the tunnel with you know, millions of people. One of the you know, millions of people. One of the you know, millions of people. One of the joys of all science. joys of all science. joys of all science. You know, we gathered stories of awe You know, we gathered stories of awe You know, we gathered stories of awe from 26 countries and it's one of my from 26 countries and it's one of my from 26 countries and it's one of my favorite parts of this research. And favorite parts of this research. And favorite parts of this research. And this is like India and Brazil and Poland this is like India and Brazil and Poland this is like India and Brazil and Poland and Chile and Mexico and Japan and Korea and Chile and Mexico and Japan and Korea and Chile and Mexico and Japan and Korea and South Korea and Russia and we and South Korea and Russia and we and South Korea and Russia and we everybody. We brought them in, got these everybody. We brought them in, got these everybody. We brought them in, got these stories. And you know, like what is vast and And you know, like what is vast and And you know, like what is vast and mysterious? What gives you goosebumps? mysterious? What gives you goosebumps? mysterious? What gives you goosebumps? What's amazing or awesome to you? What's amazing or awesome to you? What's amazing or awesome to you? And when you get stories from Brazil or And when you get stories from Brazil or And when you get stories from Brazil or Argentina they're going to write about They're they're going to write about They're they're going to write about They're going to tell you about They're going to tell you about They're going to tell you about football, you know. And you know, when football, you know. And you know, when football, you know. And you know, when you get stories you get stories you get stories from parts of the United States, they're from parts of the United States, they're from parts of the United States, they're going to talk about going to talk about going to talk about you know, American football and you know, American football and you know, American football and baseball. You get stories from Boston, baseball. You get stories from Boston, baseball. You get stories from Boston, it's there's going to be a Red Sox it's there's going to be a Red Sox it's there's going to be a Red Sox story. And we have not studied sports in my And we have not studied sports in my And we have not studied sports in my emotion science because most emotion science because most emotion science because most emotion scientists are not good athletes. scientists are not good athletes. scientists are not good athletes. They're picked last in grammar school. They're picked last in grammar school. They're picked last in grammar school. They're grouchy about sports. And yet They're grouchy about sports. And yet They're grouchy about sports. And yet it's super emotional. And I will tell it's super emotional. And I will tell it's super emotional. And I will tell you a story that has science and uh you a story that has science and uh you a story that has science and uh personal wisdom. Uh as I gathered personal wisdom. Uh as I gathered personal wisdom. Uh as I gathered these stories, I got you know, part of these stories, I got you know, part of these stories, I got you know, part of collective effervescence, just like collective effervescence, just like collective effervescence, just like Taylor Swift or Taylor Swift or Taylor Swift or being in a punk mosh pit is also sports. being in a punk mosh pit is also sports. being in a punk mosh pit is also sports. And and just like uh And and just like uh And and just like uh it is awesome to follow a sports team it is awesome to follow a sports team it is awesome to follow a sports team and be there live. And there's this and be there live. And there's this and be there live. And there's this great obscure sociology paper that said, great obscure sociology paper that said, great obscure sociology paper that said, "Being a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers "Being a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers "Being a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers is like being in a religion. Because you is like being in a religion. Because you is like being in a religion. Because you have your rituals, they have these have your rituals, they have these have your rituals, they have these towels they sing around. You think towels they sing around. You think towels they sing around. You think of yourself as the Steeler Nation. They of yourself as the Steeler Nation. They of yourself as the Steeler Nation. They talk about God-like experiences on the talk about God-like experiences on the talk about God-like experiences on the field. They have these spiritual moments field. They have these spiritual moments field. They have these spiritual moments where in freezing days they'll take off where in freezing days they'll take off where in freezing days they'll take off their clothes and their clothes and their clothes and cheer and cry together." Uh and I was cheer and cry together." Uh and I was cheer and cry together." Uh and I was teaching this recently, and there were teaching this recently, and there were teaching this recently, and there were two Steeler fans in the audience. And two Steeler fans in the audience. And two Steeler fans in the audience. And they're like, they're like, they're like, "That's exactly it. But I'll tell you "That's exactly it. But I'll tell you "That's exactly it. But I'll tell you more. Like everywhere you go, more. Like everywhere you go, more. Like everywhere you go, if you're a fan, if you're a fan, if you're a fan, a Steeler fan, there are Steeler bars a Steeler fan, there are Steeler bars a Steeler fan, there are Steeler bars that you can go to. that you can go to. that you can go to. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; And when the Steelers play, there're &gt;&gt; And when the Steelers play, there're &gt;&gt; And when the Steelers play, there're going to be Steelers fans. And if you're going to be Steelers fans. And if you're going to be Steelers fans. And if you're a kid and the Steelers lose, somebody a kid and the Steelers lose, somebody a kid and the Steelers lose, somebody who's old will tell you, "I remember who's old will tell you, "I remember who's old will tell you, "I remember when we lost in 1983, and we'll recover. when we lost in 1983, and we'll recover. when we lost in 1983, and we'll recover. We'll you know, I'll have this expansion We'll you know, I'll have this expansion We'll you know, I'll have this expansion of time." of time." of time." It was so rich to me, you know, it was It was so rich to me, you know, it was It was so rich to me, you know, it was like we love sports. You know, sports like we love sports. You know, sports like we love sports. You know, sports the Olympics are old, they're 3,000 the Olympics are old, they're 3,000 the Olympics are old, they're 3,000 years old. The ball court games in the years old. The ball court games in the years old. The ball court games in the Maya, you know, in the Mayan traditions Maya, you know, in the Mayan traditions Maya, you know, in the Mayan traditions are were amazing ways to gather are were amazing ways to gather are were amazing ways to gather community and become collective, community and become collective, community and become collective, right? So, you know, uh it was really right? So, you know, uh it was really right? So, you know, uh it was really eye-opening for me just to eye-opening for me just to eye-opening for me just to sense the awesomeness of sports. And one sense the awesomeness of sports. And one sense the awesomeness of sports. And one of my great joys of my great joys of my great joys of writing the book was to talk with of writing the book was to talk with of writing the book was to talk with Steve Kerr, who was coaching the Steve Kerr, who was coaching the Steve Kerr, who was coaching the Warriors at the time. He's a righteous Warriors at the time. He's a righteous Warriors at the time. He's a righteous guy, you know. guy, you know. guy, you know. Uh he is a person of truth and just Uh he is a person of truth and just Uh he is a person of truth and just getting his sense of like how awesome it getting his sense of like how awesome it getting his sense of like how awesome it is to is to is to I mean, for him to coach a game and the I mean, for him to coach a game and the I mean, for him to coach a game and the Warriors are in this amazing period and Warriors are in this amazing period and Warriors are in this amazing period and look up into the stands and 10,000 look up into the stands and 10,000 look up into the stands and 10,000 people are dancing. people are dancing. people are dancing. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Because of your coaching, you know. I &gt;&gt; Because of your coaching, you know. I &gt;&gt; Because of your coaching, you know. I was like, was like, was like, that's pretty good. Yeah, he's really that's pretty good. Yeah, he's really that's pretty good. Yeah, he's really tapped in, isn't he? He's a meditator tapped in, isn't he? He's a meditator tapped in, isn't he? He's a meditator and wildlife experience and um And trauma wildlife experience and um And trauma wildlife experience and um And trauma early, you know. His dad losing his dad. early, you know. His dad losing his dad. early, you know. His dad losing his dad. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that orienting him to what &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that orienting him to what &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that orienting him to what really matters. I'm thinking about the really matters. I'm thinking about the really matters. I'm thinking about the things that inhibit awe, but I'm also things that inhibit awe, but I'm also things that inhibit awe, but I'm also thinking about thinking about thinking about solutions. Yeah. You know, it sprang to solutions. Yeah. You know, it sprang to solutions. Yeah. You know, it sprang to mind that, you know, mind that, you know, mind that, you know, it's funny. Sometimes I get tagged it's funny. Sometimes I get tagged it's funny. Sometimes I get tagged to like ice baths for some Look, folks, to like ice baths for some Look, folks, to like ice baths for some Look, folks, that was a whim, right? I mean, that was that was a whim, right? I mean, that was that was a whim, right? I mean, that was a whim. I mean, sure, I've done some a whim. I mean, sure, I've done some a whim. I mean, sure, I've done some cold plunges. I like the cold. I do the cold plunges. I like the cold. I do the cold plunges. I like the cold. I do the cold. Yeah, it's fun. I mean, it you know, it Yeah, it's fun. I mean, it you know, it Yeah, it's fun. I mean, it you know, it it's psychologically painful and you it's psychologically painful and you it's psychologically painful and you feel better afterwards and um it'll make feel better afterwards and um it'll make feel better afterwards and um it'll make you it'll make you anyone mentally you it'll make you anyone mentally you it'll make you anyone mentally stronger because cold is a universal stronger because cold is a universal stronger because cold is a universal stressor. Um but you know, Um but you know, Um but you know, it gets kind of a bad rap cuz mostly it gets kind of a bad rap cuz mostly it gets kind of a bad rap cuz mostly cuz people don't like doing it. Everyone cuz people don't like doing it. Everyone cuz people don't like doing it. Everyone loves the sauna. It's kind of funny. loves the sauna. It's kind of funny. loves the sauna. It's kind of funny. Everyone's cool with sauna. Then the Everyone's cool with sauna. Then the Everyone's cool with sauna. Then the Finns love the sauna and it's a social Finns love the sauna and it's a social Finns love the sauna and it's a social thing for them. And one thing that I thing for them. And one thing that I thing for them. And one thing that I think has been overlooked, and it just think has been overlooked, and it just think has been overlooked, and it just sprang to mind now, so I overlooked it sprang to mind now, so I overlooked it sprang to mind now, so I overlooked it as well, is that as well, is that as well, is that you know, there's this thing that's you know, there's this thing that's you know, there's this thing that's wonderful about experiences that we can wonderful about experiences that we can wonderful about experiences that we can have with other people, but that we can have with other people, but that we can have with other people, but that we can also do on our own. And when we do them also do on our own. And when we do them also do on our own. And when we do them on our own, we are know other people on our own, we are know other people on our own, we are know other people are doing it on their own, too. are doing it on their own, too. are doing it on their own, too. And so, it's kind of a it's a different And so, it's kind of a it's a different And so, it's kind of a it's a different version of what we've been talking version of what we've been talking version of what we've been talking about. And you know, the quote unquote about. And you know, the quote unquote about. And you know, the quote unquote health and wellness community, they take health and wellness community, they take health and wellness community, they take some heat. Like people go, "Oh, it's all some heat. Like people go, "Oh, it's all some heat. Like people go, "Oh, it's all about supplements, it's all about cold about supplements, it's all about cold about supplements, it's all about cold plunges." You know, and I've got a like plunges." You know, and I've got a like plunges." You know, and I've got a like a like a particular finger I hold up a like a particular finger I hold up a like a particular finger I hold up when I hear that. But when I hear that. But when I hear that. But it's not it's not it's not about that. Yeah. about that. Yeah. about that. Yeah. &gt;&gt; There's this deeper layer that's much &gt;&gt; There's this deeper layer that's much &gt;&gt; There's this deeper layer that's much more important that's formed over the more important that's formed over the more important that's formed over the last, I would say, 5 to 10 years. Cuz it last, I would say, 5 to 10 years. Cuz it last, I would say, 5 to 10 years. Cuz it used to be meditation, breathwork, used to be meditation, breathwork, used to be meditation, breathwork, Esalen great, love Esalen. Amazing, Esalen great, love Esalen. Amazing, Esalen great, love Esalen. Amazing, incredible place. incredible place. incredible place. &gt;&gt; A historic and many important things &gt;&gt; A historic and many important things &gt;&gt; A historic and many important things actually happened there that people actually happened there that people actually happened there that people don't even realize in terms of shifting don't even realize in terms of shifting don't even realize in terms of shifting world politics and world peace. world politics and world peace. world politics and world peace. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. That maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. That maybe &gt;&gt; the Russians in there. &gt;&gt; the Russians in there. &gt;&gt; the Russians in there. For in for example, to end the Cold For in for example, to end the Cold For in for example, to end the Cold War. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And Gorbachev, I know. Yeah, incredible, &gt;&gt; And Gorbachev, I know. Yeah, incredible, &gt;&gt; And Gorbachev, I know. Yeah, incredible, right? But you know, so it used to be right? But you know, so it used to be right? But you know, so it used to be these isolated pockets, but now, you these isolated pockets, but now, you these isolated pockets, but now, you know, people get together to sauna. know, people get together to sauna. know, people get together to sauna. People get together to do breathwork. People get together to do breathwork. People get together to do breathwork. People get together to cold plunge. And People get together to cold plunge. And People get together to cold plunge. And of course, for thousands of years, of course, for thousands of years, of course, for thousands of years, humans have been doing this. This is not humans have been doing this. This is not humans have been doing this. This is not a new thing. a new thing. a new thing. And people look at that and they go, And people look at that and they go, And people look at that and they go, "This is wacky or it's about the "This is wacky or it's about the "This is wacky or it's about the marketing of this." Actually, I think marketing of this." Actually, I think marketing of this." Actually, I think that there's a connection that's formed that there's a connection that's formed that there's a connection that's formed among people who want to take good care among people who want to take good care among people who want to take good care of their health. They want to of their health. They want to of their health. They want to have some control over their state. have some control over their state. have some control over their state. Um because otherwise, the world will Um because otherwise, the world will Um because otherwise, the world will take control of it for you. Yep. And take control of it for you. Yep. And take control of it for you. Yep. And meditating is a very solitary experience meditating is a very solitary experience meditating is a very solitary experience for most people. So, there's something for most people. So, there's something for most people. So, there's something pretty nice about going to a banya. I pretty nice about going to a banya. I pretty nice about going to a banya. I love banyas, Russian banyas. And then love banyas, Russian banyas. And then love banyas, Russian banyas. And then also doing the sauna on your own or cold also doing the sauna on your own or cold also doing the sauna on your own or cold plunge on your own. And I think that plunge on your own. And I think that plunge on your own. And I think that what it builds is a community that is what it builds is a community that is what it builds is a community that is linked on social media. So, from now on, linked on social media. So, from now on, linked on social media. So, from now on, when I see people doing things that I when I see people doing things that I when I see people doing things that I go, "Oh, cool. Like I like a bit of go, "Oh, cool. Like I like a bit of go, "Oh, cool. Like I like a bit of that." I don't maybe do it every day or that." I don't maybe do it every day or that." I don't maybe do it every day or I do that every day, too, get see my I do that every day, too, get see my I do that every day, too, get see my morning sunlight. The morning sunlight. The morning sunlight. The notion that there's a community The notion that there's a community The notion that there's a community being built that was the original being built that was the original being built that was the original intention of social media. And so, I intention of social media. And so, I intention of social media. And so, I think social media think social media think social media can have this dominant negative effect can have this dominant negative effect can have this dominant negative effect on and day-to-day experience. on and day-to-day experience. on and day-to-day experience. &gt;&gt; So, the question is &gt;&gt; So, the question is &gt;&gt; So, the question is are there ways, surely there are, but are there ways, surely there are, but are there ways, surely there are, but how could we build more of a sense how could we build more of a sense how could we build more of a sense of like this communal feeling of like this communal feeling of like this communal feeling leveraging what people are already leveraging what people are already leveraging what people are already doing. They're already on their phones doing. They're already on their phones doing. They're already on their phones and scrolling. Hopefully they're also and scrolling. Hopefully they're also and scrolling. Hopefully they're also doing things to benefit their health. To doing things to benefit their health. To doing things to benefit their health. To make them feel less isolated because as make them feel less isolated because as make them feel less isolated because as Jonathan Haidt and others have pointed Jonathan Haidt and others have pointed Jonathan Haidt and others have pointed out quite correctly, it can really out quite correctly, it can really out quite correctly, it can really fracture us into the Oh, yeah. the fracture us into the Oh, yeah. the fracture us into the Oh, yeah. the me, the ego version. me, the ego version. me, the ego version. Where it's Where it's Where it's but it's kind of the perfect venue to but it's kind of the perfect venue to but it's kind of the perfect venue to connect people also. connect people also. connect people also. &gt;&gt; So, I don't expect you to come up with &gt;&gt; So, I don't expect you to come up with &gt;&gt; So, I don't expect you to come up with any answers right on the on the fly, but any answers right on the on the fly, but any answers right on the on the fly, but I feel like it's not going anywhere. I feel like it's not going anywhere. I feel like it's not going anywhere. So, how could we So, how could we So, how could we build or glean a more sense of a build or glean a more sense of a build or glean a more sense of a community through things that we're community through things that we're community through things that we're doing actually doing in our daily lives? doing actually doing in our daily lives? doing actually doing in our daily lives? Is I think it a question that's worth Is I think it a question that's worth Is I think it a question that's worth exploring. &gt;&gt; It's profoundly important, you know, um &gt;&gt; It's profoundly important, you know, um &gt;&gt; It's profoundly important, you know, um the you know, and the you know, and the you know, and the preceding question is like, what are the preceding question is like, what are the preceding question is like, what are the enemies of awe? What gets in the way the enemies of awe? What gets in the way the enemies of awe? What gets in the way or the barriers? And and you just or the barriers? And and you just or the barriers? And and you just nailed a couple as, you know, nailed a couple as, you know, nailed a couple as, you know, online life, you know, and I think online life, you know, and I think online life, you know, and I think Jonathan Haidt is right that it's Jonathan Haidt is right that it's Jonathan Haidt is right that it's not only anxiety-producing, but we don't not only anxiety-producing, but we don't not only anxiety-producing, but we don't think about the opportunity costs of think about the opportunity costs of think about the opportunity costs of like it deprives me of awe, you know? And in it deprives me of awe, you know? And in it deprives me of awe, you know? And in our study of 2,600 people around the our study of 2,600 people around the our study of 2,600 people around the world, what makes them feel awe, no one world, what makes them feel awe, no one world, what makes them feel awe, no one ever said being on Meta or Facebook or ever said being on Meta or Facebook or ever said being on Meta or Facebook or you know, or uh you know, or Instagram. you know, or uh you know, or Instagram. you know, or uh you know, or Instagram. There are a couple reason worries I have There are a couple reason worries I have There are a couple reason worries I have about online life and I'm kind of about online life and I'm kind of about online life and I'm kind of working on this now. working on this now. working on this now. You know, and one is the content You know, and one is the content You know, and one is the content itself, which is itself, which is itself, which is you know, it's been algorithmically you know, it's been algorithmically you know, it's been algorithmically designed. I was at Facebook when some of designed. I was at Facebook when some of designed. I was at Facebook when some of those algorithms I was advising there those algorithms I was advising there those algorithms I was advising there were set in place of like making people were set in place of like making people were set in place of like making people hate each other and not demonstrate all hate each other and not demonstrate all hate each other and not demonstrate all of our of our of our all the wonderful things about human all the wonderful things about human all the wonderful things about human beings, which are beings, which are beings, which are uh ample. And then online life disrupts uh ample. And then online life disrupts uh ample. And then online life disrupts sharing. And the technologies of today sharing. And the technologies of today sharing. And the technologies of today have disrupted sharing. So, we don't have disrupted sharing. So, we don't have disrupted sharing. So, we don't share music like we used to share. We share music like we used to share. We share music like we used to share. We used to listen to music together. used to listen to music together. used to listen to music together. That's down. Going to movies is down That's down. Going to movies is down That's down. Going to movies is down 40%, right? That used to be a very 40%, right? That used to be a very 40%, right? That used to be a very important collective cultural important collective cultural important collective cultural experience. Did you see the latest experience. Did you see the latest experience. Did you see the latest Scorsese or Pixar or whatever? Now it's Scorsese or Pixar or whatever? Now it's Scorsese or Pixar or whatever? Now it's streaming, right? So, I really worry streaming, right? So, I really worry streaming, right? So, I really worry about that. And I think the next about that. And I think the next about that. And I think the next challenge in the technological world challenge in the technological world challenge in the technological world and the new the social media and the and the new the social media and the and the new the social media and the platforms is platforms is platforms is like you said, how do you enable the is like you said, how do you enable the is like you said, how do you enable the sharing of experience? sharing of experience? sharing of experience? Um you are absolutely right. A lot of what you are absolutely right. A lot of what you are absolutely right. A lot of what we do we do we do for our bodies in the wellness space has for our bodies in the wellness space has for our bodies in the wellness space has a massively important community basis to a massively important community basis to a massively important community basis to it. Where suddenly you're not you know, it. Where suddenly you're not you know, it. Where suddenly you're not you know, meditating and breathing, but you're also sharing and breathing, but you're also sharing and breathing, but you're also sharing your mind and your experience. You're your mind and your experience. You're your mind and your experience. You're not, you know, listening to music, not, you know, listening to music, not, you know, listening to music, you're sharing an understanding of the you're sharing an understanding of the you're sharing an understanding of the music together and its cultural history. music together and its cultural history. music together and its cultural history. One of my favorite examples is farmers One of my favorite examples is farmers One of my favorite examples is farmers markets. They were markets. They were markets. They were non-existent in the '90s, right? And non-existent in the '90s, right? And non-existent in the '90s, right? And they used to be very common in American they used to be very common in American they used to be very common in American culture. And now there are 9,000 farmers culture. And now there are 9,000 farmers culture. And now there are 9,000 farmers markets growing. markets growing. markets growing. And yeah, people go to buy kale and get And yeah, people go to buy kale and get And yeah, people go to buy kale and get the honey and, you know, the fresh bread the honey and, you know, the fresh bread the honey and, you know, the fresh bread or whatever, but they're also going or whatever, but they're also going or whatever, but they're also going because it's community. It's profound because it's community. It's profound because it's community. It's profound community. Um and we derive a lot of benefits from Um and we derive a lot of benefits from Um and we derive a lot of benefits from that. Profound benefits, 10 years of that. Profound benefits, 10 years of that. Profound benefits, 10 years of life expectancy. Community. 10 years. life expectancy. Community. 10 years. life expectancy. Community. 10 years. &gt;&gt; 10 years. My goodness, there's so much &gt;&gt; 10 years. My goodness, there's so much &gt;&gt; 10 years. My goodness, there's so much obsession these days around what sport obsession these days around what sport obsession these days around what sport allows you to live the longest. Turns allows you to live the longest. Turns allows you to live the longest. Turns out it's like pole vaulting, which most out it's like pole vaulting, which most out it's like pole vaulting, which most people aren't going to do. people aren't going to do. people aren't going to do. Um sprinting, gymnastics, the stuff that Um sprinting, gymnastics, the stuff that Um sprinting, gymnastics, the stuff that involves a lot of jumping and landing. involves a lot of jumping and landing. involves a lot of jumping and landing. Is that right? Is that right? Is that right? &gt;&gt; And and fast twitch activity. Yeah. I &gt;&gt; And and fast twitch activity. Yeah. I &gt;&gt; And and fast twitch activity. Yeah. I mean, there are a bunch of other mean, there are a bunch of other mean, there are a bunch of other features there about like who's biased features there about like who's biased features there about like who's biased to go into those sports and whatnot, but to go into those sports and whatnot, but to go into those sports and whatnot, but I mean, I think it's in keeping with I mean, I think it's in keeping with I mean, I think it's in keeping with this idea that like getting your heart this idea that like getting your heart this idea that like getting your heart rate way up and moving quickly as rate way up and moving quickly as rate way up and moving quickly as you as quickly as you safely can like you as quickly as you safely can like you as quickly as you safely can like once a week at something cool is once a week at something cool is once a week at something cool is probably a good idea, but the greatest probably a good idea, but the greatest probably a good idea, but the greatest benefit seen there is something like benefit seen there is something like benefit seen there is something like five to eight years. So, you're talking five to eight years. So, you're talking five to eight years. So, you're talking about a 10-year benefit. about a 10-year benefit. about a 10-year benefit. &gt;&gt; that's a meta-analysis of 350,000 &gt;&gt; that's a meta-analysis of 350,000 &gt;&gt; that's a meta-analysis of 350,000 participants. So, that's that you can go participants. So, that's that you can go participants. So, that's that you can go to the bank with that. Like, social to the bank with that. Like, social to the bank with that. Like, social community very good for the body. I community very good for the body. I community very good for the body. I think it's the greatest challenge of our think it's the greatest challenge of our think it's the greatest challenge of our social media and our platforms. our social media and our platforms. our social media and our platforms. And I've advised at Facebook 2010 to And I've advised at Facebook 2010 to And I've advised at Facebook 2010 to 2015, Google, Pinterest, a little bit of 2015, Google, Pinterest, a little bit of 2015, Google, Pinterest, a little bit of Apple, and I keep telling them like, you Apple, and I keep telling them like, you Apple, and I keep telling them like, you know, this is the singular challenge. know, this is the singular challenge. know, this is the singular challenge. And it's so And it's so And it's so it's hard. It's, you know, the it's hard. It's, you know, the it's hard. It's, you know, the technologies are asynchronous. You know, technologies are asynchronous. You know, technologies are asynchronous. You know, hey, I send you a text and hey, I send you a text and hey, I send you a text and 18 hours later I hear from you. 18 hours later I hear from you. 18 hours later I hear from you. Uh you're not making eye contact. The Uh you're not making eye contact. The Uh you're not making eye contact. The visual connection is degraded. You know, visual connection is degraded. You know, visual connection is degraded. You know, Steve Pinker observed rightly so, like, Steve Pinker observed rightly so, like, Steve Pinker observed rightly so, like, when I'm on Zoom, when I'm on Zoom, when I'm on Zoom, I have to look at that down to see the I have to look at that down to see the I have to look at that down to see the camera or whatever or I look at the camera or whatever or I look at the camera or whatever or I look at the screen, so my eye contact is going down. screen, so my eye contact is going down. screen, so my eye contact is going down. I'm not making eye contact like we are. I'm not making eye contact like we are. I'm not making eye contact like we are. Uh it's just the technology works Uh it's just the technology works Uh it's just the technology works against it and against it and against it and I think it's the hard problem of the I think it's the hard problem of the I think it's the hard problem of the social media platforms is social media platforms is social media platforms is can they do what you're aspirationally can they do what you're aspirationally can they do what you're aspirationally asking for, which is like asking for, which is like asking for, which is like get us to feel connected. Uh you know, get us to feel connected. Uh you know, get us to feel connected. Uh you know, Mark Zuckerberg, the original statement Mark Zuckerberg, the original statement Mark Zuckerberg, the original statement about Facebook was open and connected. Facebook was open and connected. Facebook was open and connected. Uh and I think they failed and I think Uh and I think they failed and I think Uh and I think they failed and I think we got to we it's the challenge of we got to we it's the challenge of we got to we it's the challenge of our times. I know Mark a bit and I our times. I know Mark a bit and I our times. I know Mark a bit and I know, you know, you know, you know, I trust he wants that. I know. I really I trust he wants that. I know. I really I trust he wants that. I know. I really do. I know some people will push do. I know some people will push do. I know some people will push back on that statement, but I back on that statement, but I back on that statement, but I actually know that he wants that. And I actually know that he wants that. And I actually know that he wants that. And I know some of the folks that in the leadership some of the folks that in the leadership some of the folks that in the leadership at Instagram, they want that. Like, at Instagram, they want that. Like, at Instagram, they want that. Like, these people actually have very healthy these people actually have very healthy these people actually have very healthy personal lives. They understand the personal lives. They understand the personal lives. They understand the value of connection both at the level of value of connection both at the level of value of connection both at the level of the family, friendships, but also the family, friendships, but also the family, friendships, but also at large. They they want that. I think at large. They they want that. I think at large. They they want that. I think that maybe I'm being optimistic here, that maybe I'm being optimistic here, that maybe I'm being optimistic here, but maybe AI will offer an opportunity but maybe AI will offer an opportunity but maybe AI will offer an opportunity for that as opposed to divorcing us from for that as opposed to divorcing us from for that as opposed to divorcing us from um gathering and seeing facial um gathering and seeing facial um gathering and seeing facial expressions and hearing of voices expressions and hearing of voices expressions and hearing of voices together or observing other things. You together or observing other things. You together or observing other things. You know, I the I do think that right now know, I the I do think that right now know, I the I do think that right now the way that most social media the way that most social media the way that most social media experiences land is the exact opposite experiences land is the exact opposite experiences land is the exact opposite of awe. I will say that because and I of awe. I will say that because and I of awe. I will say that because and I can say that with a fair degree of can say that with a fair degree of can say that with a fair degree of certainty because certainty because certainty because I spend a good amount of time on social I spend a good amount of time on social I spend a good amount of time on social media teaching, learning, and looking media teaching, learning, and looking media teaching, learning, and looking for entertainment, trying not to get uh for entertainment, trying not to get uh for entertainment, trying not to get uh you know, rage baited or numbing out. you know, rage baited or numbing out. you know, rage baited or numbing out. Those are the two things I look out for. Those are the two things I look out for. Those are the two things I look out for. Rage baiting and numbing out. Rage baiting and numbing out. Rage baiting and numbing out. &gt;&gt; Well put. There's a version of social &gt;&gt; Well put. There's a version of social &gt;&gt; Well put. There's a version of social media that's happening right now where media that's happening right now where media that's happening right now where we're going further and further into our we're going further and further into our we're going further and further into our silos. Yeah. But I don't think it has to silos. Yeah. But I don't think it has to silos. Yeah. But I don't think it has to be that. be that. be that. &gt;&gt; Not at all. I don't. I think it could &gt;&gt; Not at all. I don't. I think it could &gt;&gt; Not at all. I don't. I think it could be really leveraged to connect people. be really leveraged to connect people. be really leveraged to connect people. &gt;&gt; You know, when I started advising at &gt;&gt; You know, when I started advising at &gt;&gt; You know, when I started advising at Facebook 2010 to 20 it was like Arab Facebook 2010 to 20 it was like Arab Facebook 2010 to 20 it was like Arab Spring and democracy was spreading and Spring and democracy was spreading and Spring and democracy was spreading and in many ways we've had this great and in many ways we've had this great and in many ways we've had this great democratization of things of democratization of things of democratization of things of people sharing music, you know, people sharing music, you know, people sharing music, you know, instantaneously I can hear music from instantaneously I can hear music from instantaneously I can hear music from any part of the world any part of the world any part of the world which you know, that's profound and visual art you know, that's profound and visual art you know, that's profound and visual art and knowledge and podcasts and knowledge and podcasts and knowledge and podcasts and we've got to be nuanced about this, but we've got to be nuanced about this, but we've got to be nuanced about this, but we do need you know, to think we do need you know, to think we do need you know, to think intentionally about design, you know, intentionally about design, you know, intentionally about design, you know, and that you know, I really worry about and that you know, I really worry about and that you know, I really worry about the privileging of hate. I forgot what the privileging of hate. I forgot what the privileging of hate. I forgot what you called it, but you called it, but you called it, but that has been privileged uh and that's not has been privileged uh and that's not has been privileged uh and that's not human nature. We we are not all trolls human nature. We we are not all trolls human nature. We we are not all trolls and you know, tracking people and you know, tracking people and you know, tracking people and you know, and that is a degradation of you know, and that is a degradation of you know, and that is a degradation of who we are and I think science would who we are and I think science would who we are and I think science would guide us in many ways to avoid that. guide us in many ways to avoid that. guide us in many ways to avoid that. So, I think it's we're in this big So, I think it's we're in this big So, I think it's we're in this big reflection period about how to redesign. reflection period about how to redesign. reflection period about how to redesign. And I hope I hope they listen to the And I hope I hope they listen to the And I hope I hope they listen to the social science. It has a lot of good social science. It has a lot of good social science. It has a lot of good things to say. I've had this thought things to say. I've had this thought things to say. I've had this thought that the way social media is now Yeah. the way social media is now Yeah. the way social media is now Yeah. it's the direct opposite of all for the it's the direct opposite of all for the it's the direct opposite of all for the following reason. All inspiring experiences All inspiring experiences All inspiring experiences you never forget them. you never forget them. you never forget them. You never forget them. I mean, we could You never forget them. I mean, we could You never forget them. I mean, we could spend 15 hours talking about first spend 15 hours talking about first spend 15 hours talking about first concert, second concert, first love, concert, second concert, first love, concert, second concert, first love, first kiss, you know, first get break first kiss, you know, first get break first kiss, you know, first get break up, you know, and which is its own form up, you know, and which is its own form up, you know, and which is its own form of all like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like if this can of all like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like if this can of all like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like if this can there's this flip side to this love there's this flip side to this love there's this flip side to this love thing, right? You know, I mean, there's thing, right? You know, I mean, there's thing, right? You know, I mean, there's all that. all that. all that. I sometimes do the test of myself. I go, I sometimes do the test of myself. I go, I sometimes do the test of myself. I go, "Okay, I spent I don't know how much "Okay, I spent I don't know how much "Okay, I spent I don't know how much time on social media yesterday, but do I time on social media yesterday, but do I time on social media yesterday, but do I remember anything specific?" remember anything specific?" remember anything specific?" I don't think I do. I don't think I don't think I do. I don't think I don't think I do. I don't think I remember anything specific. remember anything specific. remember anything specific. But there was tons of sensory input. But there was tons of sensory input. But there was tons of sensory input. A fair amount of time, and remember a A fair amount of time, and remember a A fair amount of time, and remember a damn thing. damn thing. damn thing. And so, that's scary. It is scary. And so, that's scary. It is scary. And so, that's scary. It is scary. &gt;&gt; Cuz the only thing that resembles that &gt;&gt; Cuz the only thing that resembles that &gt;&gt; Cuz the only thing that resembles that Yeah. is drugs of abuse. Yeah. is drugs of abuse. Yeah. is drugs of abuse. And I'm very fortunate that I don't have And I'm very fortunate that I don't have And I'm very fortunate that I don't have a drug thing. I never I never felt drawn a drug thing. I never I never felt drawn a drug thing. I never I never felt drawn to them in a way that I felt like I to them in a way that I felt like I to them in a way that I felt like I couldn't escape from them or same with couldn't escape from them or same with couldn't escape from them or same with alcohol. Um easy clip for me alcohol. Um easy clip for me alcohol. Um easy clip for me um to not drink um I will say. I but my um to not drink um I will say. I but my um to not drink um I will say. I but my friends who had real challenges with friends who had real challenges with friends who had real challenges with alcohol and substances alcohol and substances alcohol and substances they'll tell you like they'll tell you like they'll tell you like it's this super compelling thing, but it's this super compelling thing, but it's this super compelling thing, but then you don't have anything to say then you don't have anything to say then you don't have anything to say about it or for it. about it or for it. about it or for it. It's just a space-time It's just a space-time It's just a space-time disintegration. And not the space-time disintegration of And not the space-time disintegration of And not the space-time disintegration of psychedelics, which may have some psychedelics, which may have some psychedelics, which may have some benefits. We'll talk We'll talk about benefits. We'll talk We'll talk about benefits. We'll talk We'll talk about that. So, to me that's the problem with that. So, to me that's the problem with that. So, to me that's the problem with social media. There's nothing memorable social media. There's nothing memorable social media. There's nothing memorable about yesterday's social media. about yesterday's social media. about yesterday's social media. And I do think that the people who build And I do think that the people who build And I do think that the people who build it want it to be impactful on the it want it to be impactful on the it want it to be impactful on the day-to-day scale, but also scale, but also scale, but also Of course they'd want to be memorable. Of course they'd want to be memorable. Of course they'd want to be memorable. Yeah. They should Some kid should be talking They should Some kid should be talking They should Some kid should be talking about like Laurel like you're talking about like Laurel like you're talking about like Laurel like you're talking about Laurel Canyon. about Laurel Canyon. about Laurel Canyon. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know. But I don't know if &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know. But I don't know if &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know. But I don't know if they're going to feel that way. Well, they're going to feel that way. Well, they're going to feel that way. Well, you know, one of the things I'm really you know, one of the things I'm really you know, one of the things I'm really interested in right now, Andrew, is interested in right now, Andrew, is interested in right now, Andrew, is awe design, right? And you know, I'm awe design, right? And you know, I'm awe design, right? And you know, I'm working with Gale architecture in working with Gale architecture in working with Gale architecture in Copenhagen. Like, how do you design Copenhagen. Like, how do you design Copenhagen. Like, how do you design cities for more awe? It's not hard and cities for more awe? It's not hard and cities for more awe? It's not hard and it's good for people, right? A little it's good for people, right? A little it's good for people, right? A little bit of music, a little bit of green bit of music, a little bit of green bit of music, a little bit of green space, a little bit of art. Get people space, a little bit of art. Get people space, a little bit of art. Get people looking at each other and talking and looking at each other and talking and looking at each other and talking and buzzing, right? Easy to do. buzzing, right? Easy to do. buzzing, right? Easy to do. And I think you've just laid out, you And I think you've just laid out, you And I think you've just laid out, you know, and someone could write a know, and someone could write a know, and someone could write a manifesto like manifesto like manifesto like maybe my life on the smartphone is the maybe my life on the smartphone is the maybe my life on the smartphone is the antithesis of awe. It's small, awe is antithesis of awe. It's small, awe is antithesis of awe. It's small, awe is vast. It's sped up, awe slows things down. It It's sped up, awe slows things down. It It's sped up, awe slows things down. It has a fragmentation to it, awe has a fragmentation to it, awe has a fragmentation to it, awe integrates, right? It's about micro integrates, right? It's about micro integrates, right? It's about micro things, awe is about systems. Like, when things, awe is about systems. Like, when things, awe is about systems. Like, when you feel awe towards music, it's like you feel awe towards music, it's like you feel awe towards music, it's like I get it all here right now. Its content I get it all here right now. Its content I get it all here right now. Its content is not inspiring very often. And it is not inspiring very often. And it is not inspiring very often. And it could It all could be. Sometimes it is. could It all could be. Sometimes it is. could It all could be. Sometimes it is. I think that the that the that the I think that the that the that the I think that the that the that the space-time aperture that we talked about space-time aperture that we talked about space-time aperture that we talked about before, I think the problem with social before, I think the problem with social before, I think the problem with social media is actually its power to bring the media is actually its power to bring the media is actually its power to bring the whole space-time into an aperture this whole space-time into an aperture this whole space-time into an aperture this big. I actually think that it has to do big. I actually think that it has to do big. I actually think that it has to do crazy hypothesis, happy to be wrong. I crazy hypothesis, happy to be wrong. I crazy hypothesis, happy to be wrong. I actually think the whole problem with it actually think the whole problem with it actually think the whole problem with it has to do with the fact that has to do with the fact that has to do with the fact that it brings long time scales, past, present, and long time scales, past, present, and long time scales, past, present, and future, different future, different future, different frame rates into one different frame rates into one different frame rates into one real-world visual aperture. real-world visual aperture. real-world visual aperture. &gt;&gt; Right. Because when I haven't been to &gt;&gt; Right. Because when I haven't been to &gt;&gt; Right. Because when I haven't been to the Sphere in Las Vegas, but friends of the Sphere in Las Vegas, but friends of the Sphere in Las Vegas, but friends of mine who are musicians, who love live mine who are musicians, who love live mine who are musicians, who love live music, who are producers, who love live music, who are producers, who love live music, who are producers, who love live music, tell me it is incredible. music, tell me it is incredible. music, tell me it is incredible. [snorts] &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's you know, in some cases the live band is you know, in some cases the live band is you know, in some cases the live band is there, and in other cases they're not. there, and in other cases they're not. there, and in other cases they're not. And so, there's no reason why that And so, there's no reason why that And so, there's no reason why that technology should be technology should be technology should be awesome for Again, here we go. No better awesome for Again, here we go. No better awesome for Again, here we go. No better word for No better word for all than word for No better word for all than word for No better word for all than awesome, so we're just going to stick awesome, so we're just going to stick awesome, so we're just going to stick with it. We're going to roll with it. with it. We're going to roll with it. with it. We're going to roll with it. The There's there's no reason why The There's there's no reason why The There's there's no reason why digital can't be awe-inspiring. digital can't be awe-inspiring. digital can't be awe-inspiring. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it should. And I And we have &gt;&gt; Yeah, it should. And I And we have &gt;&gt; Yeah, it should. And I And we have to, you know, we just have to take a to, you know, we just have to take a to, you know, we just have to take a step back in these conversations, right? step back in these conversations, right? step back in these conversations, right? There's you know, there's new work out about AI you know, there's new work out about AI you know, there's new work out about AI helping medical doctors. And it's, you helping medical doctors. And it's, you helping medical doctors. And it's, you know, and the writer of this book coming know, and the writer of this book coming know, and the writer of this book coming out of UC San Francisco is like out of UC San Francisco is like out of UC San Francisco is like it's like having the best brain trust it's like having the best brain trust it's like having the best brain trust about medicine right with you all the about medicine right with you all the about medicine right with you all the time. Who wouldn't want that, you know? time. Who wouldn't want that, you know? time. Who wouldn't want that, you know? And I think let's remember that. And I think let's remember that. And I think let's remember that. And yeah, I think that's the challenge is to yeah, I think that's the challenge is to yeah, I think that's the challenge is to have these have these have these AI and the devices that it is manifest AI and the devices that it is manifest AI and the devices that it is manifest on get us to what's awesome. And on get us to what's awesome. And on get us to what's awesome. And uh we'll see, you know, I hope so. uh we'll see, you know, I hope so. uh we'll see, you know, I hope so. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PFASs or forever chemicals are still PFASs or forever chemicals are still PFASs or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of nonstick pans, as well found in 80% of nonstick pans, as well found in 80% of nonstick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these PFASs or forever chemicals like Teflon PFASs or forever chemicals like Teflon PFASs or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of Our Place. Our why I'm a huge fan of Our Place. Our why I'm a huge fan of Our Place. Our Place products are made with the highest Place products are made with the highest Place products are made with the highest quality materials and are all PFAS and quality materials and are all PFAS and quality materials and are all PFAS and toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first nonstick pan made with zero chemicals nonstick pan made with zero chemicals nonstick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. That means it has no harmful titanium. That means it has no harmful titanium. That means it has no harmful forever chemicals, and it does not forever chemicals, and it does not forever chemicals, and it does not degrade or lose its nonstick effect over degrade or lose its nonstick effect over degrade or lose its nonstick effect over time. I cook my eggs in my titanium time. I cook my eggs in my titanium time. I cook my eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook design allows for the eggs to cook design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. perfectly without sticking to the pan. perfectly without sticking to the pan. Right now, Our Place is having their Right now, Our Place is having their Right now, Our Place is having their biggest sale of the season. You can save biggest sale of the season. You can save biggest sale of the season. You can save up to 40% site wide now through April up to 40% site wide now through April up to 40% site wide now through April 12th. Just head to 12th. Just head to 12th. Just head to fromourplace.com/huberman. Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman to save up to 40%. Can we talk about to save up to 40%. Can we talk about to save up to 40%. Can we talk about embarrassment? Yeah. And [laughter] and embarrassment? Yeah. And [laughter] and embarrassment? Yeah. And [laughter] and uh &gt;&gt; My favorite My other favorite emotion. &gt;&gt; My favorite My other favorite emotion. &gt;&gt; My favorite My other favorite emotion. Right at the beginning of my career. Right at the beginning of my career. Right at the beginning of my career. &gt;&gt; it was guys, right? Guys specifically uh &gt;&gt; it was guys, right? Guys specifically uh &gt;&gt; it was guys, right? Guys specifically uh teasing one another. I definitely teasing one another. I definitely teasing one another. I definitely experienced that um and I definitely experienced that um and I definitely experienced that um and I definitely participated in it uh in a benevolent participated in it uh in a benevolent participated in it uh in a benevolent way. But it the teasing that happens in way. But it the teasing that happens in way. But it the teasing that happens in groups of good male friends groups of good male friends groups of good male friends can be pretty brutal. Oh, yeah. But can be pretty brutal. Oh, yeah. But can be pretty brutal. Oh, yeah. But there's a pleasure in it. there's a pleasure in it. there's a pleasure in it. Most of the time. Yeah. Most of the time. Yeah. Most of the time. Yeah. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, what's that about? &gt;&gt; So, what's that about? &gt;&gt; So, what's that about? &gt;&gt; I know. Well, you know, &gt;&gt; I know. Well, you know, &gt;&gt; I know. Well, you know, it all begins really in my like it all begins really in my like it all begins really in my like when I started scientifically to when I started scientifically to when I started scientifically to depart from the Ekman canon, if you depart from the Ekman canon, if you depart from the Ekman canon, if you will, of those six emotions we talked will, of those six emotions we talked will, of those six emotions we talked about earlier. about earlier. about earlier. And I was doing a project in his lab and And I was doing a project in his lab and And I was doing a project in his lab and we were startling people and studying we were startling people and studying we were startling people and studying the startle response, a seven muscle the startle response, a seven muscle the startle response, a seven muscle movement motor pattern built into the movement motor pattern built into the movement motor pattern built into the nervous system. And I noticed people got nervous system. And I noticed people got nervous system. And I noticed people got embarrassed after they were startled embarrassed after they were startled embarrassed after they were startled unexpectedly. You know, they you blast unexpectedly. You know, they you blast unexpectedly. You know, they you blast them with a noise out of the blue in the them with a noise out of the blue in the them with a noise out of the blue in the lab and they're like, "Whoa, I think I lab and they're like, "Whoa, I think I lab and they're like, "Whoa, I think I spit and you know, peed my pants or spit and you know, peed my pants or spit and you know, peed my pants or whatever." And they show this response whatever." And they show this response whatever." And they show this response and I took it to Ekman in his the blush and I took it to Ekman in his the blush and I took it to Ekman in his the blush and people avert their gaze and they and people avert their gaze and they and people avert their gaze and they look away and they hide their face, you look away and they hide their face, you look away and they hide their face, you know. And he's like, "That's a motor pattern And he's like, "That's a motor pattern And he's like, "That's a motor pattern of emotion. You should go study it." And of emotion. You should go study it." And of emotion. You should go study it." And I did. And and then I started to notice I did. And and then I started to notice I did. And and then I started to notice and there's a really rich literature on and there's a really rich literature on and there's a really rich literature on that and Darwin wrote about this that a and Darwin wrote about this that a and Darwin wrote about this that a person's embarrassment is a sign person's embarrassment is a sign person's embarrassment is a sign of their commitment to the collective, of their commitment to the collective, of their commitment to the collective, right? Like, "Man, you know, called you right? Like, "Man, you know, called you right? Like, "Man, you know, called you by the wrong name or you know, I farted by the wrong name or you know, I farted by the wrong name or you know, I farted in the yoga class or whatever it is, and in the yoga class or whatever it is, and in the yoga class or whatever it is, and I'm embarrassed. Like, I'm sorry, man. I'm embarrassed. Like, I'm sorry, man. I'm embarrassed. Like, I'm sorry, man. You know, I apologize. That really You know, I apologize. That really You know, I apologize. That really matters. And when you see people get matters. And when you see people get matters. And when you see people get embarrassed, you like them more, and you embarrassed, you like them more, and you embarrassed, you like them more, and you trust them more, and you give resources trust them more, and you give resources trust them more, and you give resources to them, and you think they're a good to them, and you think they're a good to them, and you think they're a good group member. group member. group member. And then I was like, man, you know, And then I was like, man, you know, And then I was like, man, you know, like I've played a lot of pick-up like I've played a lot of pick-up like I've played a lot of pick-up basketball in my life, thousands of basketball in my life, thousands of basketball in my life, thousands of games. And you're banging into And there's just And you're banging into And there's just And you're banging into And there's just a lot of teasing and taunting, and you a lot of teasing and taunting, and you a lot of teasing and taunting, and you know, people I admired, you know, great know, people I admired, you know, great know, people I admired, you know, great athletes tease and taunt, you know, it's athletes tease and taunt, you know, it's athletes tease and taunt, you know, it's just part of what we do when we're just part of what we do when we're just part of what we do when we're banging into each other. banging into each other. banging into each other. And I started to put it together like, And I started to put it together like, And I started to put it together like, you know, the right kind of teasing you know, the right kind of teasing you know, the right kind of teasing within a collective, you're kind of within a collective, you're kind of within a collective, you're kind of provoking people to see if they care provoking people to see if they care provoking people to see if they care about the group, right? And then the about the group, right? And then the about the group, right? And then the wrong kind of teasing, which we wrong kind of teasing, which we wrong kind of teasing, which we documented in our labs, like, that's documented in our labs, like, that's documented in our labs, like, that's bullying and harassment, and we can bullying and harassment, and we can bullying and harassment, and we can pinpoint like, that's inappropriate, you pinpoint like, that's inappropriate, you pinpoint like, that's inappropriate, you know, you're trying to you're not know, you're trying to you're not know, you're trying to you're not keeping people in the group, you're keeping people in the group, you're keeping people in the group, you're excluding them or humiliating them. excluding them or humiliating them. excluding them or humiliating them. So, we did this study, uh it was one of So, we did this study, uh it was one of So, we did this study, uh it was one of my first studies, we brought four my first studies, we brought four my first studies, we brought four fraternity We brought groups of fraternity We brought groups of fraternity We brought groups of fraternity four fraternity four fraternity four uh fraternity guys in each interaction uh fraternity guys in each interaction uh fraternity guys in each interaction uh from this fraternity house at the uh from this fraternity house at the uh from this fraternity house at the University of Wisconsin, University of Wisconsin, University of Wisconsin, and we gave them each nicknames, or we and we gave them each nicknames, or we and we gave them each nicknames, or we gave them each initials, and we had them gave them each initials, and we had them gave them each initials, and we had them make up nicknames make up nicknames make up nicknames based on the initials. based on the initials. based on the initials. So, two letters of a nick were A.D. So, two letters of a nick were A.D. So, two letters of a nick were A.D. And I'm not sure I can say what the And I'm not sure I can say what the And I'm not sure I can say what the nicknames were like, but it you know, nicknames were like, but it you know, nicknames were like, but it you know, another drunk, and another drunk, and another drunk, and it gets pretty profane. And so, we let it gets pretty profane. And so, we let it gets pretty profane. And so, we let them tease each other. them tease each other. them tease each other. And they start teasing each other, and And they start teasing each other, and And they start teasing each other, and they are really like, this is young men they are really like, this is young men they are really like, this is young men coming out of a fraternity house, coming out of a fraternity house, coming out of a fraternity house, teasing each other. There are funny teasing each other. There are funny teasing each other. There are funny stories. People got embarrassed. People got embarrassed. People got embarrassed. Uh the stories and the teasing was kind the stories and the teasing was kind the stories and the teasing was kind of about like of about like of about like I'm going to accuse you of something I'm going to accuse you of something I'm going to accuse you of something that you shouldn't do in this group, that you shouldn't do in this group, that you shouldn't do in this group, right? Like pass out drunk naked, you right? Like pass out drunk naked, you right? Like pass out drunk naked, you know, in the streets of Wisconsin. Don't know, in the streets of Wisconsin. Don't know, in the streets of Wisconsin. Don't do that, right? And then they get do that, right? And then they get do that, right? And then they get embarrassed and they say, "I'm not going embarrassed and they say, "I'm not going embarrassed and they say, "I'm not going to do that." And what we found is the to do that." And what we found is the to do that." And what we found is the more that they got embarrassed, the more that they got embarrassed, the more that they got embarrassed, the better they liked each other. better they liked each other. better they liked each other. Cuz it's turning to this motor Cuz it's turning to this motor Cuz it's turning to this motor pattern of like pattern of like pattern of like Wow, I'm showing you that I care about Wow, I'm showing you that I care about Wow, I'm showing you that I care about what you're accusing me of and I get what you're accusing me of and I get what you're accusing me of and I get embarrassed. You see that in me, we embarrassed. You see that in me, we embarrassed. You see that in me, we become closer. become closer. become closer. The the guys who are better teasers The the guys who are better teasers The the guys who are better teasers and that were more playful and funny and that were more playful and funny and that were more playful and funny and made people aware of the norms that made people aware of the norms that made people aware of the norms that mattered to the group, but not really mattered to the group, but not really mattered to the group, but not really humiliate people, those guys are more humiliate people, those guys are more humiliate people, those guys are more popular in the group. And that's been popular in the group. And that's been popular in the group. And that's been replicated, right? Just storytelling and replicated, right? Just storytelling and replicated, right? Just storytelling and ribbing each other. And and it and ribbing each other. And and it and ribbing each other. And and it was part of healthy group functioning. was part of healthy group functioning. was part of healthy group functioning. It's just embarrassing each other. You It's just embarrassing each other. You It's just embarrassing each other. You think about roasts, you know, it's the think about roasts, you know, it's the think about roasts, you know, it's the end of your career. end of your career. end of your career. You're going to get that someone's going You're going to get that someone's going You're going to get that someone's going to talk about your career. You're going to talk about your career. You're going to talk about your career. You're going to get hammered. to get hammered. to get hammered. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; And it's wonderful. &gt;&gt; And it's wonderful. &gt;&gt; And it's wonderful. &gt;&gt; I fear that day. &gt;&gt; I fear that day. &gt;&gt; I fear that day. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, and that's part of this &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, and that's part of this &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, and that's part of this phenomenon of like phenomenon of like phenomenon of like we make fun of the people we love we make fun of the people we love we make fun of the people we love the most. Siblings the most. Siblings the most. Siblings are you big families with a lot of are you big families with a lot of are you big families with a lot of siblings tease each other like mad, you know, and tease each other like mad, you know, and tease each other like mad, you know, and they joke and they josh and they wrestle they joke and they josh and they wrestle they joke and they josh and they wrestle and they give each other noogies and they give each other noogies and they give each other noogies and they have nicknames for each other. they have nicknames for each other. they have nicknames for each other. Again, to like make sure everybody's Again, to like make sure everybody's Again, to like make sure everybody's aware of what matters and how not to aware of what matters and how not to aware of what matters and how not to violate those rules. So, um it was it violate those rules. So, um it was it violate those rules. So, um it was it was fun research. It was meant a lot to was fun research. It was meant a lot to was fun research. It was meant a lot to me. &gt;&gt; I bet. I mean, it &gt;&gt; I bet. I mean, it &gt;&gt; I bet. I mean, it grew up in a big packs of boys. I grew up in a big packs of boys. I grew up in a big packs of boys. I mean, on my street growing up and mean, on my street growing up and mean, on my street growing up and skateboarding thing and then science it skateboarding thing and then science it skateboarding thing and then science it was a little bit different. Actually, was a little bit different. Actually, was a little bit different. Actually, when I came up there was more of that. when I came up there was more of that. when I came up there was more of that. It changed over time for good I think It changed over time for good I think It changed over time for good I think for good reasons, but for good reasons, but for good reasons, but um &gt;&gt; And then of course there's my podcast &gt;&gt; And then of course there's my podcast &gt;&gt; And then of course there's my podcast team and people keep telling me the team and people keep telling me the team and people keep telling me the reason I get teased a lot is cuz they reason I get teased a lot is cuz they reason I get teased a lot is cuz they cuz they like me, but you know cuz they like me, but you know cuz they like me, but you know &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. I saw an a I saw an a I saw an a an interesting well, two things. Uh a an interesting well, two things. Uh a an interesting well, two things. Uh a former guest on this podcast who's a former guest on this podcast who's a former guest on this podcast who's a psychiatrist who's also very uh versed psychiatrist who's also very uh versed psychiatrist who's also very uh versed in Eastern philosophy, uh Dr. K in Eastern philosophy, uh Dr. K in Eastern philosophy, uh Dr. K as they call him, um said that as they call him, um said that as they call him, um said that embarrassment is important because it embarrassment is important because it embarrassment is important because it also signals that you're not a creep. also signals that you're not a creep. also signals that you're not a creep. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Especially he was referring to &gt;&gt; Especially he was referring to &gt;&gt; Especially he was referring to heterosexual relationships where, you heterosexual relationships where, you heterosexual relationships where, you know, a guy says something trying to be know, a guy says something trying to be know, a guy says something trying to be uh you know, trying to flirt basically uh you know, trying to flirt basically uh you know, trying to flirt basically or pick up on someone and then uh the or pick up on someone and then uh the or pick up on someone and then uh the woman says something back and he like woman says something back and he like woman says something back and he like gets embarrassed. He realizes like he gets embarrassed. He realizes like he gets embarrassed. He realizes like he said the wrong thing. If he doesn't show said the wrong thing. If he doesn't show said the wrong thing. If he doesn't show embarrassment, he's creepy. If he does, embarrassment, he's creepy. If he does, embarrassment, he's creepy. If he does, it verifies that he has a certain degree it verifies that he has a certain degree it verifies that he has a certain degree of empathy and self-reflection. Now, so of empathy and self-reflection. Now, so of empathy and self-reflection. Now, so that was his point, but it feels that was his point, but it feels that was his point, but it feels relevant here. So And he's right. I relevant here. So And he's right. I relevant here. So And he's right. I mean, you know, mean, you know, mean, you know, uh Darwin early on wrote about the blush uh Darwin early on wrote about the blush uh Darwin early on wrote about the blush being a sign of your healthy character, being a sign of your healthy character, being a sign of your healthy character, your moral virtue almost. And in your moral virtue almost. And in your moral virtue almost. And in non-human species, the facial reddening non-human species, the facial reddening non-human species, the facial reddening is associated with physical robustness. is associated with physical robustness. is associated with physical robustness. And then in humans, we think of it as And then in humans, we think of it as And then in humans, we think of it as moral robustness. Like, yeah, I care moral robustness. Like, yeah, I care moral robustness. Like, yeah, I care about stuff. We did work early on, Bob about stuff. We did work early on, Bob about stuff. We did work early on, Bob Knight at Berkeley, orbital frontal Knight at Berkeley, orbital frontal Knight at Berkeley, orbital frontal patients. The orbital frontal cortex is in part The orbital frontal cortex is in part The orbital frontal cortex is in part where your ethical consider- where your ethical consider- where your ethical consider- consideration takes place. consideration takes place. consideration takes place. And if you have damage to that region of And if you have damage to that region of And if you have damage to that region of the brain through brain trauma, you fall the brain through brain trauma, you fall the brain through brain trauma, you fall off a motorcycle or off a motorcycle or off a motorcycle or you know, fall off a ladder, you know, fall off a ladder, you know, fall off a ladder, you don't show embarrassment where you don't show embarrassment where you don't show embarrassment where you should and they have feel should and they have feel should and they have feel creepy if you will or just like creepy if you will or just like creepy if you will or just like hey, they're not playing by the rules. hey, they're not playing by the rules. hey, they're not playing by the rules. So it's So it's So it's a very subtle thing. Erving Goffman it's a very subtle thing. Erving Goffman it's a very subtle thing. Erving Goffman wrote a lot about it, the great wrote a lot about it, the great wrote a lot about it, the great sociologist like our embarrassment is sociologist like our embarrassment is sociologist like our embarrassment is telling people like, I know what the telling people like, I know what the telling people like, I know what the rules are and I care about them. I'm rules are and I care about them. I'm rules are and I care about them. I'm committed to them. So your psychiatrist committed to them. So your psychiatrist committed to them. So your psychiatrist friend is right. Along the lines of friend is right. Along the lines of friend is right. Along the lines of teasing, Yeah. teasing, Yeah. teasing, Yeah. uh someone I'm proud to call a uh someone I'm proud to call a uh someone I'm proud to call a friend who's also public facing, uh friend who's also public facing, uh friend who's also public facing, uh Jocko Willink, who's also turns out one Jocko Willink, who's also turns out one Jocko Willink, who's also turns out one of our of our of our we're friends for a bunch of reasons, we're friends for a bunch of reasons, we're friends for a bunch of reasons, but one of them is that he grew up but one of them is that he grew up but one of them is that he grew up really into East Coast hardcore music. really into East Coast hardcore music. really into East Coast hardcore music. Not not a genre I gravitate towards, Not not a genre I gravitate towards, Not not a genre I gravitate towards, but there's some marginal overlap, um but there's some marginal overlap, um but there's some marginal overlap, um uh with the types of music uh I'm into. uh with the types of music uh I'm into. uh with the types of music uh I'm into. We've gone on a show together, and um he We've gone on a show together, and um he We've gone on a show together, and um he put something up. You know, every once put something up. You know, every once put something up. You know, every once in a while on social media, somebody in a while on social media, somebody in a while on social media, somebody posts something that really lands, Naval posts something that really lands, Naval posts something that really lands, Naval or Jocko, and he's Jocko's a man of few Jocko, and he's Jocko's a man of few Jocko, and he's Jocko's a man of few words, so I'm going to put more words to words, so I'm going to put more words to words, so I'm going to put more words to it than he was able to. Um but the it than he was able to. Um but the it than he was able to. Um but the quote was something like, um quote was something like, um quote was something like, um you know, if you want to understand and you know, if you want to understand and you know, if you want to understand and he said former Navy SEAL Team he said former Navy SEAL Team he said former Navy SEAL Team operator, most people know that, operator, most people know that, operator, most people know that, but um but um but um if you want to understand um males in if you want to understand um males in if you want to understand um males in groups and healthy uh groups and healthy uh groups and healthy uh masculine friendship, uh guys are going masculine friendship, uh guys are going masculine friendship, uh guys are going to tease each other relentlessly in to tease each other relentlessly in to tease each other relentlessly in front of each other, but they'll never front of each other, but they'll never front of each other, but they'll never tease behind somebody's back, and tease behind somebody's back, and tease behind somebody's back, and they'll back the other person who they they'll back the other person who they they'll back the other person who they were just teasing in person Yeah. were just teasing in person Yeah. were just teasing in person Yeah. &gt;&gt; against the rest, you know, they'll &gt;&gt; against the rest, you know, they'll &gt;&gt; against the rest, you know, they'll buffer them against any kind of buffer them against any kind of buffer them against any kind of criticism. So, that's a very interesting criticism. So, that's a very interesting criticism. So, that's a very interesting um kind of uh contrast there that I think kind of uh contrast there that I think kind of uh contrast there that I think is true. is true. is true. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like you know, it's not like you &gt;&gt; Like you know, it's not like you &gt;&gt; Like you know, it's not like you tease your friend behind his back. It's tease your friend behind his back. It's tease your friend behind his back. It's the it's the teasing to his face that the it's the teasing to his face that the it's the teasing to his face that actually builds the bond. actually builds the bond. actually builds the bond. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's another piece of that, &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's another piece of that, &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's another piece of that, which is that you know that person which is that you know that person which is that you know that person would back you if you're out of the would back you if you're out of the would back you if you're out of the room. And you know, I a couple friends, all my And you know, I a couple friends, all my And you know, I a couple friends, all my friends come to mind, but a couple friends come to mind, but a couple friends come to mind, but a couple people who really think about and people who really think about and people who really think about and talk about this loyalty component uh talk about this loyalty component uh talk about this loyalty component uh Jocko was talking about there, Lex Jocko was talking about there, Lex Jocko was talking about there, Lex Friedman. You know, it's a it's a Friedman. You know, it's a it's a Friedman. You know, it's a it's a critical component to um I'm sure female critical component to um I'm sure female critical component to um I'm sure female friendship, too, although I only know my friendship, too, although I only know my friendship, too, although I only know my own experience, so uh to male own experience, so uh to male own experience, so uh to male friendship, which is that friendship, which is that friendship, which is that they can say anything to your face, they can say anything to your face, they can say anything to your face, even be harsh criticism, but you know even be harsh criticism, but you know even be harsh criticism, but you know that if you're out of the room, they're that if you're out of the room, they're that if you're out of the room, they're not going to cut you down. They're going not going to cut you down. They're going not going to cut you down. They're going to reserve that for when you're standing to reserve that for when you're standing to reserve that for when you're standing in front of them, thankfully. We in front of them, thankfully. We in front of them, thankfully. We documented in the fraternity study that documented in the fraternity study that documented in the fraternity study that you know, when you when you tease you know, when you when you tease you know, when you when you tease somebody and you're like somebody and you're like somebody and you're like hey man, do you see this guy's dance hey man, do you see this guy's dance hey man, do you see this guy's dance moves or you see this guy shoot free moves or you see this guy shoot free moves or you see this guy shoot free throw, whatever it is, throw, whatever it is, throw, whatever it is, you're just making light of human foible you're just making light of human foible you're just making light of human foible and all the funny things that we do. and all the funny things that we do. and all the funny things that we do. And there's just this And there's just this And there's just this really subtle repair work where they're really subtle repair work where they're really subtle repair work where they're saying like saying like saying like I'm teasing you, but I know you got it, I'm teasing you, but I know you got it, I'm teasing you, but I know you got it, you know, and I'll support you. And I you know, and I'll support you. And I you know, and I'll support you. And I agree. I think that you know, part of agree. I think that you know, part of agree. I think that you know, part of what teasing does is it says like what teasing does is it says like what teasing does is it says like what do we as a collective really care about? do we as a collective really care about? do we as a collective really care about? And let's And let's And let's surface those norms in a light-hearted surface those norms in a light-hearted surface those norms in a light-hearted way and we know together. And if and if way and we know together. And if and if way and we know together. And if and if you make mistakes, you should be you make mistakes, you should be you make mistakes, you should be apologetic about it, but part of it also apologetic about it, but part of it also apologetic about it, but part of it also is just uh is just uh is just uh this sort of I got your back repair work this sort of I got your back repair work this sort of I got your back repair work that they did. Um and it's profound. It that they did. Um and it's profound. It that they did. Um and it's profound. It it You know, it's interesting I was kind it You know, it's interesting I was kind it You know, it's interesting I was kind of this shy kid. I was very small of this shy kid. I was very small of this shy kid. I was very small growing up and kind of the teasing often growing up and kind of the teasing often growing up and kind of the teasing often crossed lines in high school, just you crossed lines in high school, just you crossed lines in high school, just you know, bullying and so forth. know, bullying and so forth. know, bullying and so forth. And then I started to play basketball And then I started to play basketball And then I started to play basketball and you know, uh and I realized like a and you know, uh and I realized like a and you know, uh and I realized like a lot of it's just lot of it's just lot of it's just men making sure just men making sure just men making sure they know that the rules of the game, they know that the rules of the game, they know that the rules of the game, you know, and showing also in those you know, and showing also in those you know, and showing also in those moments of the joys of laughing together moments of the joys of laughing together moments of the joys of laughing together like I support you. I'm with you, right? like I support you. I'm with you, right? like I support you. I'm with you, right? Uh what a sophisticated thing to do um Uh what a sophisticated thing to do um Uh what a sophisticated thing to do um compared to the alternatives. I have a compared to the alternatives. I have a compared to the alternatives. I have a sister, so I was always struck by the sister, so I was always struck by the sister, so I was always struck by the brothers in my neighborhood. Yeah. There brothers in my neighborhood. Yeah. There brothers in my neighborhood. Yeah. There were two in particular, like I would were two in particular, like I would were two in particular, like I would hear screaming outside, go outside. It's hear screaming outside, go outside. It's hear screaming outside, go outside. It's older brother, his name was Peter, older brother, his name was Peter, older brother, his name was Peter, holding Michael's face in the holding Michael's face in the holding Michael's face in the sprinklers. His brother's just crying sprinklers. His brother's just crying sprinklers. His brother's just crying and crying, screaming. I mean, and crying, screaming. I mean, and crying, screaming. I mean, relentless older brother torture. relentless older brother torture. relentless older brother torture. Some people hear this and probably be Some people hear this and probably be Some people hear this and probably be like, "Oh, call the cops." You know, and like, "Oh, call the cops." You know, and like, "Oh, call the cops." You know, and I don't know what the reaction is I don't know what the reaction is I don't know what the reaction is nowadays. I'll try not to be generally nowadays. I'll try not to be generally nowadays. I'll try not to be generally generationally biased. I don't know. generationally biased. I don't know. generationally biased. I don't know. Yeah, he was he was abusing his younger Yeah, he was he was abusing his younger Yeah, he was he was abusing his younger brother. [laughter] brother. [laughter] brother. [laughter] And but if [clears throat] anyone And but if [clears throat] anyone And but if [clears throat] anyone said or tried to do anything to either said or tried to do anything to either said or tried to do anything to either one of them, they would immediately pair one of them, they would immediately pair one of them, they would immediately pair up and fight anyone. It was interesting, up and fight anyone. It was interesting, up and fight anyone. It was interesting, right? Um for a guy who had an older right? Um for a guy who had an older right? Um for a guy who had an older sister, it's a very different sister, it's a very different sister, it's a very different experience, right? I mean, she had her experience, right? I mean, she had her experience, right? I mean, she had her own form of older sister kind of hazing own form of older sister kind of hazing own form of older sister kind of hazing to her younger brother. But there really to her younger brother. But there really to her younger brother. But there really does seem to be something critical about does seem to be something critical about does seem to be something critical about kind of defining the relationship with kind of defining the relationship with kind of defining the relationship with people one-on-one in groups versus when people one-on-one in groups versus when people one-on-one in groups versus when there's an outside threat. And and not there's an outside threat. And and not there's an outside threat. And and not that we want outside threat, but that we want outside threat, but that we want outside threat, but as long as we're talking about the as long as we're talking about the as long as we're talking about the sort of the I don't want to say sort of the I don't want to say sort of the I don't want to say disintegration, that's too pessimistic. disintegration, that's too pessimistic. disintegration, that's too pessimistic. The sort of gradual erosion of this The sort of gradual erosion of this The sort of gradual erosion of this collective feeling. It is there less collective feeling. It is there less collective feeling. It is there less just kind of just kind of just kind of grouping up together and doing grouping up together and doing grouping up together and doing things? Yeah, you know, I things? Yeah, you know, I things? Yeah, you know, I um 10 years ago 10 years ago 10 years ago uh 15 years ago, 10 years ago uh 15 years ago, 10 years ago uh 15 years ago, 10 years ago um first there was the science of first there was the science of first there was the science of loneliness and isolation, John Cacioppo. loneliness and isolation, John Cacioppo. loneliness and isolation, John Cacioppo. Uh and then those who followed like, Uh and then those who followed like, Uh and then those who followed like, "Whoa, we are fragmenting." "Whoa, we are fragmenting." "Whoa, we are fragmenting." And we would spend much too much time And we would spend much too much time And we would spend much too much time alone, isolated. And then COVID hit, alone, isolated. And then COVID hit, alone, isolated. And then COVID hit, lockdown, etc. lockdown, etc. lockdown, etc. And our surgeon general, former surgeon And our surgeon general, former surgeon And our surgeon general, former surgeon general Vivek Murthy got it right, like general Vivek Murthy got it right, like general Vivek Murthy got it right, like uh it's an epidemic of loneliness. And uh it's an epidemic of loneliness. And uh it's an epidemic of loneliness. And I, as a social psychologist, you know, I, as a social psychologist, you know, I, as a social psychologist, you know, I'm interested in these social emotions. I'm interested in these social emotions. I'm interested in these social emotions. I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, you know, you just look at the basic raw you know, you just look at the basic raw you know, you just look at the basic raw facts, like picnics are down by half. We facts, like picnics are down by half. We facts, like picnics are down by half. We don't go to movies like we used to. We don't go to movies like we used to. We don't go to movies like we used to. We don't um we don't listen to music don't um we don't listen to music don't um we don't listen to music together. We don't 30 together. We don't 30 together. We don't 30 the estimate is that 30% of meals in the estimate is that 30% of meals in the estimate is that 30% of meals in the United States people eat them by United States people eat them by United States people eat them by themselves. You know, I eat a lot of my themselves. You know, I eat a lot of my themselves. You know, I eat a lot of my meals by myself. meals by myself. meals by myself. Um we go on walks by ourselves. We don't Um we go on walks by ourselves. We don't Um we go on walks by ourselves. We don't go to church. Church is way down. go to church. Church is way down. go to church. Church is way down. Um so the kind of the broad sociological Um so the kind of the broad sociological Um so the kind of the broad sociological trends are alarming on that trends are alarming on that trends are alarming on that fragmentation. But I think the young generation is But I think the young generation is But I think the young generation is putting it back together in really putting it back together in really putting it back together in really interesting ways. interesting ways. interesting ways. You know, we know from survey data You know, we know from survey data You know, we know from survey data the 25-year-olds, 30-year-olds are the 25-year-olds, 30-year-olds are the 25-year-olds, 30-year-olds are really interested in game nights. You really interested in game nights. You really interested in game nights. You know, those are coming back. They're know, those are coming back. They're know, those are coming back. They're interested in living together, co-op interested in living together, co-op interested in living together, co-op cooperative living. They're cooking more cooperative living. They're cooking more cooperative living. They're cooking more with each other. with each other. with each other. Value-wise, they care more about Value-wise, they care more about Value-wise, they care more about community than my generation. I was the community than my generation. I was the community than my generation. I was the great explosion of individualism and great explosion of individualism and great explosion of individualism and they're kind of like they're kind of like they're kind of like you know, if I you know, if I you know, if I if I choose a job, I want to make sure if I choose a job, I want to make sure if I choose a job, I want to make sure I'm working with other people I like. I I'm working with other people I like. I I'm working with other people I like. I didn't even I didn't think about that. I didn't even I didn't think about that. I didn't even I didn't think about that. I don't know if you know, don't know if you know, don't know if you know, uh so I think it's coming back. And and uh so I think it's coming back. And and uh so I think it's coming back. And and I love the signs of you know, festivals I love the signs of you know, festivals I love the signs of you know, festivals are reappearing now. The farmers market are reappearing now. The farmers market are reappearing now. The farmers market that I've talked about, the you know, that I've talked about, the you know, that I've talked about, the you know, the dance groups that are now returning, the dance groups that are now returning, the dance groups that are now returning, contact dance. I mean, these yoga contact dance. I mean, these yoga contact dance. I mean, these yoga studios. One out of eight Americans does studios. One out of eight Americans does studios. One out of eight Americans does yoga. You know, I do yoga two to three yoga. You know, I do yoga two to three yoga. You know, I do yoga two to three times &gt;&gt; That's so wild. &gt;&gt; That's so wild. &gt;&gt; That's so wild. &gt;&gt; It's amazing. &gt;&gt; It's amazing. &gt;&gt; It's amazing. &gt;&gt; 15 years ago no one would have predicted &gt;&gt; 15 years ago no one would have predicted &gt;&gt; 15 years ago no one would have predicted that. Also 15 years ago no one would that. Also 15 years ago no one would that. Also 15 years ago no one would have predicted that the single it have predicted that the single it have predicted that the single it we're being told that one of the single we're being told that one of the single we're being told that one of the single most important health interventions that most important health interventions that most important health interventions that women and men should do is like lift women and men should do is like lift women and men should do is like lift weights. The only people who lifted weights. The only people who lifted weights. The only people who lifted weights when I was growing up were like weights when I was growing up were like weights when I was growing up were like bodybuilders and preseason football bodybuilders and preseason football bodybuilders and preseason football players. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is that true? Lifting weights is I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is that true? Lifting weights is I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is that true? Lifting weights is I mean, you never want to actually live mean, you never want to actually live mean, you never want to actually live this way, but if you if you could only this way, but if you if you could only this way, but if you if you could only pick one form of exercise pick one form of exercise pick one form of exercise to do once a week, that's what you would to do once a week, that's what you would to do once a week, that's what you would do. I mean, just in terms of bone do. I mean, just in terms of bone do. I mean, just in terms of bone health, if it's done properly you health, if it's done properly you health, if it's done properly you probably get some cardiovascular probably get some cardiovascular probably get some cardiovascular benefit, too, but just in terms of brain benefit, too, but just in terms of brain benefit, too, but just in terms of brain health. I mean, obviously you want to do health. I mean, obviously you want to do health. I mean, obviously you want to do both, but resistance training is clearly both, but resistance training is clearly both, but resistance training is clearly has a longevity benefit. has a longevity benefit. has a longevity benefit. But for the longest time, I mean, you But for the longest time, I mean, you But for the longest time, I mean, you just didn't see women in gyms. Very few, just didn't see women in gyms. Very few, just didn't see women in gyms. Very few, excuse me. Very few. And if you did, excuse me. Very few. And if you did, excuse me. Very few. And if you did, they were sort of they, you know, women they were sort of they, you know, women they were sort of they, you know, women are pushing them heavy for them or are pushing them heavy for them or are pushing them heavy for them or in some cases heavier than the guys are in some cases heavier than the guys are in some cases heavier than the guys are lifting, but regardless, lifting, but regardless, lifting, but regardless, that's a huge shift. So, many that's a huge shift. So, many that's a huge shift. So, many more people are in gyms. And I wonder more people are in gyms. And I wonder more people are in gyms. And I wonder whether or not it contributes to some whether or not it contributes to some whether or not it contributes to some sort of feeling of collective. I mean, sort of feeling of collective. I mean, sort of feeling of collective. I mean, you're training hard around other you're training hard around other you're training hard around other people. So, that's cool. I think people. So, that's cool. I think people. So, that's cool. I think Vivek Murthy in particular, who I deeply Vivek Murthy in particular, who I deeply Vivek Murthy in particular, who I deeply admire and have worked with a bit, admire and have worked with a bit, admire and have worked with a bit, you know, he got our health world. you know, he got our health world. you know, he got our health world. Think about it. Surgeon General of the Think about it. Surgeon General of the Think about it. Surgeon General of the United States, the first one to come out United States, the first one to come out United States, the first one to come out of public health traditions, did work in of public health traditions, did work in of public health traditions, did work in India, right? And he's like, India, right? And he's like, India, right? And he's like, there's this social side that you've there's this social side that you've there's this social side that you've covered in your show, like to health, to covered in your show, like to health, to covered in your show, like to health, to physical health, to the physical health, to the physical health, to the telomeres of your cells, your the telomeres of your cells, your the telomeres of your cells, your DNA, and the vagus nerve, and so forth. DNA, and the vagus nerve, and so forth. DNA, and the vagus nerve, and so forth. Oxytocin, cortisol, it's social. Uh Oxytocin, cortisol, it's social. Uh Oxytocin, cortisol, it's social. Uh there's there are social dimensions to there's there are social dimensions to there's there are social dimensions to our nervous system. our nervous system. our nervous system. And I think that's coming, Andrew. Like, And I think that's coming, Andrew. Like, And I think that's coming, Andrew. Like, we're starting to see we're starting to see we're starting to see Why do I go to a farmers market? Cuz I Why do I go to a farmers market? Cuz I Why do I go to a farmers market? Cuz I feel a sense of community. And why do I feel a sense of community. And why do I feel a sense of community. And why do I love yoga? Because love yoga? Because love yoga? Because I'm doing these postures all I'm doing these postures all I'm doing these postures all synchronized with people I don't know, synchronized with people I don't know, synchronized with people I don't know, and I feel sense of awe and I feel sense of awe and I feel sense of awe and transcendence. Why do I lift weights, transcendence. Why do I lift weights, transcendence. Why do I lift weights, right? There's the banter and the discussion There's the banter and the discussion There's the banter and the discussion and the history and the sense of and the history and the sense of and the history and the sense of you know, of what this all means you know, of what this all means you know, of what this all means culturally. I think that's coming. I culturally. I think that's coming. I culturally. I think that's coming. I think the gyms are appealing to it in think the gyms are appealing to it in think the gyms are appealing to it in some sense, right? Little bit more some sense, right? Little bit more some sense, right? Little bit more community activ- act- activity. And I community activ- act- activity. And I community activ- act- activity. And I think it's good news, you know. I love think it's good news, you know. I love think it's good news, you know. I love the Japanese onsen. Uh the Japanese onsen. Uh the Japanese onsen. Uh you go for the water, you go for the water, you go for the water, you know, and the springs and the you know, and the springs and the you know, and the springs and the heat and so forth, But they in their heat and so forth, But they in their heat and so forth, But they in their wisdom have built entire community wisdom have built entire community wisdom have built entire community experiences around it. experiences around it. experiences around it. Where you wash yourself and you Where you wash yourself and you Where you wash yourself and you bathe together and you eat together and bathe together and you eat together and bathe together and you eat together and you there's sayings up on the walls and you there's sayings up on the walls and you there's sayings up on the walls and you spend a little time with your kids you spend a little time with your kids you spend a little time with your kids there, right? So, I hope we learn there, right? So, I hope we learn there, right? So, I hope we learn cuz I think it's important. cuz I think it's important. cuz I think it's important. Yeah, I'm thinking a lot now about how Yeah, I'm thinking a lot now about how Yeah, I'm thinking a lot now about how we can bridge between these incredible we can bridge between these incredible we can bridge between these incredible technologies cuz I am a fan technologies cuz I am a fan technologies cuz I am a fan and but also the and but also the and but also the non-negotiable technology of our the non-negotiable technology of our the non-negotiable technology of our nervous system and our biology and nervous system and our biology and nervous system and our biology and our psychology, right? Lately because I our psychology, right? Lately because I our psychology, right? Lately because I have a query I'm really into this thing have a query I'm really into this thing have a query I'm really into this thing called aquascaping which is this called aquascaping which is this called aquascaping which is this Japanese form of like plants and Japanese form of like plants and Japanese form of like plants and freshwater fish and just obsessed with freshwater fish and just obsessed with freshwater fish and just obsessed with it but and it but and it but and when the ecosystem is doing well I'm and when the ecosystem is doing well I'm and when the ecosystem is doing well I'm like oh like I feel like oh like I feel like oh like I feel it's a form of it's brought me some awe it's a form of it's brought me some awe it's a form of it's brought me some awe at times when like there things are at times when like there things are at times when like there things are going well in there I'm like wow it's going well in there I'm like wow it's going well in there I'm like wow it's just beautiful and just beautiful and just beautiful and I think there and I think there and I think there things that I would never do to my fish. things that I would never do to my fish. things that I would never do to my fish. I would never isolate them from one I would never isolate them from one I would never isolate them from one another but I give them enough places to another but I give them enough places to another but I give them enough places to hide from one another cuz there's a lot hide from one another cuz there's a lot hide from one another cuz there's a lot of dominance hierarchy stuff being of dominance hierarchy stuff being of dominance hierarchy stuff being worked out between these discus. I make worked out between these discus. I make worked out between these discus. I make sure they're on a light cycle. I make sure they're on a light cycle. I make sure they're on a light cycle. I make sure they're fed but not overfed or sure they're fed but not overfed or sure they're fed but not overfed or underfed, right? And um underfed, right? And um underfed, right? And um I wouldn't do most of the things I wouldn't do most of the things I wouldn't do most of the things that we do to ourselves to that we do to ourselves to that we do to ourselves to my fish. to my fish. to my fish. You know, I wouldn't isolate them and You know, I wouldn't isolate them and You know, I wouldn't isolate them and give them like little videos of other give them like little videos of other give them like little videos of other fish to look at. Like I know that fish to look at. Like I know that fish to look at. Like I know that wouldn't that wouldn't work. wouldn't that wouldn't work. wouldn't that wouldn't work. I know that they would die. I know I know that they would die. I know I know that they would die. I know that you know, and so I think we can learn a you know, and so I think we can learn a you know, and so I think we can learn a lot from lot from lot from more simpler organisms and the sort more simpler organisms and the sort more simpler organisms and the sort of basic units of care and community. of basic units of care and community. of basic units of care and community. They're very similar. Maybe it gets They're very similar. Maybe it gets They're very similar. Maybe it gets played out differently but they're played out differently but they're played out differently but they're very similar cuz very similar cuz very similar cuz obviously we evolved obviously we evolved obviously we evolved similar nervous systems let alone similar nervous systems let alone similar nervous systems let alone similar needs. similar needs. similar needs. I would like to talk about psychedelics I would like to talk about psychedelics I would like to talk about psychedelics if you're willing. Yeah. I think there if you're willing. Yeah. I think there if you're willing. Yeah. I think there are two are two are two at least two views of psychedelics. at least two views of psychedelics. at least two views of psychedelics. Yeah. With the caveat that Yeah. With the caveat that Yeah. With the caveat that this is not a call for people to start this is not a call for people to start this is not a call for people to start taking them that you know, these are taking them that you know, these are taking them that you know, these are powerful compounds that um people with powerful compounds that um people with powerful compounds that um people with psychosis or bipolar conditions in their psychosis or bipolar conditions in their psychosis or bipolar conditions in their family really need to be careful family really need to be careful family really need to be careful and on and on. Just be careful. I and on and on. Just be careful. I and on and on. Just be careful. I don't say that to protect myself. I say don't say that to protect myself. I say don't say that to protect myself. I say that to protect whoever's listening and that to protect whoever's listening and that to protect whoever's listening and watching. Really, this is no small watching. Really, this is no small watching. Really, this is no small no small bump. It's a whole thing. So, no small bump. It's a whole thing. So, no small bump. It's a whole thing. So, some people will say, "Okay, they just some people will say, "Okay, they just some people will say, "Okay, they just send you inward." send you inward." send you inward." And that's the opposite of what we're And that's the opposite of what we're And that's the opposite of what we're talking about. Like getting all the awe talking about. Like getting all the awe talking about. Like getting all the awe inside. Like, "Okay, that's inside. Like, "Okay, that's inside. Like, "Okay, that's I mean, that's I mean, that's I mean, that's pretty extreme. pretty extreme. pretty extreme. Um other people will say that their Um other people will say that their Um other people will say that their experiences with psychedelics allow them experiences with psychedelics allow them experiences with psychedelics allow them to come out of that experience and to come out of that experience and to come out of that experience and really have a felt really have a felt really have a felt connection to people, to plants, to connection to people, to plants, to connection to people, to plants, to animals, to life that is um profoundly animals, to life that is um profoundly animals, to life that is um profoundly positive for their feelings of positive for their feelings of positive for their feelings of connection. Yeah. And seeing awe perhaps connection. Yeah. And seeing awe perhaps connection. Yeah. And seeing awe perhaps even in lots of things. So, how should even in lots of things. So, how should even in lots of things. So, how should we think about psychedelics? And we think about psychedelics? And we think about psychedelics? And we should probably constrain the question a should probably constrain the question a should probably constrain the question a little bit. Like, I'm not talking about little bit. Like, I'm not talking about little bit. Like, I'm not talking about MDMA, which is not a psychedelic. It's MDMA, which is not a psychedelic. It's MDMA, which is not a psychedelic. It's an empathogen. Ketamine is not a an empathogen. Ketamine is not a an empathogen. Ketamine is not a psychedelic. It's a dissociative psychedelic. It's a dissociative psychedelic. It's a dissociative anesthetic. I'm starting to do this now anesthetic. I'm starting to do this now anesthetic. I'm starting to do this now because people will start to lump, and because people will start to lump, and because people will start to lump, and it's actually causing issues that for it's actually causing issues that for it's actually causing issues that for the potential legalization for So, we the potential legalization for So, we the potential legalization for So, we need we need to be splitters, not need we need to be splitters, not need we need to be splitters, not lumpers, here. So, I'm talking about lumpers, here. So, I'm talking about lumpers, here. So, I'm talking about LSD, psilocybin, LSD, psilocybin, LSD, psilocybin, maybe DMT, ayahuasca, the maybe DMT, ayahuasca, the maybe DMT, ayahuasca, the classic psychedelics. classic psychedelics. classic psychedelics. Yeah, what are your thoughts on these? Yeah, what are your thoughts on these? Yeah, what are your thoughts on these? I'm good friends with Michael Pollan and I'm good friends with Michael Pollan and I'm good friends with Michael Pollan and was, you know, kind of walk in the was, you know, kind of walk in the was, you know, kind of walk in the Berkeley hills as he was producing that Berkeley hills as he was producing that Berkeley hills as he was producing that book and book and book and you know, watched as we started a center you know, watched as we started a center you know, watched as we started a center for psychedelics uh at Berkeley and for psychedelics uh at Berkeley and for psychedelics uh at Berkeley and um and you know, it's a revolution. I um and you know, it's a revolution. I um and you know, it's a revolution. I mean, it's psychedelic use is up, you mean, it's psychedelic use is up, you mean, it's psychedelic use is up, you know, 40% since his book. I mean, it's know, 40% since his book. I mean, it's know, 40% since his book. I mean, it's incredible to watch. And I have a few incredible to watch. And I have a few incredible to watch. And I have a few thoughts. You know, one is thoughts. You know, one is thoughts. You know, one is you know, make sure to honor the you know, make sure to honor the you know, make sure to honor the indigenous traditions out of which they indigenous traditions out of which they indigenous traditions out of which they come. Uh those are spirit medicines in their Uh those are spirit medicines in their Uh those are spirit medicines in their community. They're a part of deep ethical They're a part of deep ethical They're a part of deep ethical traditions. Um you know, and to honor that with Um you know, and to honor that with Um you know, and to honor that with you know, uh you know, uh sharing of you know, uh you know, uh sharing of you know, uh you know, uh sharing of resources and knowledge and the resources and knowledge and the resources and knowledge and the right kind of right kind of right kind of acknowledgement. That's really acknowledgement. That's really acknowledgement. That's really important. Um important. Um important. Um I think in some sense uh I think in some sense uh I think in some sense uh and you know, David Yaden at Johns and you know, David Yaden at Johns and you know, David Yaden at Johns Hopkins and Hopkins and Hopkins and others uh and some of the early Roland others uh and some of the early Roland others uh and some of the early Roland Griffiths work spoke to this that they Griffiths work spoke to this that they Griffiths work spoke to this that they are about awe um are about awe um are about awe um fundamentally. You know, they fundamentally. You know, they fundamentally. You know, they open up your mind and you see all life open up your mind and you see all life open up your mind and you see all life forms and time is different and your forms and time is different and your forms and time is different and your sense of self vanishes. sense of self vanishes. sense of self vanishes. Robin Carhartt-Harris, you know, and Robin Carhartt-Harris, you know, and Robin Carhartt-Harris, you know, and you're just connected to vast things, you're just connected to vast things, you're just connected to vast things, ecosystems, and ecosystems, and ecosystems, and sense of humanity. And I think in some sense of humanity. And I think in some sense of humanity. And I think in some sense in done when done in the right sense in done when done in the right sense in done when done in the right way, that's good news. way, that's good news. way, that's good news. You know, Molly Crockett and her team at You know, Molly Crockett and her team at You know, Molly Crockett and her team at Princeton like Princeton like Princeton like you go to a festival and you have you go to a festival and you have you go to a festival and you have psychedelics, a year later you're kinder psychedelics, a year later you're kinder psychedelics, a year later you're kinder uh through awe, right? Uh so, I think uh through awe, right? Uh so, I think uh through awe, right? Uh so, I think that's important. Uh I think it's great that's important. Uh I think it's great that's important. Uh I think it's great news what it does for the hard problems news what it does for the hard problems news what it does for the hard problems of the mind, you know, of the mind, you know, of the mind, you know, death anxiety, addiction, trauma, death anxiety, addiction, trauma, death anxiety, addiction, trauma, uh maybe veterans who are suffering uh maybe veterans who are suffering uh maybe veterans who are suffering twice through rates of PTSD. twice through rates of PTSD. twice through rates of PTSD. They're drawn to this, you know, and the They're drawn to this, you know, and the They're drawn to this, you know, and the VA is working on this. So, VA is working on this. So, VA is working on this. So, uh and the data look pretty good. OCD, uh and the data look pretty good. OCD, uh and the data look pretty good. OCD, right? Hard problems of the mind. right? Hard problems of the mind. right? Hard problems of the mind. Panic, right? That um Panic, right? That um Panic, right? That um I've in part dealt with. I've in part dealt with. I've in part dealt with. That is good news. That is good news. That is good news. Um I worry about microdosing. Um I worry about microdosing. Um I worry about microdosing. You know, I think people are taking um You know, I think people are taking um You know, I think people are taking um these things like coffee these things like coffee these things like coffee and it's not coffee, you know. and it's not coffee, you know. and it's not coffee, you know. No, it's not coffee. I drink coffee and No, it's not coffee. I drink coffee and No, it's not coffee. I drink coffee and I might and I know a thing or two about I might and I know a thing or two about I might and I know a thing or two about psychedelics by experience and it's psychedelics by experience and it's psychedelics by experience and it's definitely not coffee. definitely not coffee. definitely not coffee. &gt;&gt; speak to this and we've &gt;&gt; speak to this and we've &gt;&gt; speak to this and we've suddenly unleashed the use of it. Tens suddenly unleashed the use of it. Tens suddenly unleashed the use of it. Tens of millions of people are using it not of millions of people are using it not of millions of people are using it not in the way that Michael Pollan describes in the way that Michael Pollan describes in the way that Michael Pollan describes of like putting it into a cultural of like putting it into a cultural of like putting it into a cultural container of inquiry and knowledge and container of inquiry and knowledge and container of inquiry and knowledge and guidance. Uh and someone who knows what they're Uh and someone who knows what they're Uh and someone who knows what they're doing around you and so doing around you and so doing around you and so &gt;&gt; even. Safety, yeah. So, we're seeing &gt;&gt; even. Safety, yeah. So, we're seeing &gt;&gt; even. Safety, yeah. So, we're seeing that. And I, you know, they changed my life. I And I, you know, they changed my life. I And I, you know, they changed my life. I got to them early. Uh you know, got to them early. Uh you know, got to them early. Uh you know, &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; in my late teens, 17, 18, 19, I was a &gt;&gt; in my late teens, 17, 18, 19, I was a &gt;&gt; in my late teens, 17, 18, 19, I was a very anxious very anxious very anxious obsessive kid and I think they opened up obsessive kid and I think they opened up obsessive kid and I think they opened up my mind in this perspective way we've my mind in this perspective way we've my mind in this perspective way we've been talking about. I don't really do been talking about. I don't really do been talking about. I don't really do them now, you know, they gave me a lot. them now, you know, they gave me a lot. them now, you know, they gave me a lot. That's why they're here. That's why they're here. That's why they're here. You know, it's funny, you know, You know, it's funny, you know, You know, it's funny, you know, Andrew, like when I was doing them, we Andrew, like when I was doing them, we Andrew, like when I was doing them, we were reading Castaneda who's been were reading Castaneda who's been were reading Castaneda who's been debunked, you know, and we we're reading debunked, you know, and we we're reading debunked, you know, and we we're reading the traditions and thinking about them the traditions and thinking about them the traditions and thinking about them spiritually in the doors of perception spiritually in the doors of perception spiritually in the doors of perception and all this good stuff, right? We were and all this good stuff, right? We were and all this good stuff, right? We were they were embedded in a culture they were embedded in a culture they were embedded in a culture of trying to find mysticism or whatever of trying to find mysticism or whatever of trying to find mysticism or whatever it is and I hope people are doing that, it is and I hope people are doing that, it is and I hope people are doing that, you know, if they're going to be doing you know, if they're going to be doing you know, if they're going to be doing on them. Make it a form of inquiry. on them. Make it a form of inquiry. on them. Make it a form of inquiry. It's a complicated story. It's a complicated story. It's a complicated story. Like everything. Like technology. Well, Like everything. Like technology. Well, Like everything. Like technology. Well, they're a form of plant technology, they're a form of plant technology, they're a form of plant technology, right? Plant which right? Plant which right? Plant which quick vignette on that, we had someone quick vignette on that, we had someone quick vignette on that, we had someone here Chris McCurdy who runs a lab out in Chris McCurdy who runs a lab out in Chris McCurdy who runs a lab out in Florida. He studies kratom and other Florida. He studies kratom and other Florida. He studies kratom and other compounds from plants. The pharma compounds from plants. The pharma compounds from plants. The pharma companies, they bioprospect. They send companies, they bioprospect. They send companies, they bioprospect. They send people looking for plants that then they people looking for plants that then they people looking for plants that then they can find isolates and everything from can find isolates and everything from can find isolates and everything from aspirin to aspirin to aspirin to kratom to anesthetics like cocaine. I'm kratom to anesthetics like cocaine. I'm kratom to anesthetics like cocaine. I'm not suggesting people use this as an not suggesting people use this as an not suggesting people use this as an anesthetic. They come from plants, but anesthetic. They come from plants, but anesthetic. They come from plants, but they're isolated and then synthesized they're isolated and then synthesized they're isolated and then synthesized and enriched. And that's where the and enriched. And that's where the and enriched. And that's where the opiate the extreme opiate the extreme opiate the extreme opiate the extreme opiate the extreme opiate the extreme stimulant, you know, that's where it stimulant, you know, that's where it stimulant, you know, that's where it comes from, but they all come from plant comes from, but they all come from plant comes from, but they all come from plant al- Many of them come from plant al- Many of them come from plant al- Many of them come from plant alkaloids, which is interesting in its alkaloids, which is interesting in its alkaloids, which is interesting in its own right. But, the I share your own right. But, the I share your own right. But, the I share your feelings about microdosing. feelings about microdosing. feelings about microdosing. The data Robin Carhart-Harris tells me, The data Robin Carhart-Harris tells me, The data Robin Carhart-Harris tells me, and he's the real expert, of course, the and he's the real expert, of course, the and he's the real expert, of course, the data say there's no data say there's no data say there's no uh evidence of benefit from microdosing uh evidence of benefit from microdosing uh evidence of benefit from microdosing at least on major depression as compared at least on major depression as compared at least on major depression as compared to like two rounds of psilocybin with a to like two rounds of psilocybin with a to like two rounds of psilocybin with a guide therapy before, during, and after. guide therapy before, during, and after. guide therapy before, during, and after. Right. And on and on. So, Right. And on and on. So, Right. And on and on. So, I hope people hear that. Yeah, I hope I hope people hear that. Yeah, I hope I hope people hear that. Yeah, I hope they hear that. Um I had the opposite they hear that. Um I had the opposite they hear that. Um I had the opposite experience as you. Um I actually regret experience as you. Um I actually regret experience as you. Um I actually regret having done psychedelics when I was having done psychedelics when I was having done psychedelics when I was younger. They were terrifying. younger. They were terrifying. younger. They were terrifying. [clears throat] [clears throat] [clears throat] I didn't have a good experience. I didn't have a good experience. I didn't have a good experience. I stopped didn't go anywhere near them. stopped didn't go anywhere near them. stopped didn't go anywhere near them. And then later in a therapeutic setting And then later in a therapeutic setting And then later in a therapeutic setting um had a few experiences with them, not um had a few experiences with them, not um had a few experiences with them, not many, but that were immensely beneficial many, but that were immensely beneficial many, but that were immensely beneficial for me. Um so, kind of the opposite for me. Um so, kind of the opposite for me. Um so, kind of the opposite direction there. But, what we're talking direction there. But, what we're talking direction there. But, what we're talking about now about now about now about kind of okay, you know, there's about kind of okay, you know, there's about kind of okay, you know, there's this problem with certain technologies. problem with certain technologies. problem with certain technologies. There's the cultural the culture wars. There's the cultural the culture wars. There's the cultural the culture wars. There's the political wars. There's the There's the political wars. There's the There's the political wars. There's the actual war that's also going on right actual war that's also going on right actual war that's also going on right now. In a lot of ways this resembles now. In a lot of ways this resembles now. In a lot of ways this resembles like the '70s, '80s. There's not that I like the '70s, '80s. There's not that I like the '70s, '80s. There's not that I mean, I remember a time when you had mean, I remember a time when you had mean, I remember a time when you had yuppies and you had hippies and you had yuppies and you had hippies and you had yuppies and you had hippies and you had punk rockers. And you watch a John punk rockers. And you watch a John punk rockers. And you watch a John Hughes film and it was like the idea was Hughes film and it was like the idea was Hughes film and it was like the idea was it was like, "Oh, we're actually it was like, "Oh, we're actually it was like, "Oh, we're actually similar, right?" You know, it's like the similar, right?" You know, it's like the similar, right?" You know, it's like the extent to which those films like showed extent to which those films like showed extent to which those films like showed people, "Hey, like people were actually people, "Hey, like people were actually people, "Hey, like people were actually similar along certain dimensions as similar along certain dimensions as similar along certain dimensions as opposed to so different. But, opposed to so different. But, opposed to so different. But, you know, I you know, I you know, I wonder I wonder I wonder cuz I think about the not so recent cuz I think about the not so recent cuz I think about the not so recent and recent history of things. Everything and recent history of things. Everything and recent history of things. Everything from breath work, cold plunges, from breath work, cold plunges, from breath work, cold plunges, psychedelics, um awe, music, the collective um awe, music, the collective um awe, music, the collective consciousness. I mean, it's going to consciousness. I mean, it's going to consciousness. I mean, it's going to look different now. The same way that it look different now. The same way that it look different now. The same way that it looked different back then. Right? it looked different back then. Right? it looked different back then. Right? Like I'm trying to get outside my Like I'm trying to get outside my Like I'm trying to get outside my Gen X self these days and think like, Gen X self these days and think like, Gen X self these days and think like, "So, what would it look like? Like I'm "So, what would it look like? Like I'm "So, what would it look like? Like I'm the old guy now. So, what would it look the old guy now. So, what would it look the old guy now. So, what would it look like if these technologies like if these technologies like if these technologies I just mentioned a few, but all of them, I just mentioned a few, but all of them, I just mentioned a few, but all of them, including social media, what would it including social media, what would it including social media, what would it look like if those were all used to the look like if those were all used to the look like if those were all used to the greatest benefit? Like what would that greatest benefit? Like what would that greatest benefit? Like what would that look like? Can we be the open-minded look like? Can we be the open-minded look like? Can we be the open-minded parents of the '80s? You know, um can we parents of the '80s? You know, um can we parents of the '80s? You know, um can we be the be the be the Yeah, like because I feel like Yeah, like because I feel like Yeah, like because I feel like I can scream all day or about what I can scream all day or about what I can scream all day or about what I think about the science of this and that think about the science of this and that think about the science of this and that to younger people, but the only thing I to younger people, but the only thing I to younger people, but the only thing I actually have control over is like me. actually have control over is like me. actually have control over is like me. How do we How do we How do we um the let's say 40 the let's say 40 the let's say 40 to 100-year-olds to 100-year-olds to 100-year-olds Let's really lean it on the Let's really lean it on the Let's really lean it on the 40-to-70-year-olds. How do we create the 40-to-70-year-olds. How do we create the 40-to-70-year-olds. How do we create the environment so that environment so that environment so that younger people can younger people can younger people can flourish with these technologies as opposed to with these technologies as opposed to with these technologies as opposed to being like the parents of the '70s and being like the parents of the '70s and being like the parents of the '70s and '80s that are like, "Oh, they got long '80s that are like, "Oh, they got long '80s that are like, "Oh, they got long hair and like what is this like punk hair and like what is this like punk hair and like what is this like punk rock thing?" Like I don't want to be rock thing?" Like I don't want to be rock thing?" Like I don't want to be that person. That sucks. that person. That sucks. that person. That sucks. I also don't want to be the and I see I also don't want to be the and I see I also don't want to be the and I see this a lot, unfortunately, people who this a lot, unfortunately, people who this a lot, unfortunately, people who are part of those movements and then are part of those movements and then are part of those movements and then they they're just like towing the party they they're just like towing the party they they're just like towing the party line because line because line because they're like wholeheartedly adhering to they're like wholeheartedly adhering to they're like wholeheartedly adhering to one political group without thinking one political group without thinking one political group without thinking about whether or not there's any about whether or not there's any about whether or not there's any hint of rational argument on the any hint of rational argument on the any hint of rational argument on the other side. Right? The whole point is other side. Right? The whole point is other side. Right? The whole point is not to be against the whole idea is to not to be against the whole idea is to not to be against the whole idea is to be for what you believe is right. And be for what you believe is right. And be for what you believe is right. And so, I don't know how to do this. so, I don't know how to do this. so, I don't know how to do this. You're older than I am by a bit. You're older than I am by a bit. You're older than I am by a bit. You're clearly wiser than I am, seriously, and clearly wiser than I am, seriously, and clearly wiser than I am, seriously, and you have more life experience. So, what you have more life experience. So, what you have more life experience. So, what do we do? do we do? do we do? Like really, like what in the hell Like really, like what in the hell Like really, like what in the hell can we do because I don't like this, you can we do because I don't like this, you can we do because I don't like this, you guys are all on your phones. You know, guys are all on your phones. You know, guys are all on your phones. You know, like that doesn't feel good to me cuz like that doesn't feel good to me cuz like that doesn't feel good to me cuz they were telling us when we were they were telling us when we were they were telling us when we were younger, like this is ridiculous. Like younger, like this is ridiculous. Like younger, like this is ridiculous. Like the older guys are like, you know, small the older guys are like, you know, small the older guys are like, you know, small wheels on skateboard. They were right wheels on skateboard. They were right wheels on skateboard. They were right about the small wheels things. Turns out about the small wheels things. Turns out about the small wheels things. Turns out we wheels got too small. But, the we wheels got too small. But, the we wheels got too small. But, the [laughter] Jim will understand that joke. But, what Jim will understand that joke. But, what Jim will understand that joke. But, what do we do? I think we're in this moment, do we do? I think we're in this moment, do we do? I think we're in this moment, you know, with everything going on, you know, with everything going on, you know, with everything going on, you know, with AI and being online and know, with AI and being online and know, with AI and being online and polarization and climate crisis and polarization and climate crisis and polarization and climate crisis and uh you know, the things that we worry uh you know, the things that we worry uh you know, the things that we worry about, the rise of white supremacy about, the rise of white supremacy about, the rise of white supremacy politics, etc. Everybody's asking this politics, etc. Everybody's asking this politics, etc. Everybody's asking this question of like, what how do we question of like, what how do we question of like, what how do we kind of kind of kind of move forward and you know, in light move forward and you know, in light move forward and you know, in light of many of the things that we've talked of many of the things that we've talked of many of the things that we've talked about in this conversation. about in this conversation. about in this conversation. I'm most focused on um I'm most focused on um I'm most focused on um what Robert Putnam started to write what Robert Putnam started to write what Robert Putnam started to write about and other people started to write about and other people started to write about and other people started to write about, like the just the breakdown of about, like the just the breakdown of about, like the just the breakdown of collective life and shared life. collective life and shared life. collective life and shared life. And I think that's that you know, a And I think that's that you know, a And I think that's that you know, a defining issue of our times as well as defining issue of our times as well as defining issue of our times as well as our relationship to the natural world. our relationship to the natural world. our relationship to the natural world. And I find I find I find awe uh as do other people, really uh as do other people, really uh as do other people, really refreshing. It provides a roadmap, which refreshing. It provides a roadmap, which refreshing. It provides a roadmap, which is you know, and I'll give you a very you know, and I'll give you a very you know, and I'll give you a very concrete example. I'm working with concrete example. I'm working with concrete example. I'm working with Gehl Architecture Gehl Architecture Gehl Architecture on a Cities of Awe initiative and they on a Cities of Awe initiative and they on a Cities of Awe initiative and they do amazing work. Hundreds of cities do amazing work. Hundreds of cities do amazing work. Hundreds of cities around the world. 70% of human around the world. 70% of human around the world. 70% of human population is in cities. population is in cities. population is in cities. Most of our carbon emissions come out of Most of our carbon emissions come out of Most of our carbon emissions come out of cities. And this is cities. And this is cities. And this is this is a place we can redesign and this is a place we can redesign and this is a place we can redesign and make it better, right? And awe is a make it better, right? And awe is a make it better, right? And awe is a wonderful lens. So, you can ask and you wonderful lens. So, you can ask and you wonderful lens. So, you can ask and you could ask the same of like, what do you could ask the same of like, what do you could ask the same of like, what do you give to a teenager who's suffering give to a teenager who's suffering give to a teenager who's suffering suicidal ideation? Or what do you give suicidal ideation? Or what do you give suicidal ideation? Or what do you give to a veteran who is coming back and to a veteran who is coming back and to a veteran who is coming back and feeling alienated from the world? Uh you feeling alienated from the world? Uh you feeling alienated from the world? Uh you give them awe, right? And what does that give them awe, right? And what does that give them awe, right? And what does that mean? It's like, well, you give them a mean? It's like, well, you give them a mean? It's like, well, you give them a little nature and that's you rewild part little nature and that's you rewild part little nature and that's you rewild part of a city, right? You give them some of a city, right? You give them some of a city, right? You give them some public art. We love art. You know, we public art. We love art. You know, we public art. We love art. You know, we love visual art. You give them love visual art. You give them love visual art. You give them uh the opportunity to recognize the uh the opportunity to recognize the uh the opportunity to recognize the moral beauty. You know, you found it in moral beauty. You know, you found it in moral beauty. You know, you found it in Joe Strummer. Just get them to interact Joe Strummer. Just get them to interact Joe Strummer. Just get them to interact with other people from face-to-face. You with other people from face-to-face. You with other people from face-to-face. You give them give them give them uh a little collective stuff, right? You uh a little collective stuff, right? You uh a little collective stuff, right? You Hey, we're going to have the yoga class Hey, we're going to have the yoga class Hey, we're going to have the yoga class in the town square or the Mexican in the town square or the Mexican in the town square or the Mexican Zocalo. Everybody walks together at a Zocalo. Everybody walks together at a Zocalo. Everybody walks together at a certain hour of the day and they certain hour of the day and they certain hour of the day and they suddenly feel peaceful, right? suddenly feel peaceful, right? suddenly feel peaceful, right? Uh you give them ideas about big ideas Uh you give them ideas about big ideas Uh you give them ideas about big ideas and life. You give them a little bit and life. You give them a little bit and life. You give them a little bit of opportunity for meditation and of opportunity for meditation and of opportunity for meditation and reflection. Um that's easy to do. And when I, you know, that's easy to do. And when I, you know, that's easy to do. And when I, you know, was writing this book and just teaching was writing this book and just teaching was writing this book and just teaching social science for 30 years, social science for 30 years, social science for 30 years, it's like, man, you know, we used to do it's like, man, you know, we used to do it's like, man, you know, we used to do this really well and it used to be this really well and it used to be this really well and it used to be temples and church. You know, that's temples and church. You know, that's temples and church. You know, that's where it all was brought together and where it all was brought together and where it all was brought together and now we don't go there. 55% of Americans now we don't go there. 55% of Americans now we don't go there. 55% of Americans go to church. It used to be 90 or go to church. It used to be 90 or go to church. It used to be 90 or temple. Um I don't. I never did, you know, and I Um I don't. I never did, you know, and I Um I don't. I never did, you know, and I and I and I and I in some sense in some sense in some sense miss it. You know, I see my one of my miss it. You know, I see my one of my miss it. You know, I see my one of my best friends very religious. He views best friends very religious. He views best friends very religious. He views them and they have so much and them and they have so much and them and they have so much and we're recreating that right now, right? we're recreating that right now, right? we're recreating that right now, right? And we've got to do it in a coherent And we've got to do it in a coherent And we've got to do it in a coherent way. If it's the place where people are way. If it's the place where people are way. If it's the place where people are lifting weights, lifting weights, lifting weights, there should be music there. There there should be music there. There there should be music there. There should be visual stuff. There should be should be visual stuff. There should be should be visual stuff. There should be some art, nature. There should be some art, nature. There should be some art, nature. There should be some wisdom and some moral beauty, right? wisdom and some moral beauty, right? wisdom and some moral beauty, right? That's uh I love Iron Works where I go That's uh I love Iron Works where I go That's uh I love Iron Works where I go climb because you go there and it's like climb because you go there and it's like climb because you go there and it's like people are climbing, but there's you people are climbing, but there's you people are climbing, but there's you get to see the there's the art exhibit get to see the there's the art exhibit get to see the there's the art exhibit each month of a local artist. There's each month of a local artist. There's each month of a local artist. There's some music going on. You get to listen some music going on. You get to listen some music going on. You get to listen to music. So, this isn't that hard to music. So, this isn't that hard to music. So, this isn't that hard to do, Andrew, and I think the awe science do, Andrew, and I think the awe science do, Andrew, and I think the awe science gives us road map to think about what we gives us road map to think about what we gives us road map to think about what we share. I love that. Um I was not into CrossFit, I love that. Um I was not into CrossFit, I love that. Um I was not into CrossFit, but um but um but um next girlfriend of mine when I met her next girlfriend of mine when I met her next girlfriend of mine when I met her was like really into CrossFit, and they was like really into CrossFit, and they was like really into CrossFit, and they would do barbecues, and they'd clean the would do barbecues, and they'd clean the would do barbecues, and they'd clean the gym, and they would dress up in costumes gym, and they would dress up in costumes gym, and they would dress up in costumes and stuff. And remember this is when I and stuff. And remember this is when I and stuff. And remember this is when I moved to San Diego to start my lab down moved to San Diego to start my lab down moved to San Diego to start my lab down there before I moved to Stanford. And there before I moved to Stanford. And there before I moved to Stanford. And and I remember thinking like this is and I remember thinking like this is and I remember thinking like this is kind of crazy. Like I went to the gym kind of crazy. Like I went to the gym kind of crazy. Like I went to the gym growing up. I always since I was in my growing up. I always since I was in my growing up. I always since I was in my teens. And I'm like really? You guys teens. And I'm like really? You guys teens. And I'm like really? You guys like social And they had this awesome like social And they had this awesome like social And they had this awesome social community. And now CrossFit has social community. And now CrossFit has social community. And now CrossFit has somewhat fallen out of favor now. I somewhat fallen out of favor now. I somewhat fallen out of favor now. I think the pandemic brought us into our think the pandemic brought us into our think the pandemic brought us into our isolation. You may be uh isolation. You may be uh isolation. You may be uh pleased to hear I just pleased to hear I just pleased to hear I just thought of this. I can't remember I thought of this. I can't remember I thought of this. I can't remember I can't believe that I didn't remember can't believe that I didn't remember can't believe that I didn't remember this earlier. One of the things that Joe this earlier. One of the things that Joe this earlier. One of the things that Joe Strummer was famous for after the Clash Strummer was famous for after the Clash Strummer was famous for after the Clash cuz you know he went into the cuz you know he went into the cuz you know he went into the kind of void of like he wasn't doing kind of void of like he wasn't doing kind of void of like he wasn't doing anything. He he wandered for a long anything. He he wandered for a long anything. He he wandered for a long time. He went down to Spain. Oh, he grew time. He went down to Spain. Oh, he grew time. He went down to Spain. Oh, he grew out a beard, moved to Spain. And um out a beard, moved to Spain. And um out a beard, moved to Spain. And um Cool. didn't tell anyone who he was, and Cool. didn't tell anyone who he was, and Cool. didn't tell anyone who he was, and they kind of realized who he was they kind of realized who he was they kind of realized who he was eventually. He was really searching, you eventually. He was really searching, you eventually. He was really searching, you know, his life had He lost his brother know, his life had He lost his brother know, his life had He lost his brother to suicide, I believe. Um to suicide, I believe. Um to suicide, I believe. Um he ran the uh he ran the uh he ran the uh the Paris Marathon. It's kind of famous. the Paris Marathon. It's kind of famous. the Paris Marathon. It's kind of famous. I think while smoking a cigarette. Uh I think while smoking a cigarette. Uh I think while smoking a cigarette. Uh people always say And I don't think he people always say And I don't think he people always say And I don't think he did any training. One thing that he was did any training. One thing that he was did any training. One thing that he was very well known for until his death was very well known for until his death was very well known for until his death was he would do campfires. Yeah. In he would do campfires. Yeah. In he would do campfires. Yeah. In Manhattan. He would take people down to Manhattan. He would take people down to Manhattan. He would take people down to the river. And and he had some famous the river. And and he had some famous the river. And and he had some famous friends like Jim Jarmusch and uh you friends like Jim Jarmusch and uh you friends like Jim Jarmusch and uh you know, and uh well-known people in know, and uh well-known people in know, and uh well-known people in that world. Uh but he would invite that world. Uh but he would invite that world. Uh but he would invite whoever. And there were kids. And there were kids. And there were kids. You got to see this documentary. It's so You got to see this documentary. It's so You got to see this documentary. It's so good. We'll put a link to it uh for if good. We'll put a link to it uh for if good. We'll put a link to it uh for if people want to see it. It's so good. Um people want to see it. It's so good. Um people want to see it. It's so good. Um there were kids. There were adults. Um there were kids. There were adults. Um there were kids. There were adults. Um and they stay out till like 2:00 or 3:00 and they stay out till like 2:00 or 3:00 and they stay out till like 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning playing music. in the morning playing music. in the morning playing music. Singing, drumming. Uh people get up and Singing, drumming. Uh people get up and Singing, drumming. Uh people get up and talk. And so he He constantly doing talk. And so he He constantly doing talk. And so he He constantly doing these campfires his entire life. these campfires his entire life. these campfires his entire life. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Knowing close friends of his, it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Knowing close friends of his, it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Knowing close friends of his, it's like this actually what he did. And he like this actually what he did. And he like this actually what he did. And he wasn't getting They were They were able wasn't getting They were They were able wasn't getting They were They were able to film a few of these, but that was not to film a few of these, but that was not to film a few of these, but that was not the point. the point. the point. And he would bring out a radio cuz he And he would bring out a radio cuz he And he would bring out a radio cuz he thought like maybe you could like make thought like maybe you could like make thought like maybe you could like make it like a radio show of the thing and it like a radio show of the thing and it like a radio show of the thing and but it was not to record and distribute. but it was not to record and distribute. but it was not to record and distribute. It was just So, I don't know. I got this It was just So, I don't know. I got this It was just So, I don't know. I got this crazy idea in the back of my mind that crazy idea in the back of my mind that crazy idea in the back of my mind that maybe like I'm going to start doing maybe like I'm going to start doing maybe like I'm going to start doing campfires. I have to weigh in on some campfires. I have to weigh in on some campfires. I have to weigh in on some science. &gt;&gt; Okay. Am I going to destroy the &gt;&gt; Okay. Am I going to destroy the &gt;&gt; Okay. Am I going to destroy the environment? &gt;&gt; No, not at all. &gt;&gt; No, not at all. &gt;&gt; No, not at all. &gt;&gt; Okay. I was afraid you were going to &gt;&gt; Okay. I was afraid you were going to &gt;&gt; Okay. I was afraid you were going to tell me that. I think this is a deep tell me that. I think this is a deep tell me that. I think this is a deep idea. There's this new science of idea. There's this new science of idea. There's this new science of campfires and they're several hundred campfires and they're several hundred campfires and they're several hundred thousand years old. And also, you know, thousand years old. And also, you know, thousand years old. And also, you know, when you study people in small-scale when you study people in small-scale when you study people in small-scale societies, they gather at night around they gather at night around they gather at night around campfires and they tell certain kinds of campfires and they tell certain kinds of campfires and they tell certain kinds of stories. You know, stories of how stories. You know, stories of how stories. You know, stories of how they're all connected and helping each they're all connected and helping each they're all connected and helping each other and watching out for what is other and watching out for what is other and watching out for what is dangerous in the dark and you know, a dangerous in the dark and you know, a dangerous in the dark and you know, a lot of stuff happens that's fundamental lot of stuff happens that's fundamental lot of stuff happens that's fundamental to our humanity around campfires. to our humanity around campfires. to our humanity around campfires. Um so, I think you're onto something Um so, I think you're onto something Um so, I think you're onto something really important, you know, that we really important, you know, that we really important, you know, that we need to return. Uh When I go to the need to return. Uh When I go to the need to return. Uh When I go to the climbing gym, we all take saunas. climbing gym, we all take saunas. climbing gym, we all take saunas. You know, I do probably four saunas a You know, I do probably four saunas a You know, I do probably four saunas a week. &gt;&gt; Nice. And you get your sweat and your &gt;&gt; Nice. And you get your sweat and your &gt;&gt; Nice. And you get your sweat and your heart rate goes up and so good for your heart rate goes up and so good for your heart rate goes up and so good for your body, but then it's like your body, but then it's like your body, but then it's like everybody sort of offhandedly notes like everybody sort of offhandedly notes like everybody sort of offhandedly notes like "I love the conversations that happen in "I love the conversations that happen in "I love the conversations that happen in the sauna, you know?" And it's true and the sauna, you know?" And it's true and the sauna, you know?" And it's true and so, yeah, we've got to so, yeah, we've got to so, yeah, we've got to there are all these ways to get back to there are all these ways to get back to there are all these ways to get back to what we should be doing right now to what we should be doing right now to what we should be doing right now to bring us together. And campfires would bring us together. And campfires would bring us together. And campfires would be a good start. I'll come to your first be a good start. I'll come to your first be a good start. I'll come to your first one. Awesome. Uh campfire also great red one. Awesome. Uh campfire also great red one. Awesome. Uh campfire also great red light therapy, no joke. Long wavelength light therapy, no joke. Long wavelength light therapy, no joke. Long wavelength light only coming out of that fire and light only coming out of that fire and light only coming out of that fire and you know, everyone's obsessed with like you know, everyone's obsessed with like you know, everyone's obsessed with like red light therapy. You can get it from red light therapy. You can get it from red light therapy. You can get it from the sun, but you don't want to get too the sun, but you don't want to get too the sun, but you don't want to get too much UV, but yeah, you get tons of long much UV, but yeah, you get tons of long much UV, but yeah, you get tons of long wavelength light exposure, which is wavelength light exposure, which is wavelength light exposure, which is great for which is known to be great for great for which is known to be great for great for which is known to be great for mitochondria. I mean, mitochondria. I mean, mitochondria. I mean, don't get me I don't want to get going don't get me I don't want to get going don't get me I don't want to get going on this. That's too much of attention. on this. That's too much of attention. on this. That's too much of attention. We've had guests on here from University We've had guests on here from University We've had guests on here from University College London. I mean, the long College London. I mean, the long College London. I mean, the long wavelength light actually goes all the wavelength light actually goes all the wavelength light actually goes all the way through your body even in light way through your body even in light way through your body even in light clothing and is absorbed by the water in clothing and is absorbed by the water in clothing and is absorbed by the water in your mitochondria, which actually your mitochondria, which actually your mitochondria, which actually improves mitochondrial function in every improves mitochondrial function in every improves mitochondrial function in every single every single cell that has single every single cell that has single every single cell that has mitochondria. So, And where do we get mitochondria. So, And where do we get mitochondria. So, And where do we get this light from? It's this light from? It's this light from? It's &gt;&gt; Typically it's from sunlight when &gt;&gt; Typically it's from sunlight when &gt;&gt; Typically it's from sunlight when it's low solar angle, so when it's low it's low solar angle, so when it's low it's low solar angle, so when it's low in the sky because of Rayleigh in the sky because of Rayleigh in the sky because of Rayleigh scattering you're getting rid of the UV. scattering you're getting rid of the UV. scattering you're getting rid of the UV. That's why you can see the orange and That's why you can see the orange and That's why you can see the orange and red and it's not painful to look at the red and it's not painful to look at the red and it's not painful to look at the sun when it's low in the sky. When it's sun when it's low in the sky. When it's sun when it's low in the sky. When it's overhead the UV index is high your it's overhead the UV index is high your it's overhead the UV index is high your it's you know full spectrum and you have to you know full spectrum and you have to you know full spectrum and you have to be you know careful of that. You're also be you know careful of that. You're also be you know careful of that. You're also you got some color to you but like you got some color to you but like you got some color to you but like you something tells me your lineage was kind something tells me your lineage was kind something tells me your lineage was kind of like fair-skinned, right? Okay, so um of like fair-skinned, right? Okay, so um of like fair-skinned, right? Okay, so um but everyone it needs to be cautious but everyone it needs to be cautious but everyone it needs to be cautious about that but that long wavelength about that but that long wavelength about that but that long wavelength light, you know, people buy red light light, you know, people buy red light light, you know, people buy red light units and things and those can be units and things and those can be units and things and those can be beneficial. They use them clinically now beneficial. They use them clinically now beneficial. They use them clinically now but good data on that, but good data on that, but good data on that, but campfires do it. Yeah. And um And people campfires do it. Yeah. And um And people campfires do it. Yeah. And um And people love campfires. love campfires. love campfires. &gt;&gt; And there is this thing if you were out &gt;&gt; And there is this thing if you were out &gt;&gt; And there is this thing if you were out in front of a campfire at night even if in front of a campfire at night even if in front of a campfire at night even if you stay up very late you wake up you stay up very late you wake up you stay up very late you wake up feeling pretty darn good. feeling pretty darn good. feeling pretty darn good. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, um &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, um &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, um so I'm calling it right now. My team's so I'm calling it right now. My team's so I'm calling it right now. My team's going to hate me for this but uh you going to hate me for this but uh you going to hate me for this but uh you know, a campfire coming to your town. Um know, a campfire coming to your town. Um know, a campfire coming to your town. Um I've always dreamed of doing this like I've always dreamed of doing this like I've always dreamed of doing this like taking a year and just getting a bus and taking a year and just getting a bus and taking a year and just getting a bus and just going from town to town and having just going from town to town and having just going from town to town and having science health discussions but mostly science health discussions but mostly science health discussions but mostly just listening to people and doing just listening to people and doing just listening to people and doing campfires and um we probably would film campfires and um we probably would film campfires and um we probably would film it just cuz it You should do it. it just cuz it You should do it. it just cuz it You should do it. &gt;&gt; I got to create content. My dream was to &gt;&gt; I got to create content. My dream was to &gt;&gt; I got to create content. My dream was to take that bus and to go to all the take that bus and to go to all the take that bus and to go to all the basketball courts of the country. That's basketball courts of the country. That's basketball courts of the country. That's your thing. Yeah, pick up basketballs your thing. Yeah, pick up basketballs your thing. Yeah, pick up basketballs the same thing. It's like people the same thing. It's like people the same thing. It's like people gathering, banging into each other, gathering, banging into each other, gathering, banging into each other, Would you do it? Would you do it? Would you do it? Would I You'd probably figure out an Would I You'd probably figure out an Would I You'd probably figure out an experiment that goes with it. experiment that goes with it. experiment that goes with it. &gt;&gt; Well, my knees are the But Stanford &gt;&gt; Well, my knees are the But Stanford &gt;&gt; Well, my knees are the But Stanford just developed this way to regenerate just developed this way to regenerate just developed this way to regenerate cartilage in humans, so cartilage in humans, so cartilage in humans, so &gt;&gt; Well, then I'll look into it. Yeah, I &gt;&gt; Well, then I'll look into it. Yeah, I &gt;&gt; Well, then I'll look into it. Yeah, I think it'd be I love the idea. Do you think it'd be I love the idea. Do you think it'd be I love the idea. Do you believe in life after death? believe in life after death? believe in life after death? I don't ask every guest that by the way. I don't ask every guest that by the way. I don't ask every guest that by the way. You're the only person I've ever asked You're the only person I've ever asked You're the only person I've ever asked that. Do you believe that something that. Do you believe that something that. Do you believe that something happens after I do. happens after I do. happens after I do. I do. Um I do. Um I do. Um Yeah, you know, when I write about this Yeah, you know, when I write about this Yeah, you know, when I write about this in Awe when my brother Ralph passed in Awe when my brother Ralph passed in Awe when my brother Ralph passed away, colon cancer, colon cancer, colon cancer, uh 55 or so, uh you know, I watched the uh 55 or so, uh you know, I watched the uh 55 or so, uh you know, I watched the whole transition and you know, his battle transition and you know, his battle transition and you know, his battle against it and his acceptance and then against it and his acceptance and then against it and his acceptance and then his leaving and I had this leaving and I had this leaving and I had this profound experience that night, you profound experience that night, you profound experience that night, you know, a transcendent experience. And I'm know, a transcendent experience. And I'm know, a transcendent experience. And I'm like you, you know, Andrew, it's like you, you know, Andrew, it's like you, you know, Andrew, it's like neurons and statistics and cells and neurons and statistics and cells and neurons and statistics and cells and we can figure it all out and we can figure it all out and we can figure it all out and characterize everything and it's like I characterize everything and it's like I characterize everything and it's like I saw space in a different way. I saw space in a different way. I saw space in a different way. I saw something alive in him. And then something alive in him. And then something alive in him. And then afterward I had afterward I had afterward I had a lot of people have this kind of grief a lot of people have this kind of grief a lot of people have this kind of grief experience of he was around, his voice, experience of he was around, his voice, experience of he was around, his voice, his hand was on my back. his hand was on my back. his hand was on my back. And I just thought for several years and And I just thought for several years and And I just thought for several years and still to this day of, you know, still to this day of, you know, still to this day of, you know, um quantum reality and things beyond our quantum reality and things beyond our quantum reality and things beyond our three-dimensional, four-dimensional view three-dimensional, four-dimensional view three-dimensional, four-dimensional view of time and space and of time and space and of time and space and uh you know, those basic uh you know, those basic uh you know, those basic laws. Uh and that Uh and that Uh and that there is there is there is uh you know, consciousness may be you know, consciousness may be you know, consciousness may be patterns of, you know, magnetic patterns of, you know, magnetic patterns of, you know, magnetic electromagnetic waves around our minds electromagnetic waves around our minds electromagnetic waves around our minds and bodies that are syncing up with and bodies that are syncing up with and bodies that are syncing up with other people that transcend the other people that transcend the other people that transcend the Newtonian world of the brain. Newtonian world of the brain. Newtonian world of the brain. And I believe that and we don't I don't And I believe that and we don't I don't And I believe that and we don't I don't know how to study it. know how to study it. know how to study it. Uh I sense it in life. I think a lot of Uh I sense it in life. I think a lot of Uh I sense it in life. I think a lot of other people do, too. other people do, too. other people do, too. And so that keeps me open to it. And now And so that keeps me open to it. And now And so that keeps me open to it. And now I've moved from, I've moved from, I've moved from, you know, being a skeptical but open, you know, being a skeptical but open, you know, being a skeptical but open, you know, agnostic to like, yeah, you know, agnostic to like, yeah, you know, agnostic to like, yeah, there's something there that's beyond there's something there that's beyond there's something there that's beyond what we know. So, I believe it. what we know. So, I believe it. what we know. So, I believe it. Very cool. Very cool. Very cool. I hope you're right. I hope you're right. I hope you're right. I believe it, too, but I just hope I believe it, too, but I just hope I believe it, too, but I just hope you're right. I sense you're right. you're right. I sense you're right. you're right. I sense you're right. Dacher, thank you so much for making the Dacher, thank you so much for making the Dacher, thank you so much for making the trip down here to talk with us today and trip down here to talk with us today and trip down here to talk with us today and share and share and share what you've been up to for all these what you've been up to for all these what you've been up to for all these years. Uh you've had and continue to years. Uh you've had and continue to years. Uh you've had and continue to have a magnificent career. You know, have a magnificent career. You know, have a magnificent career. You know, it's really hard to do really good it's really hard to do really good it's really hard to do really good science, and it's even harder to do science, and it's even harder to do science, and it's even harder to do really good science with a purpose. really good science with a purpose. really good science with a purpose. Uh and you're doing that and you continue and you're doing that and you continue and you're doing that and you continue to and to and to and you just have a way about you that you just have a way about you that you just have a way about you that everyone now has everyone now has everyone now has uh been able to experience firsthand that been able to experience firsthand that been able to experience firsthand that like you really care. That's clear. like you really care. That's clear. like you really care. That's clear. You put a ton of thought into the work You put a ton of thought into the work You put a ton of thought into the work that you're doing. that you're doing. that you're doing. Uh you've Uh you've Uh you've raised 25 raised 25 raised 25 professors, &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; which is no small feat, I'll tell you. &gt;&gt; which is no small feat, I'll tell you. &gt;&gt; which is no small feat, I'll tell you. That's a monumental feat, which means That's a monumental feat, which means That's a monumental feat, which means that the work will continue. And um that the work will continue. And um that the work will continue. And um and you're still going, and I'm grateful and you're still going, and I'm grateful and you're still going, and I'm grateful for your book and that you're for your book and that you're for your book and that you're continuing to do this and continuing to do this and continuing to do this and um I hope you take that trip to uh I hope you take that trip to uh I hope you take that trip to uh maybe if you can't do it around the maybe if you can't do it around the maybe if you can't do it around the entire country, you get you know, hit entire country, you get you know, hit entire country, you get you know, hit some pick up basketball games some pick up basketball games some pick up basketball games uh &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; cuz I think there's something to be &gt;&gt; cuz I think there's something to be &gt;&gt; cuz I think there's something to be learned there, for sure. I sense it. learned there, for sure. I sense it. learned there, for sure. I sense it. And and thanks for inspiring me and And and thanks for inspiring me and And and thanks for inspiring me and I know you've inspired a ton of other I know you've inspired a ton of other I know you've inspired a ton of other people. So, we'll put links to people. So, we'll put links to people. So, we'll put links to everything that you discussed into your everything that you discussed into your everything that you discussed into your book. Um book. Um book. Um but you've definitely inspired us to but you've definitely inspired us to but you've definitely inspired us to think more deeply about basically what think more deeply about basically what think more deeply about basically what it is to be human and where to take all it is to be human and where to take all it is to be human and where to take all this technology that we have and this technology that we have and this technology that we have and this opportunity that we have and really do opportunity that we have and really do opportunity that we have and really do uh real good with it. So, I'm very uh real good with it. So, I'm very uh real good with it. So, I'm very grateful to you. Thank you. Well, thank grateful to you. Thank you. Well, thank grateful to you. Thank you. Well, thank you, Andrew. It's been an incredible you, Andrew. It's been an incredible you, Andrew. It's been an incredible conversation. Let's do more. Definitely conversation. Let's do more. Definitely conversation. Let's do more. Definitely do it again. do it again. do it again. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Dacher Keltner. To discussion with Dr. Dacher Keltner. To discussion with Dr. Dacher Keltner. To learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find links to his books, including his book links to his books, including his book links to his books, including his book on awe, please see the links in the show on awe, please see the links in the show on awe, please see the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from note captions. If you're learning from note captions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please and/or enjoying this podcast, please and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. a terrific zero-cost way to support us. a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sell at book is now available by pre-sell at book is now available by pre-sell at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero-cost. that is available completely zero-cost. that is available completely zero-cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Dacher today's discussion with Dr. Dacher today's discussion with Dr. Dacher Keltner. And last but certainly not Keltner. And last but certainly not Keltner. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science.