Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Bel Campo Meat Our first sponsor is Bel Campo Meat Our first sponsor is Bel Campo Meat Company. Bel Campo Meat Company is a regenerative Bel Campo Meat Company is a regenerative Bel Campo Meat Company is a regenerative farm in northern California that raises farm in northern California that raises farm in northern California that raises organic, grass-fed, and grass-finished, organic, grass-fed, and grass-finished, organic, grass-fed, and grass-finished, certified humane meats. certified humane meats. certified humane meats. I eat meat about once a day. I'm neither I eat meat about once a day. I'm neither I eat meat about once a day. I'm neither pure carnivore, nor am I a vegetarian, pure carnivore, nor am I a vegetarian, pure carnivore, nor am I a vegetarian, obviously. I eat meat. The way I eat is obviously. I eat meat. The way I eat is obviously. I eat meat. The way I eat is I tend to fast until about noon, and I tend to fast until about noon, and I tend to fast until about noon, and then I have my first meal, which then I have my first meal, which then I have my first meal, which generally consists of a piece of beef. generally consists of a piece of beef. generally consists of a piece of beef. You know, it's either ground beef or a You know, it's either ground beef or a You know, it's either ground beef or a steak. I like ribeyes, I like flat steak. I like ribeyes, I like flat steak. I like ribeyes, I like flat irons, these kinds of things, and a irons, these kinds of things, and a irons, these kinds of things, and a small salad, sometimes a large salad. small salad, sometimes a large salad. small salad, sometimes a large salad. And then throughout the day, I generally And then throughout the day, I generally And then throughout the day, I generally am low-carb until the evening when I eat am low-carb until the evening when I eat am low-carb until the evening when I eat pasta and rice and things of that sort. pasta and rice and things of that sort. pasta and rice and things of that sort. Eating that way is what optimizes my Eating that way is what optimizes my Eating that way is what optimizes my levels of alertness and optimizes my levels of alertness and optimizes my levels of alertness and optimizes my sleep. I've talked about this on sleep. I've talked about this on sleep. I've talked about this on previous podcast episodes. Now, because previous podcast episodes. Now, because previous podcast episodes. Now, because I eat meat essentially every day, the I eat meat essentially every day, the I eat meat essentially every day, the source of that meat is extremely source of that meat is extremely source of that meat is extremely important to me. I want to be healthy important to me. I want to be healthy important to me. I want to be healthy for me, and I want the animals that it for me, and I want the animals that it for me, and I want the animals that it comes from to be healthy and to have comes from to be healthy and to have comes from to be healthy and to have lived a good life. lived a good life. lived a good life. Conventionally raised animals are Conventionally raised animals are Conventionally raised animals are confined to feedlots, and they eat a confined to feedlots, and they eat a confined to feedlots, and they eat a diet of inflammatory grains, which is diet of inflammatory grains, which is diet of inflammatory grains, which is terrible for them, and it's terrible for terrible for them, and it's terrible for terrible for them, and it's terrible for us when we eat those meats. Bel Campo's us when we eat those meats. Bel Campo's us when we eat those meats. Bel Campo's animals graze on open pastures and animals graze on open pastures and animals graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses, which results in meat seasonal grasses, which results in meat seasonal grasses, which results in meat that is higher in nutrients and healthy that is higher in nutrients and healthy that is higher in nutrients and healthy fats. They actually have very high fats. They actually have very high fats. They actually have very high levels of omega-3s, which I've also levels of omega-3s, which I've also levels of omega-3s, which I've also talked about on this podcast, are talked about on this podcast, are talked about on this podcast, are important for mental and physical health important for mental and physical health important for mental and physical health for a variety of reasons. for a variety of reasons. for a variety of reasons. The way Bel Campo raises its animals is The way Bel Campo raises its animals is The way Bel Campo raises its animals is also good for the environment. They also good for the environment. They also good for the environment. They practice regenerative agriculture, which practice regenerative agriculture, which practice regenerative agriculture, which means it's climate positive and carbon means it's climate positive and carbon means it's climate positive and carbon negative, which translates to good for negative, which translates to good for negative, which translates to good for us and good for the planet. You can us and good for the planet. You can us and good for the planet. You can order Bel Campo's sustainably raised order Bel Campo's sustainably raised order Bel Campo's sustainably raised meats to be delivered straight to your meats to be delivered straight to your meats to be delivered straight to your door using my code Huberman by going to door using my code Huberman by going to door using my code Huberman by going to belcampo.com/huberman and you'll get 20% off your first time and you'll get 20% off your first time and you'll get 20% off your first time order. That's belcampo.com/huberman That's belcampo.com/huberman That's belcampo.com/huberman for 20% off. for 20% off. for 20% off. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized Inside Tracker is a personalized Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach better understand your body and reach better understand your body and reach your health goals. your health goals. your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting blood work done for the simple reason blood work done for the simple reason blood work done for the simple reason that many, if not most of the factors that many, if not most of the factors that many, if not most of the factors that impact our immediate and long-term that impact our immediate and long-term that impact our immediate and long-term health, can only be assessed from a health, can only be assessed from a health, can only be assessed from a blood test. And now with the advent of blood test. And now with the advent of blood test. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, we can get additional modern DNA tests, we can get additional modern DNA tests, we can get additional information about our current health information about our current health information about our current health status and our health trajectory. status and our health trajectory. status and our health trajectory. One of the major problems with blood One of the major problems with blood One of the major problems with blood test and DNA tests available from most test and DNA tests available from most test and DNA tests available from most sources is that you get the numbers back sources is that you get the numbers back sources is that you get the numbers back and you can easily see whether or not and you can easily see whether or not and you can easily see whether or not those numbers are within the standard those numbers are within the standard those numbers are within the standard range or outside the range, but it's range or outside the range, but it's range or outside the range, but it's very hard to know what to do with that very hard to know what to do with that very hard to know what to do with that information. Also, what the various information. Also, what the various information. Also, what the various factors are that are being measured is factors are that are being measured is factors are that are being measured is often very cryptic. often very cryptic. often very cryptic. With Inside Tracker, they clarify With Inside Tracker, they clarify With Inside Tracker, they clarify everything. They make it very clear and everything. They make it very clear and everything. They make it very clear and simple as to what each of those factors simple as to what each of those factors simple as to what each of those factors relates to. So, they give you some relates to. So, they give you some relates to. So, they give you some understanding of what those are and they understanding of what those are and they understanding of what those are and they give you ideas and suggestions about give you ideas and suggestions about give you ideas and suggestions about things that you can do with your things that you can do with your things that you can do with your lifestyle, changes to your diet, changes lifestyle, changes to your diet, changes lifestyle, changes to your diet, changes to your supplementation, changes to your to your supplementation, changes to your to your supplementation, changes to your sleep schedule or exercise patterns that sleep schedule or exercise patterns that sleep schedule or exercise patterns that can serve to optimize the levels of can serve to optimize the levels of can serve to optimize the levels of those various factors and your DNA. those various factors and your DNA. those various factors and your DNA. In addition, they have something called In addition, they have something called In addition, they have something called the Inner Age test, which compares your the Inner Age test, which compares your the Inner Age test, which compares your chronological age, which you already chronological age, which you already chronological age, which you already know, with your biological age, which know, with your biological age, which know, with your biological age, which gives you a sense of your lifespan or gives you a sense of your lifespan or gives you a sense of your lifespan or predicted lifespan. So, that's crucially predicted lifespan. So, that's crucially predicted lifespan. So, that's crucially important, and you can imagine why many important, and you can imagine why many important, and you can imagine why many people, including me, would want that people, including me, would want that people, including me, would want that information. If you'd like to try information. If you'd like to try information. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman, and you'll get 25% off any of and you'll get 25% off any of and you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the code InsideTracker's plans. Use the code InsideTracker's plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout. That's Huberman at checkout. That's Huberman at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans, and use the code Huberman at plans, and use the code Huberman at plans, and use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens drink. I've been using Athletic Greens drink. I've been using Athletic Greens for well over a decade now. I started for well over a decade now. I started for well over a decade now. I started using Athletic Greens, and I still use using Athletic Greens, and I still use using Athletic Greens, and I still use Athletic Greens because I find it rather Athletic Greens because I find it rather Athletic Greens because I find it rather dizzying to know which vitamins and dizzying to know which vitamins and dizzying to know which vitamins and minerals to take, and with Athletic minerals to take, and with Athletic minerals to take, and with Athletic Greens, I cover all my bases of vitamins Greens, I cover all my bases of vitamins Greens, I cover all my bases of vitamins and minerals. In addition, it has and minerals. In addition, it has and minerals. In addition, it has probiotics, and we now know from an probiotics, and we now know from an probiotics, and we now know from an enormous number of quality peer-reviewed enormous number of quality peer-reviewed enormous number of quality peer-reviewed studies that the gut microbiome is studies that the gut microbiome is studies that the gut microbiome is critically important for our immune critically important for our immune critically important for our immune system function, for the gut-brain axis, system function, for the gut-brain axis, system function, for the gut-brain axis, and for our mental functions, and for our mental functions, and for our mental functions, and probiotics are one way to support the probiotics are one way to support the probiotics are one way to support the gut-brain axis and the gut health gut-brain axis and the gut health gut-brain axis and the gut health generally. With Athletic Greens, I generally. With Athletic Greens, I generally. With Athletic Greens, I basically just add water, put in a basically just add water, put in a basically just add water, put in a little bit of lemon juice, because little bit of lemon juice, because little bit of lemon juice, because that's the way I like it, mix it up, it that's the way I like it, mix it up, it that's the way I like it, mix it up, it tastes delicious. I'll do that once or tastes delicious. I'll do that once or tastes delicious. I'll do that once or twice a day. It's compatible with twice a day. It's compatible with twice a day. It's compatible with fasting, at least for me, it doesn't fasting, at least for me, it doesn't fasting, at least for me, it doesn't take me out of a fasting mode, which I take me out of a fasting mode, which I take me out of a fasting mode, which I do early in the day. So, most often I'll do early in the day. So, most often I'll do early in the day. So, most often I'll have my Athletic Greens early in the have my Athletic Greens early in the have my Athletic Greens early in the day, and then sometimes I'll also have day, and then sometimes I'll also have day, and then sometimes I'll also have another one late in the evening, or another one late in the evening, or another one late in the evening, or sometimes even before bed. I'm able to sometimes even before bed. I'm able to sometimes even before bed. I'm able to sleep after drinking it without a sleep after drinking it without a sleep after drinking it without a problem. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to do that, you can claim a you can go to do that, you can claim a you can go to do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five special offer. They'll give you five special offer. They'll give you five free travel free travel free travel packs, which are these little packs that packs, which are these little packs that packs, which are these little packs that make it very easy to mix up Athletic make it very easy to mix up Athletic make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road or in Greens while you're on the road or in Greens while you're on the road or in the car or on a plane. Makes all of that the car or on a plane. Makes all of that the car or on a plane. Makes all of that very simple. And in addition, they will very simple. And in addition, they will very simple. And in addition, they will give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. There are also a lot of data supporting There are also a lot of data supporting There are also a lot of data supporting the fact that vitamin D3 is critical for the fact that vitamin D3 is critical for the fact that vitamin D3 is critical for a variety of health metrics. We all know a variety of health metrics. We all know a variety of health metrics. We all know that we can get vitamin D3 from the sun, that we can get vitamin D3 from the sun, that we can get vitamin D3 from the sun, but many people, including me, were not but many people, including me, were not but many people, including me, were not getting enough sunlight or D3. Even if I getting enough sunlight or D3. Even if I getting enough sunlight or D3. Even if I was getting a lot of sunlight, I know was getting a lot of sunlight, I know was getting a lot of sunlight, I know that cuz I had my blood levels measured that cuz I had my blood levels measured that cuz I had my blood levels measured of D3. So, I use vitamin D3 every day in of D3. So, I use vitamin D3 every day in of D3. So, I use vitamin D3 every day in addition to the other things I take, addition to the other things I take, addition to the other things I take, including Athletic Greens. If you go to including Athletic Greens. If you go to including Athletic Greens. If you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get the Athletic Greens, the five you'll get the Athletic Greens, the five you'll get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs, and a year supply of free travel packs, and a year supply of free travel packs, and a year supply of the vitamin D3 and K2. That's the vitamin D3 and K2. That's the vitamin D3 and K2. That's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer. to claim the special offer. to claim the special offer. This month on the Huberman Lab podcast, This month on the Huberman Lab podcast, This month on the Huberman Lab podcast, we're talking all about physical we're talking all about physical we're talking all about physical performance. So, that means athletic performance. So, that means athletic performance. So, that means athletic performance, recreational exercise, performance, recreational exercise, performance, recreational exercise, weightlifting, running, swimming, yoga, skills, and running, swimming, yoga, skills, and running, swimming, yoga, skills, and skill learning. Today, we're going to skill learning. Today, we're going to skill learning. Today, we're going to talk about and focus on skill learning. talk about and focus on skill learning. talk about and focus on skill learning. We are going to focus on how to learn We are going to focus on how to learn We are going to focus on how to learn skills more quickly, in particular motor skills more quickly, in particular motor skills more quickly, in particular motor skills. This will also translate to skills. This will also translate to skills. This will also translate to things like musical skills and playing things like musical skills and playing things like musical skills and playing instruments, but we're mainly going to instruments, but we're mainly going to instruments, but we're mainly going to focus on focus on focus on physical movements of the body that physical movements of the body that physical movements of the body that extend beyond the hands, like just extend beyond the hands, like just extend beyond the hands, like just playing the piano or the fingers, like playing the piano or the fingers, like playing the piano or the fingers, like playing the guitar. But, everything playing the guitar. But, everything playing the guitar. But, everything we're going to talk about will also we're going to talk about will also we're going to talk about will also serve the formation and the serve the formation and the serve the formation and the consolidation and the performance of consolidation and the performance of consolidation and the performance of other types of skills. So, if you're other types of skills. So, if you're other types of skills. So, if you're interested in how to perform better, interested in how to perform better, interested in how to perform better, whether or not it's dance or yoga or whether or not it's dance or yoga or whether or not it's dance or yoga or even something that's just very even something that's just very even something that's just very repetitive like running or swimming, repetitive like running or swimming, repetitive like running or swimming, this podcast episode is for you. We're this podcast episode is for you. We're this podcast episode is for you. We're going to go deep into the science of going to go deep into the science of going to go deep into the science of skill learning, and we are going to talk skill learning, and we are going to talk skill learning, and we are going to talk about very specific protocols that the about very specific protocols that the about very specific protocols that the science points to and has verified allow science points to and has verified allow science points to and has verified allow you to learn more quickly, you to learn more quickly, you to learn more quickly, to embed that learning so that you to embed that learning so that you to embed that learning so that you remember it, and to be able to build up remember it, and to be able to build up remember it, and to be able to build up skills more quickly than you would skills more quickly than you would skills more quickly than you would otherwise. We are also going to touch on a few We are also going to touch on a few We are also going to touch on a few things that I get asked about a lot, but things that I get asked about a lot, but things that I get asked about a lot, but fortunately recently I've had the time fortunately recently I've had the time fortunately recently I've had the time to go deep into the literature, extract to go deep into the literature, extract to go deep into the literature, extract the data for you, and that's mental the data for you, and that's mental the data for you, and that's mental visualization. How does visualizing a visualization. How does visualizing a visualization. How does visualizing a particular skill or practice serve the particular skill or practice serve the particular skill or practice serve the learning and or the consolidation of learning and or the consolidation of learning and or the consolidation of that practice? Turns out there are some that practice? Turns out there are some that practice? Turns out there are some absolutely striking protocols that one absolutely striking protocols that one absolutely striking protocols that one can use. Striking meaning they allow you can use. Striking meaning they allow you can use. Striking meaning they allow you to learn faster, and they allow you to learn faster, and they allow you to learn faster, and they allow you to remember how to do things more quickly remember how to do things more quickly remember how to do things more quickly and better than if you were not doing and better than if you were not doing and better than if you were not doing this mental rehearsal. But the pattern this mental rehearsal. But the pattern this mental rehearsal. But the pattern of mental rehearsal and when you do that of mental rehearsal and when you do that of mental rehearsal and when you do that mental rehearsal turns out to be vitally mental rehearsal turns out to be vitally mental rehearsal turns out to be vitally important. So, I'm excited for today's important. So, I'm excited for today's important. So, I'm excited for today's episode. We're going to share a lot of episode. We're going to share a lot of episode. We're going to share a lot of information with you, and there going to information with you, and there going to information with you, and there going to be a lot of very simple takeaways. So, be a lot of very simple takeaways. So, be a lot of very simple takeaways. So, let's get started. let's get started. let's get started. Before we get into the topic of skill Before we get into the topic of skill Before we get into the topic of skill learning and tools for accelerating learning and tools for accelerating learning and tools for accelerating skill learning, I want to briefly skill learning, I want to briefly skill learning, I want to briefly revisit the topic of temperature, which revisit the topic of temperature, which revisit the topic of temperature, which was covered in the last episode, and was covered in the last episode, and was covered in the last episode, and just highlight a few things and clear up just highlight a few things and clear up just highlight a few things and clear up some misunderstandings. So, last episode some misunderstandings. So, last episode some misunderstandings. So, last episode talked about these incredible data from talked about these incredible data from talked about these incredible data from my colleague Craig Heller's lab at my colleague Craig Heller's lab at my colleague Craig Heller's lab at Stanford. He's in the Department of Stanford. He's in the Department of Stanford. He's in the Department of Biology, showing that cooling the palms Biology, showing that cooling the palms Biology, showing that cooling the palms in particular ways and at particular in particular ways and at particular in particular ways and at particular times can allow athletes or just times can allow athletes or just times can allow athletes or just recreational exercisers to do more recreational exercisers to do more recreational exercisers to do more pull-ups, dips, bench presses per unit pull-ups, dips, bench presses per unit pull-ups, dips, bench presses per unit time, to run further, to cycle further, time, to run further, to cycle further, time, to run further, to cycle further, and to feel better doing it. They really and to feel better doing it. They really and to feel better doing it. They really are incredible data that are anchored in are incredible data that are anchored in are incredible data that are anchored in the biology of the vascular system, the biology of the vascular system, the biology of the vascular system, the blood supply, and how it's involved in blood supply, and how it's involved in blood supply, and how it's involved in cooling us. cooling us. cooling us. Many of you, Many of you, Many of you, dozens of you in fact, said, "Wait a dozens of you in fact, said, "Wait a dozens of you in fact, said, "Wait a second. You gave us a protocol in this second. You gave us a protocol in this second. You gave us a protocol in this episode, which says that we should cool episode, which says that we should cool episode, which says that we should cool our palms periodically throughout our palms periodically throughout our palms periodically throughout exercise in order to be able to do more exercise in order to be able to do more exercise in order to be able to do more work. But on the episode before that on growth But on the episode before that on growth But on the episode before that on growth hormone and thyroid hormone, hormone and thyroid hormone, hormone and thyroid hormone, you said that heating up the body is you said that heating up the body is you said that heating up the body is good for release of growth hormone. good for release of growth hormone. good for release of growth hormone. And I just want to clarify that both things I just want to clarify that both things I just want to clarify that both things are true. These are two separate are true. These are two separate are true. These are two separate protocols. You should always warm up before you You should always warm up before you You should always warm up before you exercise. That warm up will not increase exercise. That warm up will not increase exercise. That warm up will not increase your body temperature or the muscle your body temperature or the muscle your body temperature or the muscle temperature to the point where it's going to the point where it's going to the point where it's going to diminish your work capacity, that it's diminish your work capacity, that it's diminish your work capacity, that it's going to harm your performance. going to harm your performance. going to harm your performance. The cooling of the palms, which is The cooling of the palms, which is The cooling of the palms, which is really just a route to cool your core in really just a route to cool your core in really just a route to cool your core in an efficient way, the most efficient way an efficient way, the most efficient way an efficient way, the most efficient way in fact, is about improving performance. in fact, is about improving performance. in fact, is about improving performance. Heating up the body with exercise Heating up the body with exercise Heating up the body with exercise and focusing on heat increases or using and focusing on heat increases or using and focusing on heat increases or using sauna for heat increases is geared sauna for heat increases is geared sauna for heat increases is geared toward growth hormone release, which is toward growth hormone release, which is toward growth hormone release, which is a separate matter. So, you can do both a separate matter. So, you can do both a separate matter. So, you can do both of these protocols, but you would want of these protocols, but you would want of these protocols, but you would want to do them at separate times. to do them at separate times. to do them at separate times. So, just to make this very concrete So, just to make this very concrete So, just to make this very concrete before I move on to today's topic, before I move on to today's topic, before I move on to today's topic, if you're interested in doing more work, if you're interested in doing more work, if you're interested in doing more work, being able to do more sets and reps per being able to do more sets and reps per being able to do more sets and reps per unit time and feel better doing it, or unit time and feel better doing it, or unit time and feel better doing it, or to run further, or to cycle further, to run further, or to cycle further, to run further, or to cycle further, then cooling the palms periodically, as then cooling the palms periodically, as then cooling the palms periodically, as I described in the previous episode, is I described in the previous episode, is I described in the previous episode, is going to be the way to go. If you're going to be the way to go. If you're going to be the way to go. If you're interested in getting growth hormone interested in getting growth hormone interested in getting growth hormone release, well, then hot sauna, and I release, well, then hot sauna, and I release, well, then hot sauna, and I offered some other tools if you don't offered some other tools if you don't offered some other tools if you don't have a sauna in the episode on growth have a sauna in the episode on growth have a sauna in the episode on growth hormone and thyroid hormone, is going to hormone and thyroid hormone, is going to hormone and thyroid hormone, is going to be the way to go. Okay? So, those are be the way to go. Okay? So, those are be the way to go. Okay? So, those are separate protocols. You can include them separate protocols. You can include them separate protocols. You can include them in your in your fitness regime and your in your in your fitness regime and your in your in your fitness regime and your training regime, but you do want to do training regime, but you do want to do training regime, but you do want to do them at separate times. them at separate times. them at separate times. And as a last point about this, I also And as a last point about this, I also And as a last point about this, I also mentioned that caffeine can either help mentioned that caffeine can either help mentioned that caffeine can either help or hinder performance depending on or hinder performance depending on or hinder performance depending on whether or not you're caffeine adapted whether or not you're caffeine adapted whether or not you're caffeine adapted because of the ways that caffeine because of the ways that caffeine because of the ways that caffeine impacts body temperature and all sorts impacts body temperature and all sorts impacts body temperature and all sorts of things like vasodilation and of things like vasodilation and of things like vasodilation and constriction. It's very simple. constriction. It's very simple. constriction. It's very simple. If you enjoy caffeine before your If you enjoy caffeine before your If you enjoy caffeine before your workouts and you're accustomed to workouts and you're accustomed to workouts and you're accustomed to caffeine, meaning you drink it three or caffeine, meaning you drink it three or caffeine, meaning you drink it three or five times or more a week, 100 to 300 mg five times or more a week, 100 to 300 mg five times or more a week, 100 to 300 mg is a typical daily dose of caffeine. is a typical daily dose of caffeine. is a typical daily dose of caffeine. Some of you are ingesting more, some Some of you are ingesting more, some Some of you are ingesting more, some less. If you do that regularly, well less. If you do that regularly, well less. If you do that regularly, well then it's going to be just fine to then it's going to be just fine to then it's going to be just fine to ingest caffeine before you train. It's ingest caffeine before you train. It's ingest caffeine before you train. It's not going to impact your body not going to impact your body not going to impact your body temperature and your vaso temperature and your vaso temperature and your vaso dilation or constriction in ways that dilation or constriction in ways that dilation or constriction in ways that will hinder you. However, if you're not will hinder you. However, if you're not will hinder you. However, if you're not a regular caffeine user and you're a regular caffeine user and you're a regular caffeine user and you're thinking, "Oh, I'm going to drink a cup thinking, "Oh, I'm going to drink a cup thinking, "Oh, I'm going to drink a cup of coffee and get this huge performance of coffee and get this huge performance of coffee and get this huge performance enhancing effect." Well, that's not enhancing effect." Well, that's not enhancing effect." Well, that's not going to happen. Chances are it's going to happen. Chances are it's going to happen. Chances are it's going to lead to increases in body temperature to lead to increases in body temperature to lead to increases in body temperature and changes in the way that blood flow and changes in the way that blood flow and changes in the way that blood flow is happening in your body and in is happening in your body and in is happening in your body and in particular on these palmar surfaces and particular on these palmar surfaces and particular on these palmar surfaces and in your face in your face in your face that is going to likely diminish that is going to likely diminish that is going to likely diminish performance. So, if you enjoy caffeine performance. So, if you enjoy caffeine performance. So, if you enjoy caffeine and you're accustomed to it, so-called and you're accustomed to it, so-called and you're accustomed to it, so-called caffeine adapted, enjoy it before your caffeine adapted, enjoy it before your caffeine adapted, enjoy it before your training. If you regularly If Excuse me, training. If you regularly If Excuse me, training. If you regularly If Excuse me, if you do not regularly use caffeine, if you do not regularly use caffeine, if you do not regularly use caffeine, then you probably do not want to view then you probably do not want to view then you probably do not want to view caffeine as a performance enhancing caffeine as a performance enhancing caffeine as a performance enhancing tool. And while we're on the topic of tools And while we're on the topic of tools And while we're on the topic of tools and because this is a month on athletic and because this is a month on athletic and because this is a month on athletic performance and exercise performance and exercise performance and exercise and physical skill learning, and physical skill learning, and physical skill learning, I want to offer an additional tool that I want to offer an additional tool that I want to offer an additional tool that I've certainly found useful, which is I've certainly found useful, which is I've certainly found useful, which is how to relieve the so-called side stitch how to relieve the so-called side stitch how to relieve the so-called side stitch or side cramp when running or swimming. or side cramp when running or swimming. or side cramp when running or swimming. This actually relates to respiration and This actually relates to respiration and This actually relates to respiration and to the nervous system to the nervous system to the nervous system and it is not a cramp. and it is not a cramp. and it is not a cramp. If you've ever been out running and you If you've ever been out running and you If you've ever been out running and you felt like you had a pain on your side, felt like you had a pain on your side, felt like you had a pain on your side, that pain could be any number of things, that pain could be any number of things, that pain could be any number of things, but that what feels like cramping of but that what feels like cramping of but that what feels like cramping of your side is actually due to what's your side is actually due to what's your side is actually due to what's called collateralization called collateralization called collateralization of the phrenic nerve, which is a lot of the phrenic nerve, which is a lot of the phrenic nerve, which is a lot harder to say than a side cramp or a harder to say than a side cramp or a harder to say than a side cramp or a side stitch. But, here's the situation. side stitch. But, here's the situation. side stitch. But, here's the situation. You have a set of nerves You have a set of nerves You have a set of nerves which is called the phrenic nerve, p h r which is called the phrenic nerve, p h r which is called the phrenic nerve, p h r e n i c, the phrenic nerve, which e n i c, the phrenic nerve, which e n i c, the phrenic nerve, which extends down from your brain stem, extends down from your brain stem, extends down from your brain stem, essentially, this region to your essentially, this region to your essentially, this region to your diaphragm to control your breathing. It diaphragm to control your breathing. It diaphragm to control your breathing. It has a collateral, meaning it has a has a collateral, meaning it has a has a collateral, meaning it has a branch, just like the branch on a tree, branch, just like the branch on a tree, branch, just like the branch on a tree, that innervates your liver. that innervates your liver. that innervates your liver. And if you are not breathing deeply And if you are not breathing deeply And if you are not breathing deeply enough, what can happen is you can get what's what can happen is you can get what's what can happen is you can get what's called sometimes a referenced pain. called sometimes a referenced pain. called sometimes a referenced pain. Referenced pain is probably going to be Referenced pain is probably going to be Referenced pain is probably going to be familiar to any of you who have ever familiar to any of you who have ever familiar to any of you who have ever read about how to recognize heart read about how to recognize heart read about how to recognize heart attack. You know, people who have heart attack. You know, people who have heart attack. You know, people who have heart attacks will sometimes have pain on one attacks will sometimes have pain on one attacks will sometimes have pain on one side of their body, the left arm. side of their body, the left arm. side of their body, the left arm. Sometimes people that have pain in a Sometimes people that have pain in a Sometimes people that have pain in a part of their back will suddenly also part of their back will suddenly also part of their back will suddenly also get pain in their shoulder or part of get pain in their shoulder or part of get pain in their shoulder or part of their face. This has to do with the fact their face. This has to do with the fact their face. This has to do with the fact that many of our nerves branch and are, that many of our nerves branch and are, that many of our nerves branch and are, meaning they're collateralized to meaning they're collateralized to meaning they're collateralized to different organs and areas of the body. different organs and areas of the body. different organs and areas of the body. And the way those nerves are woven And the way those nerves are woven And the way those nerves are woven together, it's often the case that if we disrupt it's often the case that if we disrupt it's often the case that if we disrupt the pattern of firing of electrical the pattern of firing of electrical the pattern of firing of electrical activity in one of those nerve branches, activity in one of those nerve branches, activity in one of those nerve branches, that the other ones are affected, too. that the other ones are affected, too. that the other ones are affected, too. The side stitch, the pain in your side, The side stitch, the pain in your side, The side stitch, the pain in your side, is often because of the contractions of is often because of the contractions of is often because of the contractions of the diaphragm because of the way you're the diaphragm because of the way you're the diaphragm because of the way you're breathing while you're exercising, breathing while you're exercising, breathing while you're exercising, running or swimming or biking. And as a running or swimming or biking. And as a running or swimming or biking. And as a consequence, you feel pain in your side, consequence, you feel pain in your side, consequence, you feel pain in your side, but that's not a cramp. The way to but that's not a cramp. The way to but that's not a cramp. The way to relieve it is very simple. You do the relieve it is very simple. You do the relieve it is very simple. You do the physiological sigh that I've talked physiological sigh that I've talked physiological sigh that I've talked about in previous about in previous about in previous episodes of the podcast and elsewhere, episodes of the podcast and elsewhere, episodes of the podcast and elsewhere, which is a double inhale through the which is a double inhale through the which is a double inhale through the nose, very deep, and then a long exhale. nose, very deep, and then a long exhale. nose, very deep, and then a long exhale. And you might want to repeat that two or And you might want to repeat that two or And you might want to repeat that two or three times. Typically, that will three times. Typically, that will three times. Typically, that will relieve the side stitch because of the relieve the side stitch because of the relieve the side stitch because of the way that it changes the firing patterns way that it changes the firing patterns way that it changes the firing patterns of the phrenic nerve. So, the side of the phrenic nerve. So, the side of the phrenic nerve. So, the side stitch is annoying, it's painful. stitch is annoying, it's painful. stitch is annoying, it's painful. Sometimes we think we're dehydrated, and Sometimes we think we're dehydrated, and Sometimes we think we're dehydrated, and you might be dehydrated, but often times you might be dehydrated, but often times you might be dehydrated, but often times it's just that we're breathing in a way it's just that we're breathing in a way it's just that we're breathing in a way that causes some referenced pain of the that causes some referenced pain of the that causes some referenced pain of the liver. We call it a side stitch or a liver. We call it a side stitch or a liver. We call it a side stitch or a side cramp, and you can relieve it very side cramp, and you can relieve it very side cramp, and you can relieve it very easily through the double inhale, long easily through the double inhale, long easily through the double inhale, long exhale. That pattern done two or three times, That pattern done two or three times, That pattern done two or three times, often you can continue to engage in the often you can continue to engage in the often you can continue to engage in the exercise while you do the double inhale exercise while you do the double inhale exercise while you do the double inhale exhale, and it will just relieve itself exhale, and it will just relieve itself exhale, and it will just relieve itself that way. So, give it a try if you that way. So, give it a try if you that way. So, give it a try if you experience the side stitch. Some people experience the side stitch. Some people experience the side stitch. Some people I know are also doing the double inhale, I know are also doing the double inhale, I know are also doing the double inhale, long exhale during long continuous bouts long exhale during long continuous bouts long exhale during long continuous bouts of exercise. of exercise. of exercise. I actually do this when I run. We have I actually do this when I run. We have I actually do this when I run. We have decent data, although these are still decent data, although these are still decent data, although these are still unpublished data, that can engage a unpublished data, that can engage a unpublished data, that can engage a kind of regular cadence of heart rate kind of regular cadence of heart rate kind of regular cadence of heart rate variability. So, there are a number of variability. So, there are a number of variability. So, there are a number of reasons why this physiological side can reasons why this physiological side can reasons why this physiological side can be useful, but it certainly can be useful, but it certainly can be useful, but it certainly can be useful for relieving the side stitch or useful for relieving the side stitch or useful for relieving the side stitch or so-called side cramp. so-called side cramp. so-called side cramp. Let's talk about the acquisition of new Let's talk about the acquisition of new Let's talk about the acquisition of new skills. These could be skills such as a golf These could be skills such as a golf These could be skills such as a golf swing or a tennis swing, swing or a tennis swing, swing or a tennis swing, or you're shooting free throws, or you're shooting free throws, or you're shooting free throws, or you're learning to dance, or you're learning an learning to dance, or you're learning an learning to dance, or you're learning an instrument. I'm mainly going to focus on athletic I'm mainly going to focus on athletic I'm mainly going to focus on athletic performance. There are basically two types of skills. There are basically two types of skills. There are basically two types of skills. Open-loop and closed-loop. Open-loop and closed-loop. Open-loop and closed-loop. Open-loop skills Open-loop skills Open-loop skills are skills where you perform some sort are skills where you perform some sort are skills where you perform some sort of motor action, and then you wait and of motor action, and then you wait and of motor action, and then you wait and you get immediate feedback as to whether you get immediate feedback as to whether you get immediate feedback as to whether or not it was done correctly or not. A or not it was done correctly or not. A or not it was done correctly or not. A good example would be throwing darts at good example would be throwing darts at good example would be throwing darts at a dartboard. a dartboard. a dartboard. So, if you throw the dart, you get So, if you throw the dart, you get So, if you throw the dart, you get feedback about whether or not you hit feedback about whether or not you hit feedback about whether or not you hit the bull's-eye, you're off the bull's-eye, you're off the bull's-eye, you're off the dartboard, or you're some other location dartboard, or you're some other location dartboard, or you're some other location on the dartboard. That's open-loop. on the dartboard. That's open-loop. on the dartboard. That's open-loop. Closed-loop would be something that's Closed-loop would be something that's Closed-loop would be something that's more continuous. So, let's say you're a more continuous. So, let's say you're a more continuous. So, let's say you're a runner, and you're starting to do some runner, and you're starting to do some runner, and you're starting to do some speed work and some sprints, speed work and some sprints, speed work and some sprints, and you're running and you can kind of and you're running and you can kind of and you're running and you can kind of feel whether or not you're running feel whether or not you're running feel whether or not you're running correctly, or maybe you even have a correctly, or maybe you even have a correctly, or maybe you even have a coach, and they're correcting your stride, or and they're correcting your stride, or and they're correcting your stride, or you're trying to you're trying to you're trying to uh do some sort of skill like the like a uh do some sort of skill like the like a uh do some sort of skill like the like a hopscotch skill, uh, which, uh, you hopscotch skill, uh, which, uh, you hopscotch skill, uh, which, uh, you know, maybe you're doing the ladder work know, maybe you're doing the ladder work know, maybe you're doing the ladder work where you're stepping between, um, where you're stepping between, um, where you're stepping between, um, designated spaces on the ground. That's designated spaces on the ground. That's designated spaces on the ground. That's closed loop because as you go, you can closed loop because as you go, you can closed loop because as you go, you can adjust your behavior and you can adjust your behavior and you can adjust your behavior and you can adjust the distance of your steps or you can, the distance of your steps or you can, the distance of your steps or you can, uh, adjust your speed or you can adjust uh, adjust your speed or you can adjust uh, adjust your speed or you can adjust your posture. And you are able to your posture. And you are able to your posture. And you are able to essentially do more practice per unit essentially do more practice per unit essentially do more practice per unit time. But you're getting feedback on a But you're getting feedback on a But you're getting feedback on a moment-to-moment basis. Okay? So, you moment-to-moment basis. Okay? So, you moment-to-moment basis. Okay? So, you have open loop and closed loop. And just have open loop and closed loop. And just have open loop and closed loop. And just to make this very, very clear, to make this very, very clear, to make this very, very clear, open loop would be practicing your open loop would be practicing your open loop would be practicing your tennis serve. So, let's say that you set tennis serve. So, let's say that you set tennis serve. So, let's say that you set a target on the other side of the net. a target on the other side of the net. a target on the other side of the net. You throw the ball up and you you, uh, You throw the ball up and you you, uh, You throw the ball up and you you, uh, hit the ball, it goes over. That's open hit the ball, it goes over. That's open hit the ball, it goes over. That's open loop. You'll know whether or not you loop. You'll know whether or not you loop. You'll know whether or not you were in the court, you were on the were in the court, you were on the were in the court, you were on the location you wanted to hit or close to location you wanted to hit or close to location you wanted to hit or close to it or not. That's open loop. Closed loop it or not. That's open loop. Closed loop it or not. That's open loop. Closed loop would be if you're in a regular case. would be if you're in a regular case. would be if you're in a regular case. So, maybe you're learning a swim stroke. So, maybe you're learning a swim stroke. So, maybe you're learning a swim stroke. Or maybe you're trying to learn a Or maybe you're trying to learn a Or maybe you're trying to learn a particular rhythm on the drums. So, particular rhythm on the drums. So, particular rhythm on the drums. So, maybe you're trying to learn a maybe you're trying to learn a maybe you're trying to learn a particular beat. I'm not very musical, particular beat. I'm not very musical, particular beat. I'm not very musical, so I'm not going to embarrass myself by so I'm not going to embarrass myself by so I'm not going to embarrass myself by giving an example of this, although giving an example of this, although giving an example of this, although later I will. later I will. later I will. Um, where you're trying to get a Um, where you're trying to get a Um, where you're trying to get a particular rhythm down. And if you're particular rhythm down. And if you're particular rhythm down. And if you're not getting it, you can adjust in real not getting it, you can adjust in real not getting it, you can adjust in real time and try and catch up or slow down time and try and catch up or slow down time and try and catch up or slow down or speed up, etc. Okay? So, hopefully or speed up, etc. Okay? So, hopefully or speed up, etc. Okay? So, hopefully you'll understand open loop and closed you'll understand open loop and closed you'll understand open loop and closed loop. You should always know before you loop. You should always know before you loop. You should always know before you try and learn a skill whether or not try and learn a skill whether or not try and learn a skill whether or not it's open loop or closed loop. And I'll it's open loop or closed loop. And I'll it's open loop or closed loop. And I'll return to why that's important shortly. return to why that's important shortly. return to why that's important shortly. But if you want to learn something, ask But if you want to learn something, ask But if you want to learn something, ask is it open loop or closed loop? is it open loop or closed loop? is it open loop or closed loop? There are essentially three components There are essentially three components There are essentially three components of any skill of any skill of any skill that involves motor movement. And those that involves motor movement. And those that involves motor movement. And those are sensory perception, actually perceiving sensory perception, actually perceiving sensory perception, actually perceiving what you are doing and what's happening what you are doing and what's happening what you are doing and what's happening around you. around you. around you. So, what you see, what you hear. So, what you see, what you hear. So, what you see, what you hear. Sometimes you're paying attention to Sometimes you're paying attention to Sometimes you're paying attention to what you're doing specifically like the what you're doing specifically like the what you're doing specifically like the trajectory of your arm or how you're trajectory of your arm or how you're trajectory of your arm or how you're moving your feet if you're learning to moving your feet if you're learning to moving your feet if you're learning to dance. Sometimes you're more focused on dance. Sometimes you're more focused on dance. Sometimes you're more focused on something that's happening outside of something that's happening outside of something that's happening outside of you, like you're listening for something you, like you're listening for something you, like you're listening for something in music or you're paying attention to in music or you're paying attention to in music or you're paying attention to the way your partner is moving, etc. So, the way your partner is moving, etc. So, the way your partner is moving, etc. So, there's sensory input. there's sensory input. there's sensory input. Then there are the actual movements. Then there are the actual movements. Then there are the actual movements. Okay, so there are the movements of your Okay, so there are the movements of your Okay, so there are the movements of your limbs and body. limbs and body. limbs and body. And then there's something called And then there's something called And then there's something called proprioception. And proprioception proprioception. And proprioception proprioception. And proprioception is often discussed as kind of a sixth sense often discussed as kind of a sixth sense often discussed as kind of a sixth sense of knowing where your limbs are in of knowing where your limbs are in of knowing where your limbs are in relation to your body. So, relation to your body. So, relation to your body. So, proprioception is vitally important. If proprioception is vitally important. If proprioception is vitally important. If I reach down and pick up this pen and I reach down and pick up this pen and I reach down and pick up this pen and pick it up, I'm not thinking about where pick it up, I'm not thinking about where pick it up, I'm not thinking about where the pen and my hand is relative to my the pen and my hand is relative to my the pen and my hand is relative to my body. But proprioceptively, body. But proprioceptively, body. But proprioceptively, I'm aware of it at kind of a sixth sense I'm aware of it at kind of a sixth sense I'm aware of it at kind of a sixth sense deeper subconscious level. I can also deeper subconscious level. I can also deeper subconscious level. I can also make myself aware of where my make myself aware of where my make myself aware of where my limbs are. And typically when we learn, limbs are. And typically when we learn, limbs are. And typically when we learn, we are placing more focus on we are placing more focus on we are placing more focus on proprioception than we do ordinarily. proprioception than we do ordinarily. proprioception than we do ordinarily. So, if I get up from this chair and I So, if I get up from this chair and I So, if I get up from this chair and I happen to walk out of the room, I don't happen to walk out of the room, I don't happen to walk out of the room, I don't think about where my feet are landing think about where my feet are landing think about where my feet are landing relative to one another. But if my leg relative to one another. But if my leg relative to one another. But if my leg had fallen asleep because I had been you had fallen asleep because I had been you had fallen asleep because I had been you know, leaning on one of the nerves of my know, leaning on one of the nerves of my know, leaning on one of the nerves of my leg or something like that, and my leg or something like that, and my leg or something like that, and my leg feels all tingly or numb, feels all tingly or numb, feels all tingly or numb, I and you if this were to happen, you I and you if this were to happen, you I and you if this were to happen, you would immediately notice a shift in would immediately notice a shift in would immediately notice a shift in gait. It would feel strange. I'd have to gait. It would feel strange. I'd have to gait. It would feel strange. I'd have to pay attention to how I'm stepping. And pay attention to how I'm stepping. And pay attention to how I'm stepping. And the reason is I'm not getting any the reason is I'm not getting any the reason is I'm not getting any proprioceptive feedback. Now, skill proprioceptive feedback. Now, skill proprioceptive feedback. Now, skill learning has a lot of other dimensions, learning has a lot of other dimensions, learning has a lot of other dimensions, too. But those are the main ones that we're But those are the main ones that we're But those are the main ones that we're going to focus on. So, just to remind going to focus on. So, just to remind going to focus on. So, just to remind you, it's you need to know open loop or you, it's you need to know open loop or you, it's you need to know open loop or closed loop and you need to know whether closed loop and you need to know whether closed loop and you need to know whether or not or not or not Excuse me, you need to know that there's Excuse me, you need to know that there's Excuse me, you need to know that there's sensory perception, sensory perception, sensory perception, what you're paying attention to, what you're paying attention to, what you're paying attention to, movements themselves, and movements themselves, and movements themselves, and proprioception. And there's one other important thing And there's one other important thing And there's one other important thing that you need to know, which is that you need to know, which is that you need to know, which is that movement of any kind is generated from movement of any kind is generated from movement of any kind is generated from one, two, or three sources within your one, two, or three sources within your one, two, or three sources within your nervous system, within your brain and nervous system, within your brain and nervous system, within your brain and body. These are These are These are central pattern generators, which are central pattern generators, which are central pattern generators, which are sometimes called CSPGs. Excuse me, CPGs. sometimes called CSPGs. Excuse me, CPGs. sometimes called CSPGs. Excuse me, CPGs. CSPGs are something entirely different CSPGs are something entirely different CSPGs are something entirely different in biology. in biology. in biology. Um CPGs, this just goes to show that I Um CPGs, this just goes to show that I Um CPGs, this just goes to show that I have a module CSPGs are chondroitin have a module CSPGs are chondroitin have a module CSPGs are chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans, they have nothing sulfate proteoglycans, they have nothing sulfate proteoglycans, they have nothing to do with this topic. CPGs to do with this topic. CPGs to do with this topic. CPGs are central pattern generators, or CPGs are central pattern generators, or CPGs are central pattern generators, or CPGs they're sometimes called. they're sometimes called. they're sometimes called. These CPGs are in your spinal cord, mine These CPGs are in your spinal cord, mine These CPGs are in your spinal cord, mine and yours, and yours, and yours, different ones, and they generate different ones, and they generate different ones, and they generate repetitive movements. So, if you're repetitive movements. So, if you're repetitive movements. So, if you're walking, if you're running, if you're walking, if you're running, if you're walking, if you're running, if you're cycling, if you're breathing, which presumably if you're breathing, which presumably if you're breathing, which presumably you are, and you're doing that in a you are, and you're doing that in a you are, and you're doing that in a regular rhythmic cadence, regular rhythmic cadence, regular rhythmic cadence, central pattern generators are central pattern generators are central pattern generators are controlling that movement. After you controlling that movement. After you controlling that movement. After you learn how to walk, run, swim, cycle, learn how to walk, run, swim, cycle, learn how to walk, run, swim, cycle, do anything, really, do anything, really, do anything, really, much of the work is handed off to these much of the work is handed off to these much of the work is handed off to these central pattern generators. And there central pattern generators. And there central pattern generators. And there were experiments that were done in the were experiments that were done in the were experiments that were done in the '60s, '70s, and '80s '60s, '70s, and '80s '60s, '70s, and '80s that actually looked at decerebrate that actually looked at decerebrate that actually looked at decerebrate animals and even decerebrate humans. animals and even decerebrate humans. animals and even decerebrate humans. These are humans and animals that lack a These are humans and animals that lack a These are humans and animals that lack a cerebral cortex, they lack much of the cerebral cortex, they lack much of the cerebral cortex, they lack much of the brain, and yet they can engage in what's brain, and yet they can engage in what's brain, and yet they can engage in what's called a fictive movement. So, it sounds called a fictive movement. So, it sounds called a fictive movement. So, it sounds like a kind of barbaric experiment, I'm like a kind of barbaric experiment, I'm like a kind of barbaric experiment, I'm glad I wasn't the one to have to do glad I wasn't the one to have to do glad I wasn't the one to have to do them, but this is the stuff of them, but this is the stuff of them, but this is the stuff of neuroscience textbooks that cats that or neuroscience textbooks that cats that or neuroscience textbooks that cats that or dogs or mice that have their neocortex dogs or mice that have their neocortex dogs or mice that have their neocortex removed, put them on a treadmill, removed, put them on a treadmill, removed, put them on a treadmill, they'll walk just fine. And they will they'll walk just fine. And they will they'll walk just fine. And they will adjust their speed of walking just fine, adjust their speed of walking just fine, adjust their speed of walking just fine, even though they basically lack all even though they basically lack all even though they basically lack all their thinking decision-making brain. their thinking decision-making brain. their thinking decision-making brain. And it turns out humans that have And it turns out humans that have And it turns out humans that have unfortunately massive strokes to their unfortunately massive strokes to their unfortunately massive strokes to their cortex and lack any neocortex, and lack any neocortex, and lack any neocortex, but preserve these central pattern but preserve these central pattern but preserve these central pattern generators, will also walk just fine generators, will also walk just fine generators, will also walk just fine even though they lack any of the other even though they lack any of the other even though they lack any of the other stuff in the brain. So these CPGs or stuff in the brain. So these CPGs or stuff in the brain. So these CPGs or CPGSS are amazing and they control a lot CPGSS are amazing and they control a lot CPGSS are amazing and they control a lot of our already learned behavior. When of our already learned behavior. When of our already learned behavior. When you're really good at something, CPGs you're really good at something, CPGs you're really good at something, CPGs are controlling a lot of that behavior. are controlling a lot of that behavior. are controlling a lot of that behavior. And that's true also for a golf swing And that's true also for a golf swing And that's true also for a golf swing even if it's not really repetitive. even if it's not really repetitive. even if it's not really repetitive. Somebody who's really good at golf is Somebody who's really good at golf is Somebody who's really good at golf is going to I guess going to I guess going to I guess call it a T. You put the ball on the T. call it a T. You put the ball on the T. call it a T. You put the ball on the T. I show my knowledge of golf. I've only I show my knowledge of golf. I've only I show my knowledge of golf. I've only done mini golf frankly. done mini golf frankly. done mini golf frankly. Um but someday maybe I'll learn how to golf but someday maybe I'll learn how to golf but someday maybe I'll learn how to golf but you set the golf ball down and but you set the golf ball down and but you set the golf ball down and swing. Set the ball golf ball down swing. Set the ball golf ball down swing. Set the ball golf ball down swing. Central pattern generators are going to Central pattern generators are going to Central pattern generators are going to handle a lot of that. If I were to go to handle a lot of that. If I were to go to handle a lot of that. If I were to go to the golf course, the golf course, the golf course, Stanford has a beautiful golf course. If Stanford has a beautiful golf course. If Stanford has a beautiful golf course. If I were to go out there, put a ball on I were to go out there, put a ball on I were to go out there, put a ball on the T, my central pattern generators the T, my central pattern generators the T, my central pattern generators would not be involved in that at all. would not be involved in that at all. would not be involved in that at all. The moment I get, you know, The moment I get, you know, The moment I get, you know, bring the club back to swing, bring the club back to swing, bring the club back to swing, it's going to engage other things. And it's going to engage other things. And it's going to engage other things. And the other things it's going to engage the other things it's going to engage the other things it's going to engage because I don't know that behavior because I don't know that behavior because I don't know that behavior now or then is now or then is now or then is upper motor neurons. We have motor upper motor neurons. We have motor upper motor neurons. We have motor neurons in our cortex, neurons in our cortex, neurons in our cortex, in our neocortex, that control in our neocortex, that control in our neocortex, that control deliberate action. And those are the deliberate action. And those are the deliberate action. And those are the ones that you're engaging when you are ones that you're engaging when you are ones that you're engaging when you are learning. Those are the ones that you Those are the ones that you Those are the ones that you have to pay attention in order to have to pay attention in order to have to pay attention in order to engage. And that's what's happening for engage. And that's what's happening for engage. And that's what's happening for instance if I decide I'm going to reach instance if I decide I'm going to reach instance if I decide I'm going to reach down and pick up my pen which I rarely down and pick up my pen which I rarely down and pick up my pen which I rarely think about but now I'm thinking about think about but now I'm thinking about think about but now I'm thinking about it and I'm going to do this in a very it and I'm going to do this in a very it and I'm going to do this in a very deliberate way. I'm going to grab with deliberate way. I'm going to grab with deliberate way. I'm going to grab with these two fingers and lift. My upper these two fingers and lift. My upper these two fingers and lift. My upper motor neurons are now involved. Okay? So motor neurons are now involved. Okay? So motor neurons are now involved. Okay? So upper motor neurons are very important upper motor neurons are very important upper motor neurons are very important because a little bit later in the because a little bit later in the because a little bit later in the episode when we talk about how to use episode when we talk about how to use episode when we talk about how to use visualization in order to accelerate skill learning, in order to accelerate skill learning, in order to accelerate skill learning, it's going to it's going to it's going to leverage these upper motor neurons in leverage these upper motor neurons in leverage these upper motor neurons in very particular ways. Okay? So we have very particular ways. Okay? So we have very particular ways. Okay? So we have CPGs for rhythmic movement, upper motor CPGs for rhythmic movement, upper motor CPGs for rhythmic movement, upper motor neurons for deliberate unlearned neurons for deliberate unlearned neurons for deliberate unlearned movements or movements that we are in movements or movements that we are in movements or movements that we are in the process of learning. the process of learning. the process of learning. And then we have what are called lower And then we have what are called lower And then we have what are called lower motor neurons. Lower motor neurons are motor neurons. Lower motor neurons are motor neurons. Lower motor neurons are the ones in our spinal cord that send the ones in our spinal cord that send the ones in our spinal cord that send little wires out to our muscles, which little wires out to our muscles, which little wires out to our muscles, which actually cause the firing of those actually cause the firing of those actually cause the firing of those muscle fibers. Okay? So, the way to muscle fibers. Okay? So, the way to muscle fibers. Okay? So, the way to think about this is you've got upper think about this is you've got upper think about this is you've got upper motor neurons, which talk to CPGs and to motor neurons, which talk to CPGs and to motor neurons, which talk to CPGs and to lower motor neurons. So, it's really lower motor neurons. So, it's really lower motor neurons. So, it's really simple. And now you know most everything simple. And now you know most everything simple. And now you know most everything there is to know about the neural there is to know about the neural there is to know about the neural pathways controlling movement, at least pathways controlling movement, at least pathways controlling movement, at least for sake of this discussion. So, anytime for sake of this discussion. So, anytime for sake of this discussion. So, anytime we learn something, we have to decide we learn something, we have to decide we learn something, we have to decide what to place our sensory perception on. what to place our sensory perception on. what to place our sensory perception on. Meaning, what are we going to focus on? Meaning, what are we going to focus on? Meaning, what are we going to focus on? That's critical. If you're listening to That's critical. If you're listening to That's critical. If you're listening to this and you're the type of person who this and you're the type of person who this and you're the type of person who likes taking notes, this should be the likes taking notes, this should be the likes taking notes, this should be the second question you ask. Remember, the second question you ask. Remember, the second question you ask. Remember, the first question is it open loop or first question is it open loop or first question is it open loop or closed loop? The second question should closed loop? The second question should closed loop? The second question should be what should I focus my attention on? what should I focus my attention on? what should I focus my attention on? Auditory attention, visual attention, or Auditory attention, visual attention, or Auditory attention, visual attention, or proprioception? Should I focus on where proprioception? Should I focus on where proprioception? Should I focus on where my limbs are relative to my body, or my limbs are relative to my body, or my limbs are relative to my body, or should I focus on the outcome? Okay, should I focus on the outcome? Okay, should I focus on the outcome? Okay, this is a critical distinction. You can this is a critical distinction. You can this is a critical distinction. You can decide to learn how to do a golf swing decide to learn how to do a golf swing decide to learn how to do a golf swing or learn how to shoot free throws or learn how to shoot free throws or learn how to shoot free throws or learn how to dance tango, and decide learn how to dance tango, and decide learn how to dance tango, and decide that you are going to focus on that you are going to focus on that you are going to focus on the movements of your partner or the movements of your partner or the movements of your partner or the positions of your feet. You maybe are positions of your feet. You maybe are positions of your feet. You maybe are going to look at them. Maybe you're going to look at them. Maybe you're going to look at them. Maybe you're going to sense them. You're going to going to sense them. You're going to going to sense them. You're going to actually feel where they are. actually feel where they are. actually feel where they are. Or maybe you're going to sense the Or maybe you're going to sense the Or maybe you're going to sense the position and posture of your body, which position and posture of your body, which position and posture of your body, which is more proprioceptive. Okay? So, you is more proprioceptive. Okay? So, you is more proprioceptive. Okay? So, you have to allocate your attention, and I'm have to allocate your attention, and I'm have to allocate your attention, and I'm going to tell you how to allocate your going to tell you how to allocate your going to tell you how to allocate your attention best in order to learn faster. attention best in order to learn faster. attention best in order to learn faster. So, these are the sorts of decisions So, these are the sorts of decisions So, these are the sorts of decisions that you have to make. that you have to make. that you have to make. Fortunately for you, you don't have to Fortunately for you, you don't have to Fortunately for you, you don't have to think about whether or not you're going think about whether or not you're going think about whether or not you're going to use your upper motor neurons to use your upper motor neurons to use your upper motor neurons and your lower motor neurons or not, and your lower motor neurons or not, and your lower motor neurons or not, because if you don't know how to do because if you don't know how to do because if you don't know how to do something, you're automatically going to something, you're automatically going to something, you're automatically going to engage your upper motor neurons. And if engage your upper motor neurons. And if engage your upper motor neurons. And if you do, you are you do, you are you do, you are already then you're not to use your already then you're not to use your already then you're not to use your upper motor neurons. You're mainly going upper motor neurons. You're mainly going upper motor neurons. You're mainly going to rely on central pattern generators. to rely on central pattern generators. to rely on central pattern generators. You are always using your lower motor You are always using your lower motor You are always using your lower motor neurons to move muscle. So, we can neurons to move muscle. So, we can neurons to move muscle. So, we can really simplify things now. I've given really simplify things now. I've given really simplify things now. I've given you a lot of information, but we can you a lot of information, but we can you a lot of information, but we can simplify it. Basically, open loop or simplify it. Basically, open loop or simplify it. Basically, open loop or closed loop, that's one question, and closed loop, that's one question, and closed loop, that's one question, and what am I going to focus on? And then what am I going to focus on? And then what am I going to focus on? And then your neurology will take care of the your neurology will take care of the your neurology will take care of the rest. So, now I want to talk about rest. So, now I want to talk about rest. So, now I want to talk about realistic expectations. realistic expectations. realistic expectations. Somewhere in Hollywood, presumably, it got in Hollywood, presumably, it got in Hollywood, presumably, it got embedded in somebody's mind that instant embedded in somebody's mind that instant embedded in somebody's mind that instant skill acquisition was possible. That you skill acquisition was possible. That you skill acquisition was possible. That you could take a particular pill, or you could take a particular pill, or you could take a particular pill, or you could touch a particular object, or you could touch a particular object, or you could touch a particular object, or you could have a wand waved over you, and could have a wand waved over you, and could have a wand waved over you, and you would suddenly have a skill. you would suddenly have a skill. you would suddenly have a skill. And so, that is the result of Hollywood And so, that is the result of Hollywood And so, that is the result of Hollywood at all. at all. at all. It doesn't exist. It doesn't exist. It doesn't exist. At least not in reality. And I love At least not in reality. And I love At least not in reality. And I love movies, but it simply doesn't exist. movies, but it simply doesn't exist. movies, but it simply doesn't exist. Then the self-help literature Then the self-help literature Then the self-help literature created another rule called the 10,000 created another rule called the 10,000 created another rule called the 10,000 hours rule. hours rule. hours rule. And frankly, that doesn't really match And frankly, that doesn't really match And frankly, that doesn't really match the literature, at least the scientific the literature, at least the scientific the literature, at least the scientific literature, either. literature, either. literature, either. I like it because it implies that I like it because it implies that I like it because it implies that learning takes time, which is more learning takes time, which is more learning takes time, which is more accurate than the Hollywood at all accurate than the Hollywood at all accurate than the Hollywood at all instant skill acquisition rule, instant skill acquisition rule, instant skill acquisition rule, which isn't really a rule, it's a myth. which isn't really a rule, it's a myth. which isn't really a rule, it's a myth. But the 10,000 hours rule But the 10,000 hours rule But the 10,000 hours rule overlooks something crucial, which is overlooks something crucial, which is overlooks something crucial, which is that it's not about that it's not about that it's not about hours, it's about repetitions. Now, of hours, it's about repetitions. Now, of hours, it's about repetitions. Now, of course, there's a relationship between course, there's a relationship between course, there's a relationship between time and repetitions. time and repetitions. time and repetitions. But there are some beautiful experiments there are some beautiful experiments there are some beautiful experiments that point to the fact that point to the fact that point to the fact that by simple adjustment by simple adjustment by simple adjustment of what you are focused on as you of what you are focused on as you of what you are focused on as you attempt to learn a new skill, attempt to learn a new skill, attempt to learn a new skill, you can adjust the number of repetitions you can adjust the number of repetitions you can adjust the number of repetitions that you do, you adjust your motivation that you do, you adjust your motivation that you do, you adjust your motivation for learning and you can vastly for learning and you can vastly for learning and you can vastly accelerate learning. accelerate learning. accelerate learning. Some of you may recognize this by its Some of you may recognize this by its Some of you may recognize this by its internet name, which is not a scientific internet name, which is not a scientific internet name, which is not a scientific term, which is the Super Mario effect. term, which is the Super Mario effect. term, which is the Super Mario effect. There's actually a quite good video on There's actually a quite good video on There's actually a quite good video on YouTube describing the Super Mario YouTube describing the Super Mario YouTube describing the Super Mario effect. I think it was a YouTuber who effect. I think it was a YouTuber who effect. I think it was a YouTuber who has a I think a background in science. has a I think a background in science. has a I think a background in science. And he did an interesting experiment. And he did an interesting experiment. And he did an interesting experiment. And I'll talk about his experiment first and I'll talk about his experiment first and I'll talk about his experiment first and then I will talk about the neurobiology then I will talk about the neurobiology then I will talk about the neurobiology that supports that supports that supports the result that he got. the result that he got. the result that he got. The Super Mario effect The Super Mario effect The Super Mario effect relates to the game Super Mario relates to the game Super Mario relates to the game Super Mario Brothers, but you'll see why at the end. Brothers, but you'll see why at the end. Brothers, but you'll see why at the end. But basically what they did was they had But basically what they did was they had But basically what they did was they had 50,000 subjects, which is a enormous number of subjects, which is a enormous number of subjects, which is a enormous number of subjects, learn a program, essentially taking learn a program, essentially taking learn a program, essentially taking words from a computer program or words from a computer program or words from a computer program or the commands for a computer program that the commands for a computer program that the commands for a computer program that were kind of clustered in a column on were kind of clustered in a column on were kind of clustered in a column on the right. the right. the right. So these are the sorts of things that So these are the sorts of things that So these are the sorts of things that computer programmers will be familiar computer programmers will be familiar computer programmers will be familiar with, but other people won't. with, but other people won't. with, but other people won't. And those commands are essentially they And those commands are essentially they And those commands are essentially they essentially translate to things like, essentially translate to things like, essentially translate to things like, you know, go forward and then if it's a you know, go forward and then if it's a you know, go forward and then if it's a right-hand turn in the maze, then go right-hand turn in the maze, then go right-hand turn in the maze, then go right and continue until you hit a right and continue until you hit a right and continue until you hit a choice point, etc. So it's a bunch of choice point, etc. So it's a bunch of choice point, etc. So it's a bunch of instructions, but the job of the instructions, but the job of the instructions, but the job of the subjects in these experiments were to subjects in these experiments were to subjects in these experiments were to organize those instructions in a organize those instructions in a organize those instructions in a particular way that would allow a little particular way that would allow a little particular way that would allow a little cursor to move through the maze cursor to move through the maze cursor to move through the maze successfully, okay? So basically the successfully, okay? So basically the successfully, okay? So basically the goal was or at least what the subjects goal was or at least what the subjects goal was or at least what the subjects were told is that anyone can learn the were told is that anyone can learn the were told is that anyone can learn the computer program computer program computer program and if somebody can just organize the if somebody can just organize the if somebody can just organize the instructions in the right way, then they instructions in the right way, then they instructions in the right way, then they can program this little can program this little can program this little cursor to move through a maze, very cursor to move through a maze, very cursor to move through a maze, very simple. And yet And yet And yet if you don't have any background in if you don't have any background in if you don't have any background in computer programming or even if you do, computer programming or even if you do, computer programming or even if you do, it takes some skill. You have to know it takes some skill. You have to know it takes some skill. You have to know what commands to give in what particular what commands to give in what particular what commands to give in what particular order and they made that very easy. You order and they made that very easy. You order and they made that very easy. You would You assemble them in a list over would You assemble them in a list over would You assemble them in a list over onto the right. onto the right. onto the right. So, people started doing this. Now, So, people started doing this. Now, So, people started doing this. Now, there were two groups there were two groups there were two groups and some one half of the subjects and some one half of the subjects and some one half of the subjects if they got it wrong if they got it wrong if they got it wrong meaning they entered a command and the meaning they entered a command and the meaning they entered a command and the cursor would move and cursor would move and cursor would move and it was the wrong command it was the wrong command it was the wrong command for this little cursor to move through for this little cursor to move through for this little cursor to move through the maze the maze the maze they saw a signal jump up on their they saw a signal jump up on their they saw a signal jump up on their screen that said screen that said screen that said "That did not work. Please try again." "That did not work. Please try again." "That did not work. Please try again." That's it. If they got if they put in That's it. If they got if they put in That's it. If they got if they put in the wrong command or it was in the wrong the wrong command or it was in the wrong the wrong command or it was in the wrong sequence, it would say, "That did not sequence, it would say, "That did not sequence, it would say, "That did not work. Please try again." And then the work. Please try again." And then the work. Please try again." And then the people would the subjects would people would the subjects would people would the subjects would reorganize the instructions and then the reorganize the instructions and then the reorganize the instructions and then the little cursor would continue. And if little cursor would continue. And if little cursor would continue. And if they got it wrong again, it would say, they got it wrong again, it would say, they got it wrong again, it would say, "That did not work. Please try again." "That did not work. Please try again." "That did not work. Please try again." Okay? The other half of the subjects Okay? The other half of the subjects Okay? The other half of the subjects if they got something wrong, were told if they got something wrong, were told if they got something wrong, were told "You just lost five points. Please "You just lost five points. Please "You just lost five points. Please continue." So, that's the only difference in the So, that's the only difference in the So, that's the only difference in the feedback that they got. feedback that they got. feedback that they got. Now I have to confess, I would have I have to confess, I would have I have to confess, I would have predicted, based on my knowledge of predicted, based on my knowledge of predicted, based on my knowledge of dopamine circuitry and reward dopamine circuitry and reward dopamine circuitry and reward contingency and contingency and contingency and epinephrine and stress and motivated epinephrine and stress and motivated epinephrine and stress and motivated learning and this other thing that we've learning and this other thing that we've learning and this other thing that we've been told in many, many books on been told in many, many books on been told in many, many books on behavioral economics and in the behavioral economics and in the behavioral economics and in the self-help literature, which is that self-help literature, which is that self-help literature, which is that people will work much harder to prevent people will work much harder to prevent people will work much harder to prevent losing something than they will to gain losing something than they will to gain losing something than they will to gain something. That you hear all the time. something. That you hear all the time. something. That you hear all the time. And it turns that out that that's not at And it turns that out that that's not at And it turns that out that that's not at all what happened. all what happened. all what happened. If they looked at the success rate they looked at the success rate they looked at the success rate of the subjects, what they found was of the subjects, what they found was of the subjects, what they found was that the subjects that were told, "That that the subjects that were told, "That that the subjects that were told, "That did not work. Please try again." did not work. Please try again." did not work. Please try again." had a 68% success rate. had a 68% success rate. had a 68% success rate. 68% of them went on to successfully 68% of them went on to successfully 68% of them went on to successfully program this cursor moving through the program this cursor moving through the program this cursor moving through the maze. Whereas the ones that were told, "You Whereas the ones that were told, "You Whereas the ones that were told, "You lost five points." lost five points." lost five points." had a 52% success rate. which is a had a 52% success rate. which is a had a 52% success rate. which is a significant difference. significant difference. significant difference. But, the source of the success or the But, the source of the success or the But, the source of the success or the lack of success is really interesting. lack of success is really interesting. lack of success is really interesting. The subjects that were told "That did The subjects that were told "That did The subjects that were told "That did not work. Please try again." tried many, many more times per unit tried many, many more times per unit tried many, many more times per unit time. In other words, they made more time. In other words, they made more time. In other words, they made more attempts at programming this thing to attempts at programming this thing to attempts at programming this thing to allow this cursor to move through the allow this cursor to move through the allow this cursor to move through the maze. Whereas, the people that were told maze. Whereas, the people that were told maze. Whereas, the people that were told "You lost five points." gave up earlier "You lost five points." gave up earlier "You lost five points." gave up earlier or gave up entirely. or gave up entirely. or gave up entirely. Okay, so let's just step back from this Okay, so let's just step back from this Okay, so let's just step back from this because to me this was very surprising. because to me this was very surprising. because to me this was very surprising. It violates a lot of things that I had It violates a lot of things that I had It violates a lot of things that I had heard in the kind of popular heard in the kind of popular heard in the kind of popular culture or the self-help literature that culture or the self-help literature that culture or the self-help literature that people will work much harder to avoid people will work much harder to avoid people will work much harder to avoid losing something than they will to gain losing something than they will to gain losing something than they will to gain something. And it didn't really fit with something. And it didn't really fit with something. And it didn't really fit with what I understood about reward what I understood about reward what I understood about reward contingencies and dopamine. contingencies and dopamine. contingencies and dopamine. But, it did fit well with another set of But, it did fit well with another set of But, it did fit well with another set of experiments that I'm very familiar with experiments that I'm very familiar with experiments that I'm very familiar with from the neuroscience literature. from the neuroscience literature. from the neuroscience literature. And I'll give you the punchline first, And I'll give you the punchline first, And I'll give you the punchline first, and then we're going to take what these and then we're going to take what these and then we're going to take what these data mean, and we're going to data mean, and we're going to data mean, and we're going to talk about a learning protocol that you talk about a learning protocol that you talk about a learning protocol that you can use that will allow you to learn can use that will allow you to learn can use that will allow you to learn skills faster by willingly skills faster by willingly skills faster by willingly participating in more repetitions of the participating in more repetitions of the participating in more repetitions of the skill learning. Meaning, you will want skill learning. Meaning, you will want skill learning. Meaning, you will want to do more repetitions even if you're to do more repetitions even if you're to do more repetitions even if you're getting it wrong some or most of the getting it wrong some or most of the getting it wrong some or most of the time. So, the experiment that I want to tell So, the experiment that I want to tell So, the experiment that I want to tell you about is called the tube test. And you about is called the tube test. And you about is called the tube test. And this is generally done in mice, although this is generally done in mice, although this is generally done in mice, although it's sometimes been done in rats, and it it's sometimes been done in rats, and it it's sometimes been done in rats, and it has a lot of parallels to some things has a lot of parallels to some things has a lot of parallels to some things that you've probably that you've probably that you've probably seen and experienced even in human life, seen and experienced even in human life, seen and experienced even in human life, in regular life, maybe even in your in regular life, maybe even in your in regular life, maybe even in your life. So, here's the experiment. You take two So, here's the experiment. You take two So, here's the experiment. You take two rats, you put them in a tube, or two rats, you put them in a tube, or two rats, you put them in a tube, or two mice, you put them in a tube. mice, you put them in a tube. mice, you put them in a tube. And mice and rats, they don't like to And mice and rats, they don't like to And mice and rats, they don't like to share the same tube. share the same tube. share the same tube. So, what they'll do is they'll start So, what they'll do is they'll start So, what they'll do is they'll start pushing each other pushing each other pushing each other back and forth, back and forth. back and forth, back and forth. back and forth, back and forth. Sooner or later, one of the rats or mice Sooner or later, one of the rats or mice Sooner or later, one of the rats or mice pushes the other one out. The one that pushes the other one out. The one that pushes the other one out. The one that got pushed out is the loser. The one got pushed out is the loser. The one got pushed out is the loser. The one that gets the tube is the winner. that gets the tube is the winner. that gets the tube is the winner. Okay? Now, you take the winner, Now, you take the winner, Now, you take the winner, you give it a new competitor, you give it a new competitor, you give it a new competitor, and what you find is that the and what you find is that the and what you find is that the mouse or rat that won previously mouse or rat that won previously mouse or rat that won previously has a much higher than chance has a much higher than chance has a much higher than chance probability of winning the second time. probability of winning the second time. probability of winning the second time. In other words, winning before In other words, winning before In other words, winning before leads to winning again. leads to winning again. leads to winning again. And the reverse is also true. If you And the reverse is also true. If you And the reverse is also true. If you take the loser and you put that loser in take the loser and you put that loser in take the loser and you put that loser in with another mouse, with another mouse, with another mouse, fresh mouse, new mouse, fresh mouse, new mouse, fresh mouse, new mouse, the loser typically will lose at much the loser typically will lose at much the loser typically will lose at much greater probability than chance. And greater probability than chance. And greater probability than chance. And this is not related to differences in this is not related to differences in this is not related to differences in strength or size or testosterone or any strength or size or testosterone or any strength or size or testosterone or any other of the things that might leap to other of the things that might leap to other of the things that might leap to mind as explanations for this because mind as explanations for this because mind as explanations for this because those were all controlled for. those were all controlled for. those were all controlled for. Now, that result have been known about for that result have been known about for that result have been known about for decades, but 3 years ago, there was a paper published 3 years ago, there was a paper published 3 years ago, there was a paper published in the journal Science. Phenomenal in the journal Science. Phenomenal in the journal Science. Phenomenal journal. It's one of the three apex journal. It's one of the three apex journal. It's one of the three apex journals. That examined the brain area that's That examined the brain area that's That examined the brain area that's involved in this. Turns out it's a involved in this. Turns out it's a involved in this. Turns out it's a particular area of the frontal cortex, particular area of the frontal cortex, particular area of the frontal cortex, for those of you that want to know. And for those of you that want to know. And for those of you that want to know. And they did a simple experiment where they did a simple experiment where they did a simple experiment where they The experimenters increased or decreased The experimenters increased or decreased The experimenters increased or decreased the activity of this brain area in the activity of this brain area in the activity of this brain area in the prefrontal cortex, little subregion of prefrontal cortex, little subregion of prefrontal cortex, little subregion of the prefrontal cortex. And what they the prefrontal cortex. And what they the prefrontal cortex. And what they found is if they stimulated this brain found is if they stimulated this brain found is if they stimulated this brain area, a mouse or rat, regardless of whether or a mouse or rat, regardless of whether or a mouse or rat, regardless of whether or not it had been a winner or loser not it had been a winner or loser not it had been a winner or loser before, became a winner every single before, became a winner every single before, became a winner every single time. And they showed that if they blocked the And they showed that if they blocked the And they showed that if they blocked the activity of this brain area, activity of this brain area, activity of this brain area, regardless of whether or not the mouse regardless of whether or not the mouse regardless of whether or not the mouse or rat had been a winner or a loser, it or rat had been a winner or a loser, it or rat had been a winner or a loser, it became a loser every single time. And became a loser every single time. And became a loser every single time. And this translated to other scenarios, this translated to other scenarios, this translated to other scenarios, other competitive scenarios, other competitive scenarios, other competitive scenarios, where they'd put a bunch of mice or rats where they'd put a bunch of mice or rats where they'd put a bunch of mice or rats in a kind of cool chamber. They'd have a in a kind of cool chamber. They'd have a in a kind of cool chamber. They'd have a little heat lamp in the corner, and mice little heat lamp in the corner, and mice little heat lamp in the corner, and mice like heat, and there was only enough like heat, and there was only enough like heat, and there was only enough space for one mouse to get the be under space for one mouse to get the be under space for one mouse to get the be under the heat, and the one that had won in the heat, and the one that had won in the heat, and the one that had won in the tube test or that had the brain area the tube test or that had the brain area the tube test or that had the brain area stimulated always got the nice warm stimulated always got the nice warm stimulated always got the nice warm spot. Okay, so what is this magic brain area? Okay, so what is this magic brain area? Okay, so what is this magic brain area? What is it doing? Well, the reason I'm What is it doing? Well, the reason I'm What is it doing? Well, the reason I'm bringing this up today, and the reason bringing this up today, and the reason bringing this up today, and the reason I'm bringing it up on the heels of the I'm bringing it up on the heels of the I'm bringing it up on the heels of the Super Mario effect, is that stimulation Super Mario effect, is that stimulation Super Mario effect, is that stimulation of this brain area of this brain area of this brain area had a very simple had a very simple had a very simple and very important effect, which was it and very important effect, which was it and very important effect, which was it led to more forward steps, more led to more forward steps, more led to more forward steps, more repetitions, more effort, but not in repetitions, more effort, but not in repetitions, more effort, but not in terms of sheer might and will, not terms of sheer might and will, not terms of sheer might and will, not digging deeper, just more repetitions digging deeper, just more repetitions digging deeper, just more repetitions per unit time. And the losers had fewer per unit time. And the losers had fewer per unit time. And the losers had fewer repetitions per unit time. repetitions per unit time. repetitions per unit time. So, the Super Mario effect, this online So, the Super Mario effect, this online So, the Super Mario effect, this online experiment, and the tube test, which has experiment, and the tube test, which has experiment, and the tube test, which has been done by various labs and repeated been done by various labs and repeated been done by various labs and repeated again and again, point to a simple, but again and again, point to a simple, but again and again, point to a simple, but very important rule, which is neither very important rule, which is neither very important rule, which is neither the 10,000 hours rule nor the magic wand the 10,000 hours rule nor the magic wand the 10,000 hours rule nor the magic wand Hollywood version of learning, Hollywood version of learning, Hollywood version of learning, but rather the neurobiological but rather the neurobiological but rather the neurobiological explanation for learning a skill is explanation for learning a skill is explanation for learning a skill is you want to perform as many repetitions you want to perform as many repetitions you want to perform as many repetitions per unit time as you possibly can. per unit time as you possibly can. per unit time as you possibly can. At least when you're first trying to At least when you're first trying to At least when you're first trying to learn a skill. learn a skill. learn a skill. I want to repeat that. You want to I want to repeat that. You want to I want to repeat that. You want to perform as many repetitions as you perform as many repetitions as you perform as many repetitions as you possibly can, at least when you're first possibly can, at least when you're first possibly can, at least when you're first trying to learn a skill. trying to learn a skill. trying to learn a skill. Now, that might sound like a duh, it's Now, that might sound like a duh, it's Now, that might sound like a duh, it's just more reps, but it's not so obvious. just more reps, but it's not so obvious. just more reps, but it's not so obvious. There's no reason why more repetitions There's no reason why more repetitions There's no reason why more repetitions should necessarily lead to faster should necessarily lead to faster should necessarily lead to faster learning, because you could also say, well, more because you could also say, well, more because you could also say, well, more repetitions, you can make more errors, repetitions, you can make more errors, repetitions, you can make more errors, and those errors would lead to poor and those errors would lead to poor and those errors would lead to poor performance, like misstepping a number performance, like misstepping a number performance, like misstepping a number of times. And in these cases, there's of times. And in these cases, there's of times. And in these cases, there's very little feedback, right? there's very little feedback, right? there's very little feedback, right? It's not like every time It's not like every time It's not like every time uh the rat pushes forward or moves uh the rat pushes forward or moves uh the rat pushes forward or moves back that it is sensing, "Oh, I'm back that it is sensing, "Oh, I'm back that it is sensing, "Oh, I'm winning, I'm losing, I'm winning, I'm winning, I'm losing, I'm winning, I'm winning, I'm losing, I'm winning, I'm losing" on a micro level. It probably losing" on a micro level. It probably losing" on a micro level. It probably does that as it starts to push the other does that as it starts to push the other does that as it starts to push the other one out. The rat or mouse probably one out. The rat or mouse probably one out. The rat or mouse probably thinks, "I'm winning." And as it's thinks, "I'm winning." And as it's thinks, "I'm winning." And as it's backing up, it probably thinks, "I'm backing up, it probably thinks, "I'm backing up, it probably thinks, "I'm losing." As you play the game, the Super Mario As you play the game, the Super Mario As you play the game, the Super Mario game, you are told, "Nope, that didn't work. you are told, "Nope, that didn't work. you are told, "Nope, that didn't work. Nope, that didn't work. Please try Nope, that didn't work. Please try Nope, that didn't work. Please try again." But the important thing is that the But the important thing is that the But the important thing is that the winners are always generating more winners are always generating more winners are always generating more repetitions per unit time. It's just a repetitions per unit time. It's just a repetitions per unit time. It's just a repeat of performance, repeat of repeat of performance, repeat of repeat of performance, repeat of performance, even if there are errors. performance, even if there are errors. performance, even if there are errors. And that points to something vitally And that points to something vitally And that points to something vitally important, which is important, which is important, which is reps are important, reps are important, reps are important, but making error reps is also important. but making error reps is also important. but making error reps is also important. In fact, it might be the most important In fact, it might be the most important In fact, it might be the most important factor. So, let's talk about errors and factor. So, let's talk about errors and factor. So, let's talk about errors and why those solve the problem of what to why those solve the problem of what to why those solve the problem of what to focus on. focus on. focus on. Because as I said earlier, if you want Because as I said earlier, if you want Because as I said earlier, if you want to learn something, you need to know if to learn something, you need to know if to learn something, you need to know if it's open-loop or closed-loop, and you it's open-loop or closed-loop, and you it's open-loop or closed-loop, and you need to know what to focus on, where to need to know what to focus on, where to need to know what to focus on, where to place your perception. And that seems place your perception. And that seems place your perception. And that seems like a tough task, but errors will tell like a tough task, but errors will tell like a tough task, but errors will tell you exactly what to focus on. So, let's you exactly what to focus on. So, let's you exactly what to focus on. So, let's talk about errors and why you can talk about errors and why you can talk about errors and why you can leverage errors to accelerate skill leverage errors to accelerate skill leverage errors to accelerate skill learning. Okay, so we've established that Okay, so we've established that Okay, so we've established that performing the maximum number of performing the maximum number of performing the maximum number of repetitions per training session is going to be per training session is going to be per training session is going to be advantageous. And that might seem obvious, but there's And that might seem obvious, but there's And that might seem obvious, but there's a shadowy side to that, which is a shadowy side to that, which is a shadowy side to that, which is well, why would I want to just repeat the same why would I want to just repeat the same why would I want to just repeat the same thing over and over again if I'm getting thing over and over again if I'm getting thing over and over again if I'm getting it wrong 90% of the time? And the reason it wrong 90% of the time? And the reason it wrong 90% of the time? And the reason is that the errors actually cue your is that the errors actually cue your is that the errors actually cue your nervous system nervous system nervous system to two things. One, to error correction, to two things. One, to error correction, to two things. One, to error correction, and the other is it opens the door or and the other is it opens the door or and the other is it opens the door or the window for neuroplasticity. the window for neuroplasticity. the window for neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response system's ability to change in response system's ability to change in response to experience, essentially to custom to experience, essentially to custom to experience, essentially to custom modify itself in order to perform modify itself in order to perform modify itself in order to perform anything better. anything better. anything better. We did an entire month on We did an entire month on We did an entire month on neuroplasticity, and I talked a little neuroplasticity, and I talked a little neuroplasticity, and I talked a little bit about errors and why they are bit about errors and why they are bit about errors and why they are important. Now, we're going to make this important. Now, we're going to make this important. Now, we're going to make this very concrete and operationalize it, very concrete and operationalize it, very concrete and operationalize it, make it very actionable. make it very actionable. make it very actionable. There was a paper that was published in There was a paper that was published in There was a paper that was published in 2021 from Norman et al. 2021 from Norman et al. 2021 from Norman et al. This is a very important paper. This is a very important paper. This is a very important paper. It was published in the journal Neuron, It was published in the journal Neuron, It was published in the journal Neuron, which is a Cell Press journal, excellent which is a Cell Press journal, excellent which is a Cell Press journal, excellent journal. The title of the paper gives it gives it The title of the paper gives it gives it The title of the paper gives it gives it away essentially, which is post error away essentially, which is post error away essentially, which is post error recruitment of frontal sensory cortical recruitment of frontal sensory cortical recruitment of frontal sensory cortical projections promotes attention. projections promotes attention. projections promotes attention. Now, what that says is that when you make an what that says is that when you make an what that says is that when you make an error, it causes an activation of the brain it causes an activation of the brain it causes an activation of the brain areas that anchor your attention. areas that anchor your attention. areas that anchor your attention. Remember, we need perception, attention, Remember, we need perception, attention, Remember, we need perception, attention, which are they're essentially the same which are they're essentially the same which are they're essentially the same thing. We need proprioception, and we thing. We need proprioception, and we thing. We need proprioception, and we need the upper and lower motor neurons need the upper and lower motor neurons need the upper and lower motor neurons to communicate in the proper ways. to communicate in the proper ways. to communicate in the proper ways. And this vital question is what to pay And this vital question is what to pay And this vital question is what to pay attention to. attention to. attention to. Errors tell your nervous system that Errors tell your nervous system that Errors tell your nervous system that something needs to change. something needs to change. something needs to change. So, if you are performing a task or a So, if you are performing a task or a So, if you are performing a task or a skill, like you're learning how to dance skill, like you're learning how to dance skill, like you're learning how to dance and you're stepping on the other and you're stepping on the other and you're stepping on the other person's toes, or you're fumbling, or person's toes, or you're fumbling, or person's toes, or you're fumbling, or you're not getting it right, those you're not getting it right, those you're not getting it right, those errors are opening the possibility for errors are opening the possibility for errors are opening the possibility for plasticity. If you walk away at that plasticity. If you walk away at that plasticity. If you walk away at that point, you've made the exact wrong choice, you've made the exact wrong choice, you've made the exact wrong choice, okay? Unless the errors are somehow okay? Unless the errors are somehow okay? Unless the errors are somehow hazardous to your health or somebody hazardous to your health or somebody hazardous to your health or somebody else's well-being, else's well-being, else's well-being, you want to continue to engage at a high you want to continue to engage at a high you want to continue to engage at a high repetition rate. That's really where the repetition rate. That's really where the repetition rate. That's really where the learning is possible. Without errors, learning is possible. Without errors, learning is possible. Without errors, the brain is not in a position to change the brain is not in a position to change the brain is not in a position to change itself. Errors actually cue the frontal cortex Errors actually cue the frontal cortex Errors actually cue the frontal cortex networks, what we call top-down processing, and what we call top-down processing, and what we call top-down processing, and the neuromodulators, things like the neuromodulators, things like the neuromodulators, things like dopamine and acetylcholine and dopamine and acetylcholine and dopamine and acetylcholine and epinephrine, that will allow for epinephrine, that will allow for epinephrine, that will allow for plasticity. So, while the Super Mario plasticity. So, while the Super Mario plasticity. So, while the Super Mario experiment, the maze experiment was only experiment, the maze experiment was only experiment, the maze experiment was only focused on generating errors, telling focused on generating errors, telling focused on generating errors, telling people that wasn't right, please try people that wasn't right, please try people that wasn't right, please try again, or that wasn't right, you lost again, or that wasn't right, you lost again, or that wasn't right, you lost five points, five points, five points, the key distinction the key distinction the key distinction is that the errors themselves cued is that the errors themselves cued is that the errors themselves cued people to the fact that they needed to people to the fact that they needed to people to the fact that they needed to change something. change something. change something. So, if you're trying to learn a new So, if you're trying to learn a new So, if you're trying to learn a new skill and you're screwing up and you're skill and you're screwing up and you're skill and you're screwing up and you're making mistakes, making mistakes, making mistakes, the more mistakes you make, the more the more mistakes you make, the more the more mistakes you make, the more plastic your brain becomes, such that plastic your brain becomes, such that plastic your brain becomes, such that when you get it right, when you get it right, when you get it right, that correct pattern will be rewarded that correct pattern will be rewarded that correct pattern will be rewarded and consolidated. And you can trust that and consolidated. And you can trust that and consolidated. And you can trust that it will because the performance of it will because the performance of it will because the performance of something correctly is associated with something correctly is associated with something correctly is associated with the release of this neuromodulator, the release of this neuromodulator, the release of this neuromodulator, dopamine. Dopamine is involved in dopamine. Dopamine is involved in dopamine. Dopamine is involved in craving and motivation. It's involved in craving and motivation. It's involved in craving and motivation. It's involved in a lot of things, but it's also involved a lot of things, but it's also involved a lot of things, but it's also involved in learning. in learning. in learning. We will do an entire episode on dopamine We will do an entire episode on dopamine We will do an entire episode on dopamine and learning, but because some of you and learning, but because some of you and learning, but because some of you are probably wondering, are probably wondering, are probably wondering, this does not mean that just increasing this does not mean that just increasing this does not mean that just increasing your dopamine levels before learning your dopamine levels before learning your dopamine levels before learning will allow you to learn faster. In fact, will allow you to learn faster. In fact, will allow you to learn faster. In fact, increasing your dopamine levels before increasing your dopamine levels before increasing your dopamine levels before learning using pharmacology will learning using pharmacology will learning using pharmacology will actually reduce what's called the signal actually reduce what's called the signal actually reduce what's called the signal to noise. It will make these increases to noise. It will make these increases to noise. It will make these increases in dopamine that pop up in your brain in dopamine that pop up in your brain in dopamine that pop up in your brain that suddenly make you realize, "Ah, I that suddenly make you realize, "Ah, I that suddenly make you realize, "Ah, I got that one right." It will make those got that one right." It will make those got that one right." It will make those smaller relative to the background smaller relative to the background smaller relative to the background levels of dopamine, okay? You want a big levels of dopamine, okay? You want a big levels of dopamine, okay? You want a big spike in dopamine when you perform a spike in dopamine when you perform a spike in dopamine when you perform a motor pattern correctly, and you want to motor pattern correctly, and you want to motor pattern correctly, and you want to make lots of errors, many, many make lots of errors, many, many make lots of errors, many, many repetitions of errors, repetitions of errors, repetitions of errors, in order to get to that correct in order to get to that correct in order to get to that correct performance. Now, if you're like most performance. Now, if you're like most performance. Now, if you're like most people, you're going to do this in a way people, you're going to do this in a way people, you're going to do this in a way that's somewhat random. Meaning, let's that's somewhat random. Meaning, let's that's somewhat random. Meaning, let's say it's a tennis serve. I can't play say it's a tennis serve. I can't play say it's a tennis serve. I can't play tennis. I've I think I've probably tennis. I've I think I've probably tennis. I've I think I've probably played tennis twice. So, if I throw the played tennis twice. So, if I throw the played tennis twice. So, if I throw the ball up in the air and hit it, I'm going ball up in the air and hit it, I'm going ball up in the air and hit it, I'm going to get it wrong and probably hit the to get it wrong and probably hit the to get it wrong and probably hit the net. Then I'm going to hit the net. Then net. Then I'm going to hit the net. Then net. Then I'm going to hit the net. Then I'll probably go too long. Then I'll probably go too long. Then I'll probably go too long. Then I'll probably go over the fence. At some probably go over the fence. At some probably go over the fence. At some point, I like to think, I'll get it point, I like to think, I'll get it point, I like to think, I'll get it correct. The dopamine signal for that is going to The dopamine signal for that is going to The dopamine signal for that is going to be quite big. be quite big. be quite big. And I'll think, "Okay, what did I do And I'll think, "Okay, what did I do And I'll think, "Okay, what did I do there?" I actually don't know. I wasn't there?" I actually don't know. I wasn't there?" I actually don't know. I wasn't paying attention. What I was paying attention. What I was paying attention. What I was paying attention to is whether or not the ball attention to is whether or not the ball attention to is whether or not the ball went to the correct location on the went to the correct location on the went to the correct location on the opposite side of the net. Remember, it's opposite side of the net. Remember, it's opposite side of the net. Remember, it's an open-loop move. So, I don't actually an open-loop move. So, I don't actually an open-loop move. So, I don't actually know what I did correctly, but your know what I did correctly, but your know what I did correctly, but your nervous system will take care of that nervous system will take care of that nervous system will take care of that provided I, in this case, complete more provided I, in this case, complete more provided I, in this case, complete more and more and more repetitions. Now, if I and more and more repetitions. Now, if I and more and more repetitions. Now, if I were to just elevate my basal level of were to just elevate my basal level of were to just elevate my basal level of dopamine by taking, I don't know, 1,500 dopamine by taking, I don't know, 1,500 dopamine by taking, I don't know, 1,500 mg of tyr- L-tyrosine or something, that mg of tyr- L-tyrosine or something, that mg of tyr- L-tyrosine or something, that would be bad because the increase in would be bad because the increase in would be bad because the increase in dopamine would actually be much lower, dopamine would actually be much lower, dopamine would actually be much lower, right? The we would say the delta is right? The we would say the delta is right? The we would say the delta is smaller, the signal to noise is smaller smaller, the signal to noise is smaller smaller, the signal to noise is smaller if my overall levels of dopamine are if my overall levels of dopamine are if my overall levels of dopamine are very, very high. So, I'm actually going very, very high. So, I'm actually going very, very high. So, I'm actually going to learn less well. So, for skill to learn less well. So, for skill to learn less well. So, for skill learning, motor skill learning, motor skill learning, motor skill learning, increasing your dopamine levels prior is increasing your dopamine levels prior is increasing your dopamine levels prior is not a good idea. not a good idea. not a good idea. It might help with motivation to get to It might help with motivation to get to It might help with motivation to get to the learning, but it's not going to the learning, but it's not going to the learning, but it's not going to improve the plasticity process itself, improve the plasticity process itself, improve the plasticity process itself, and it's likely to hinder it. and it's likely to hinder it. and it's likely to hinder it. Okay, so that's very important. So, Okay, so that's very important. So, Okay, so that's very important. So, these errors cue the brain that something was errors cue the brain that something was errors cue the brain that something was wrong, and they open up the possibility wrong, and they open up the possibility wrong, and they open up the possibility for plasticity. It's what's sometimes for plasticity. It's what's sometimes for plasticity. It's what's sometimes called the framing effect. It frames called the framing effect. It frames called the framing effect. It frames what's important. And so, I think this what's important. And so, I think this what's important. And so, I think this is a shift, and we've heard about, you is a shift, and we've heard about, you is a shift, and we've heard about, you know, growth mindset, which is the know, growth mindset, which is the know, growth mindset, which is the incredible discovery incredible discovery incredible discovery and theory and practice of my colleague and theory and practice of my colleague and theory and practice of my colleague Carol Dweck at Stanford. This is Carol Dweck at Stanford. This is Carol Dweck at Stanford. This is distinct from that, right? This isn't distinct from that, right? This isn't distinct from that, right? This isn't about motivation to learn. This is about motivation to learn. This is about motivation to learn. This is about how you actually learn. So, the key is how you actually learn. So, the key is how you actually learn. So, the key is designate a particular block of time designate a particular block of time designate a particular block of time that you are going to perform that you are going to perform that you are going to perform repetitions. So, maybe that's 30 minutes, maybe So, maybe that's 30 minutes, maybe So, maybe that's 30 minutes, maybe that's an hour. Work for time, and then that's an hour. Work for time, and then that's an hour. Work for time, and then try and perform the maximum number of try and perform the maximum number of try and perform the maximum number of repetitions that you can do safely for repetitions that you can do safely for repetitions that you can do safely for you and others per unit time. you and others per unit time. you and others per unit time. That's going to be the best way to That's going to be the best way to That's going to be the best way to approach learning approach learning approach learning for most sessions. I'll talk about other for most sessions. I'll talk about other for most sessions. I'll talk about other things that one can do, but making things that one can do, but making things that one can do, but making errors is key, and this isn't a errors is key, and this isn't a errors is key, and this isn't a motivational speech. I'm not saying, motivational speech. I'm not saying, motivational speech. I'm not saying, "Oh, go make errors. Errors are good for "Oh, go make errors. Errors are good for "Oh, go make errors. Errors are good for you. You have to fail in order to win." you. You have to fail in order to win." you. You have to fail in order to win." No. You have to fail in order to open up the You have to fail in order to open up the You have to fail in order to open up the possibility of plasticity, but you have possibility of plasticity, but you have possibility of plasticity, but you have to fail many times within the same to fail many times within the same to fail many times within the same session. And those failures will cue your And those failures will cue your And those failures will cue your attention to the appropriate sensory attention to the appropriate sensory attention to the appropriate sensory events. Now, sometimes we're working events. Now, sometimes we're working events. Now, sometimes we're working with a coach, and so this is a shout out with a coach, and so this is a shout out with a coach, and so this is a shout out to all the coaches. Thank you for doing to all the coaches. Thank you for doing to all the coaches. Thank you for doing what you do. what you do. what you do. However, there needs to be, at least what the there needs to be, at least what the there needs to be, at least what the scientific literature say, there needs scientific literature say, there needs scientific literature say, there needs to be a period of each training session to be a period of each training session to be a period of each training session whereby the athlete or the person of any whereby the athlete or the person of any whereby the athlete or the person of any kind can simply pay attention to their kind can simply pay attention to their kind can simply pay attention to their errors without their attention being errors without their attention being errors without their attention being cued to something else. cued to something else. cued to something else. A really well-trained coach will say, A really well-trained coach will say, A really well-trained coach will say, "Oh, you know, your elbow's swinging too "Oh, you know, your elbow's swinging too "Oh, you know, your elbow's swinging too high." Or you're not gripping the high." Or you're not gripping the high." Or you're not gripping the racket in the appropriate way, etc. They racket in the appropriate way, etc. They racket in the appropriate way, etc. They can see things that the practitioner can see things that the practitioner can see things that the practitioner can't see, and of course that's vitally can't see, and of course that's vitally can't see, and of course that's vitally important. But the practitioner also important. But the practitioner also important. But the practitioner also needs to use this error recognition needs to use this error recognition needs to use this error recognition signal. They need to They need to They need to basically focus on something, and the basically focus on something, and the basically focus on something, and the errors are going to tell them what to errors are going to tell them what to errors are going to tell them what to focus on. So, put simply, there needs to focus on. So, put simply, there needs to focus on. So, put simply, there needs to be a period of time in which it's just be a period of time in which it's just be a period of time in which it's just repetition after repetition after repetition after repetition after repetition after repetition after repetition. I think many people, repetition. I think many people, repetition. I think many people, including coaches, are afraid that bad including coaches, are afraid that bad including coaches, are afraid that bad habits will get ingrained. And while habits will get ingrained. And while habits will get ingrained. And while indeed that's possible, indeed that's possible, indeed that's possible, it's very important that these errors it's very important that these errors it's very important that these errors occur in order to cue the attentional occur in order to cue the attentional occur in order to cue the attentional systems and to open the door for systems and to open the door for systems and to open the door for plasticity. So, if I'm told, "Look, uh plasticity. So, if I'm told, "Look, uh plasticity. So, if I'm told, "Look, uh you know, I'm standing a little wide. I you know, I'm standing a little wide. I you know, I'm standing a little wide. I need to tighten up my stance a little need to tighten up my stance a little need to tighten up my stance a little bit." Great. But then I need to generate many Great. But then I need to generate many Great. But then I need to generate many repetitions from that tightened stance. repetitions from that tightened stance. repetitions from that tightened stance. Okay? So, if I'm constantly being cued Okay? So, if I'm constantly being cued Okay? So, if I'm constantly being cued from the outside about what I'm doing from the outside about what I'm doing from the outside about what I'm doing incorrectly, that's not going to be as incorrectly, that's not going to be as incorrectly, that's not going to be as efficient. Okay? So, for some people efficient. Okay? So, for some people efficient. Okay? So, for some people these learning sessions might be 10 these learning sessions might be 10 these learning sessions might be 10 minutes. For some people it might be an minutes. For some people it might be an minutes. For some people it might be an hour. Whatever you can allocate, because hour. Whatever you can allocate, because hour. Whatever you can allocate, because your lifestyles will vary and your lifestyles will vary and your lifestyles will vary and your whether or not you're a professional whether or not you're a professional whether or not you're a professional athlete, etc., will vary, you want to athlete, etc., will vary, you want to athlete, etc., will vary, you want to get the maximum number of repetitions get the maximum number of repetitions get the maximum number of repetitions in, and you want to make errors. That's in, and you want to make errors. That's in, and you want to make errors. That's allowing for plasticity. allowing for plasticity. allowing for plasticity. So, science points to the fact that So, science points to the fact that So, science points to the fact that there's a particular sequencing of there's a particular sequencing of there's a particular sequencing of learning sessions that will allow you to learning sessions that will allow you to learning sessions that will allow you to learn faster and to retain the skill learn faster and to retain the skill learn faster and to retain the skill learning. It involves It involves It involves doing exactly as I just described, which doing exactly as I just described, which doing exactly as I just described, which is getting as many repetitions as you is getting as many repetitions as you is getting as many repetitions as you can in the learning session, can in the learning session, can in the learning session, paying attention to the errors that you paying attention to the errors that you paying attention to the errors that you make, and then the rewards that will be and then the rewards that will be and then the rewards that will be generated, again these are neurochemical generated, again these are neurochemical generated, again these are neurochemical rewards, from the successful performance rewards, from the successful performance rewards, from the successful performance of a movement or the approximate of a movement or the approximate of a movement or the approximate successful performance. So, maybe you successful performance. So, maybe you successful performance. So, maybe you get the golf swing better, but not get the golf swing better, but not get the golf swing better, but not perfect, but that's still going to be perfect, but that's still going to be perfect, but that's still going to be rewarded with this neurochemical rewarded with this neurochemical rewarded with this neurochemical mechanism. And then after the session, you need to And then after the session, you need to And then after the session, you need to do something very specific, do something very specific, do something very specific, which is nothing. which is nothing. which is nothing. That's right. That's right. That's right. There are beautiful data There are beautiful data There are beautiful data describing neurons in our hippocampus, describing neurons in our hippocampus, describing neurons in our hippocampus, this area of our brain involved in the this area of our brain involved in the this area of our brain involved in the consolidation of new memories. consolidation of new memories. consolidation of new memories. Those data point to the fact that in Those data point to the fact that in Those data point to the fact that in sleep, there's a replay of the sequence of there's a replay of the sequence of there's a replay of the sequence of neurons that were involved in certain neurons that were involved in certain neurons that were involved in certain behaviors the previous day, and behaviors the previous day, and behaviors the previous day, and sometimes the previous day before that. sometimes the previous day before that. sometimes the previous day before that. However, there are also data that show However, there are also data that show However, there are also data that show that after a skill learning session, any that after a skill learning session, any that after a skill learning session, any kind of motor movement, kind of motor movement, kind of motor movement, provided you're not bringing in a lot provided you're not bringing in a lot provided you're not bringing in a lot more additional new sensory stimuli, more additional new sensory stimuli, more additional new sensory stimuli, there's a replay of the motor sequence there's a replay of the motor sequence there's a replay of the motor sequence that you performed correctly, that you performed correctly, that you performed correctly, and there's an elimination of the motor and there's an elimination of the motor and there's an elimination of the motor sequences that you performed sequences that you performed sequences that you performed incorrectly, and they are run backward and they are run backward and they are run backward in time. Okay? So, to be very clear in time. Okay? So, to be very clear in time. Okay? So, to be very clear about this, about this, about this, if I were to learn a new skill or if I were to learn a new skill or if I were to learn a new skill or navigate a new city or let's just stay navigate a new city or let's just stay navigate a new city or let's just stay with the motor skill, let's say the with the motor skill, let's say the with the motor skill, let's say the free throw or a golf swing or a the free throw or a golf swing or a the free throw or a golf swing or a tennis serve, tennis serve, tennis serve, dance move, dance move, dance move, novice, so I'm still going to make a lot novice, so I'm still going to make a lot novice, so I'm still going to make a lot of errors, don't get it perfectly, but of errors, don't get it perfectly, but of errors, don't get it perfectly, but maybe I get a little bit better. maybe I get a little bit better. maybe I get a little bit better. Or I perform it Or I perform it Or I perform it correctly three times out of a thousand. correctly three times out of a thousand. correctly three times out of a thousand. That sounds like something I might do. That sounds like something I might do. That sounds like something I might do. And there I'm probably being generous to And there I'm probably being generous to And there I'm probably being generous to myself. After I finish the training session, After I finish the training session, After I finish the training session, if I do nothing, if I do nothing, if I do nothing, I'm not focused on some additional I'm not focused on some additional I'm not focused on some additional learning, I'm not bringing a lot of learning, I'm not bringing a lot of learning, I'm not bringing a lot of sensory information in, sensory information in, sensory information in, if I just sit there and close my eyes if I just sit there and close my eyes if I just sit there and close my eyes for 5 to 10 minutes, for 5 to 10 minutes, for 5 to 10 minutes, even 1 minute, even 1 minute, even 1 minute, the brain starts to replay the motor the brain starts to replay the motor the brain starts to replay the motor sequence of the cur- sequence of the cur- sequence of the cur- corresponding to the correct pattern of corresponding to the correct pattern of corresponding to the correct pattern of movement, but it plays that sequence movement, but it plays that sequence movement, but it plays that sequence backward. Now, why it plays it backward, backward. Now, why it plays it backward, backward. Now, why it plays it backward, we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. If I were to wait until sleep, or If I were to wait until sleep, or If I were to wait until sleep, or regardless, when I sleep later that regardless, when I sleep later that regardless, when I sleep later that night, the sequence will re- be replayed the sequence will re- be replayed the sequence will re- be replayed forwards in the proper sequence. forwards in the proper sequence. forwards in the proper sequence. Immediately afterward, it's played Immediately afterward, it's played Immediately afterward, it's played backward for reasons that are still backward for reasons that are still backward for reasons that are still unclear. But the replay of that sequence unclear. But the replay of that sequence unclear. But the replay of that sequence backwards appears to be important for the appears to be important for the appears to be important for the consolidation of the skill learning. consolidation of the skill learning. consolidation of the skill learning. Now, this is important because many Now, this is important because many Now, this is important because many people are finishing their jujitsu people are finishing their jujitsu people are finishing their jujitsu class, or they're finishing their yoga class, or they're finishing their yoga class, or they're finishing their yoga class, or they're finishing their dance class, or they're finishing their dance class, or they're finishing their dance class, or they're finishing some skill class, or they're finishing some skill class, or they're finishing some skill learning, and then they're immediately learning, and then they're immediately learning, and then they're immediately devoting their attention to something devoting their attention to something devoting their attention to something else. You hear a lot about visualization, and You hear a lot about visualization, and You hear a lot about visualization, and we are going to talk about we are going to talk about we are going to talk about visualization, but in the kind of obsession with the but in the kind of obsession with the but in the kind of obsession with the idea that we can learn things just idea that we can learn things just idea that we can learn things just sitting there with our eyes closed sitting there with our eyes closed sitting there with our eyes closed without having to perform a movement, without having to perform a movement, without having to perform a movement, we've overlooked something perhaps even we've overlooked something perhaps even we've overlooked something perhaps even more important, or at least equally more important, or at least equally more important, or at least equally important, which is after skill important, which is after skill important, which is after skill learning, after putting effort into learning, after putting effort into learning, after putting effort into something, sitting quietly with the eyes something, sitting quietly with the eyes something, sitting quietly with the eyes closed for 1 to 5 to 10 minutes allows the for 1 to 5 to 10 minutes allows the for 1 to 5 to 10 minutes allows the brain to replay the sequence in a way brain to replay the sequence in a way brain to replay the sequence in a way that appears important for the more that appears important for the more that appears important for the more rapid consolidation of the motor rapid consolidation of the motor rapid consolidation of the motor sequence of the pattern and to sequence of the pattern and to sequence of the pattern and to accelerated learning. If you'd like to accelerated learning. If you'd like to accelerated learning. If you'd like to learn more about this, this is not work learn more about this, this is not work learn more about this, this is not work that I was involved in. I want to be that I was involved in. I want to be that I was involved in. I want to be very clear. There's an excellent paper very clear. There's an excellent paper very clear. There's an excellent paper that covers this and much more for those that covers this and much more for those that covers this and much more for those of you that really want to dive deep on of you that really want to dive deep on of you that really want to dive deep on this and we will dive deeper in a this and we will dive deeper in a this and we will dive deeper in a moment. This is a review that was moment. This is a review that was moment. This is a review that was published in the journal Neuron, published in the journal Neuron, published in the journal Neuron, excellent journal. excellent journal. excellent journal. Many of the papers that I'm referring to Many of the papers that I'm referring to Many of the papers that I'm referring to were covered in this in this review were covered in this in this review were covered in this in this review which is titled Neuroplasticity which is titled Neuroplasticity which is titled Neuroplasticity Subserving Motor Skill Learning by Subserving Motor Skill Learning by Subserving Motor Skill Learning by Dayan, D A Y A N, I hope I'm not Dayan, D A Y A N, I hope I'm not Dayan, D A Y A N, I hope I'm not butchering the pronunciation, and Cohen, butchering the pronunciation, and Cohen, butchering the pronunciation, and Cohen, by Leonard Cohen, but not the not the by Leonard Cohen, but not the not the by Leonard Cohen, but not the not the Leonard Cohen most of us are familiar Leonard Cohen most of us are familiar Leonard Cohen most of us are familiar with, uh the musician, with, uh the musician, with, uh the musician, uh Leonard Cohen. Dayan and Cohen, uh Leonard Cohen. Dayan and Cohen, uh Leonard Cohen. Dayan and Cohen, Neuroplasticity Subserving Motor Skill Neuroplasticity Subserving Motor Skill Neuroplasticity Subserving Motor Skill Learning, and this was published and this was published and this was published uh in 2011, uh in 2011, uh in 2011, but there have been a number of updates but there have been a number of updates but there have been a number of updates and the literature that I've described and the literature that I've described and the literature that I've described in other portions of today's episode in other portions of today's episode in other portions of today's episode come from the more recent literature come from the more recent literature come from the more recent literature such as the more recent 2021 paper, such as the more recent 2021 paper, such as the more recent 2021 paper, okay? So, you have this basic learning okay? So, you have this basic learning okay? So, you have this basic learning session and then a period of time session and then a period of time session and then a period of time afterwards in which the brain can afterwards in which the brain can afterwards in which the brain can rehearse what it just did. We hear so rehearse what it just did. We hear so rehearse what it just did. We hear so much about mental rehearsal and we much about mental rehearsal and we much about mental rehearsal and we always think about mental rehearsal as always think about mental rehearsal as always think about mental rehearsal as the thing you do before you train or the thing you do before you train or the thing you do before you train or instead of training, but this is instead of training, but this is instead of training, but this is rehearsal that's done afterward where rehearsal that's done afterward where rehearsal that's done afterward where the brain is just automatically the brain is just automatically the brain is just automatically scripting through the sequence and for scripting through the sequence and for scripting through the sequence and for some reason that's still not clear as to some reason that's still not clear as to some reason that's still not clear as to why it this would be the case, it runs why it this would be the case, it runs why it this would be the case, it runs backward. Then in sleep, it runs backward. Then in sleep, it runs backward. Then in sleep, it runs forwards and certainly, absolutely, forwards and certainly, absolutely, forwards and certainly, absolutely, sleep and quality sleep of the sleep and quality sleep of the sleep and quality sleep of the appropriate duration, etc., is going to appropriate duration, etc., is going to appropriate duration, etc., is going to be important for learning of all kinds, be important for learning of all kinds, be important for learning of all kinds, including skill learning. We did entire including skill learning. We did entire including skill learning. We did entire four episodes on sleep and how to get four episodes on sleep and how to get four episodes on sleep and how to get better at sleeping. Those are the better at sleeping. Those are the better at sleeping. Those are the episodes back in January, episodes back in January, episodes back in January, episodes essentially 1 2 3 and 4. essentially 1 2 3 and 4. essentially 1 2 3 and 4. And maybe even episode 5, I don't And maybe even episode 5, I don't And maybe even episode 5, I don't recall, but you can go there to find out recall, but you can go there to find out recall, but you can go there to find out all about how to get better at sleeping. all about how to get better at sleeping. all about how to get better at sleeping. Now, there are other training sessions there are other training sessions there are other training sessions involved, right? I'm not going to learn involved, right? I'm not going to learn involved, right? I'm not going to learn the perfect golf swing or the tennis the perfect golf swing or the tennis the perfect golf swing or the tennis serve or how to dance in one session. serve or how to dance in one session. serve or how to dance in one session. And I doubt you will either. And I doubt you will either. And I doubt you will either. So, the question is when to come back So, the question is when to come back So, the question is when to come back and what to do when you come back to the and what to do when you come back to the and what to do when you come back to the training session. Now, training session. Now, training session. Now, first of all, first of all, first of all, this principle of errors queuing this principle of errors queuing this principle of errors queuing attention and opening the opportunity attention and opening the opportunity attention and opening the opportunity for plasticity, for plasticity, for plasticity, that's never going to change. That's that's never going to change. That's that's never going to change. That's going to be true for somebody who's going to be true for somebody who's going to be true for somebody who's hyper-skilled, who's a even a, you know, hyper-skilled, who's a even a, you know, hyper-skilled, who's a even a, you know, has mastery or even virtuosity in a has mastery or even virtuosity in a has mastery or even virtuosity in a given skill, right? Remember, when you're skill, right? Remember, when you're skill, right? Remember, when you're unskilled at something, uncertainty is unskilled at something, uncertainty is unskilled at something, uncertainty is very high. As you become more skilled, very high. As you become more skilled, very high. As you become more skilled, certainty goes up, right? Then certainty goes up, right? Then certainty goes up, right? Then eventually you achieve levels of mastery eventually you achieve levels of mastery eventually you achieve levels of mastery where certainty is very, very high about where certainty is very, very high about where certainty is very, very high about your ability to perform, yours, your ability to perform, yours, your ability to perform, yours, certainty and that of other people, and certainty and that of other people, and certainty and that of other people, and then there's this fourth category of then there's this fourth category of then there's this fourth category of virtuosity where somebody, maybe you, virtuosity where somebody, maybe you, virtuosity where somebody, maybe you, invites uncertainty back into the invites uncertainty back into the invites uncertainty back into the practice because only with that practice because only with that practice because only with that uncertainty can you express your uncertainty can you express your uncertainty can you express your full range of abilities, which you full range of abilities, which you full range of abilities, which you aren't even aware of until uncertainty aren't even aware of until uncertainty aren't even aware of until uncertainty comes into the picture, comes into the picture, comes into the picture, right? I uh happen to uh have the great right? I uh happen to uh have the great right? I uh happen to uh have the great uh privilege of being friends with uh privilege of being friends with uh privilege of being friends with Laird Hamilton, Laird Hamilton, Laird Hamilton, big wave surfer, who's phenomenal. I big wave surfer, who's phenomenal. I big wave surfer, who's phenomenal. I don't surf. I certainly don't surf with don't surf. I certainly don't surf with don't surf. I certainly don't surf with Laird, but he and um you know, another Laird, but he and um you know, another Laird, but he and um you know, another guy that he surfs with, Luca Padua, guy that he surfs with, Luca Padua, guy that he surfs with, Luca Padua, they're these guys are they're virtuosos they're these guys are they're virtuosos they're these guys are they're virtuosos at surfing. at surfing. at surfing. They don't just want the wave that they They don't just want the wave that they They don't just want the wave that they can master, they want uncertainty. can master, they want uncertainty. can master, they want uncertainty. They're at the point in their practice They're at the point in their practice They're at the point in their practice where when uncertainty shows up, like a where when uncertainty shows up, like a where when uncertainty shows up, like a wave that's either so big or um is wave that's either so big or um is wave that's either so big or um is uh moving in a particular way that it uh moving in a particular way that it uh moving in a particular way that it brings an element of uncertainty for brings an element of uncertainty for brings an element of uncertainty for them about what they're going to do, them about what they're going to do, them about what they're going to do, that they recognize that as the that they recognize that as the that they recognize that as the opportunity to perform better than they opportunity to perform better than they opportunity to perform better than they would otherwise, okay? So, they're would otherwise, okay? So, they're would otherwise, okay? So, they're actually trying to eliminate actually trying to eliminate actually trying to eliminate uncertainty. At the beginning of uncertainty. At the beginning of uncertainty. At the beginning of learning any skill, and as we approach learning any skill, and as we approach learning any skill, and as we approach from uncertain to skilled to mastery, we from uncertain to skilled to mastery, we from uncertain to skilled to mastery, we want to reduce uncertainty. And that's want to reduce uncertainty. And that's want to reduce uncertainty. And that's really what the nervous system is doing. really what the nervous system is doing. really what the nervous system is doing. It's trying to eliminate errors and hone It's trying to eliminate errors and hone It's trying to eliminate errors and hone in on the correct trajectories. in on the correct trajectories. in on the correct trajectories. If you re- perform a lot of repetitions, If you re- perform a lot of repetitions, If you re- perform a lot of repetitions, and then you use a and then you use a and then you use a period immediately after, we don't period immediately after, we don't period immediately after, we don't really have a name for this. Maybe really have a name for this. Maybe really have a name for this. Maybe someone will come up with it and put it someone will come up with it and put it someone will come up with it and put it in the comment section if you're on in the comment section if you're on in the comment section if you're on YouTube. If you're watching this on YouTube. If you're watching this on YouTube. If you're watching this on YouTube, a name for this post-learning YouTube, a name for this post-learning YouTube, a name for this post-learning kind of idle time for the brain, the kind of idle time for the brain, the kind of idle time for the brain, the brain isn't idle at all. It's actually brain isn't idle at all. It's actually brain isn't idle at all. It's actually scripting all these things in reverse scripting all these things in reverse scripting all these things in reverse that allow for deeper learning and work that allow for deeper learning and work that allow for deeper learning and work quick work quick learning. work quick learning. work quick learning. But, if we fill that time with other But, if we fill that time with other But, if we fill that time with other things, if we are focused on our phones, things, if we are focused on our phones, things, if we are focused on our phones, or we're focused on learning something or we're focused on learning something or we're focused on learning something else, or focusing on our performance, else, or focusing on our performance, else, or focusing on our performance, that's not going to serve us well. At that's not going to serve us well. At that's not going to serve us well. At least it's not going to serve the skill least it's not going to serve the skill least it's not going to serve the skill learning well. So, please, if you're learning well. So, please, if you're learning well. So, please, if you're interested in more rapid skill learning, interested in more rapid skill learning, interested in more rapid skill learning, try introducing these sessions. They can try introducing these sessions. They can try introducing these sessions. They can be quite powerful. be quite powerful. be quite powerful. And then on subsequent sessions, And then on subsequent sessions, And then on subsequent sessions, presumably after a night's sleep, or presumably after a night's sleep, or presumably after a night's sleep, or maybe you're doing two sessions a day, maybe you're doing two sessions a day, maybe you're doing two sessions a day, although two sessions a day is going to although two sessions a day is going to although two sessions a day is going to be a lot for most people, unless you're be a lot for most people, unless you're be a lot for most people, unless you're a professional or um you know, a professional or um you know, a professional or um you know, a high-level athlete, high-level athlete, high-level athlete, the subsequent sessions the subsequent sessions the subsequent sessions are where you get to express the gains are where you get to express the gains are where you get to express the gains of the previous session, right? Where of the previous session, right? Where of the previous session, right? Where you get to perform well, you get to perform well, you get to perform well, presumably more often, even if it's just presumably more often, even if it's just presumably more often, even if it's just subtle. Sometimes there'll be a decrease subtle. Sometimes there'll be a decrease subtle. Sometimes there'll be a decrease in performance, but most often you're in performance, but most often you're in performance, but most often you're going to perform better on subsequent going to perform better on subsequent going to perform better on subsequent and subsequent training sessions. and subsequent training sessions. and subsequent training sessions. And there is the opportunity to devote there is the opportunity to devote there is the opportunity to devote attention in very specific ways, right? attention in very specific ways, right? attention in very specific ways, right? Not just let the errors Not just let the errors Not just let the errors inform you where to place your inform you where to place your inform you where to place your attention, but rather attention, but rather attention, but rather to direct your perception to particular to direct your perception to particular to direct your perception to particular elements of the movement in order to elements of the movement in order to elements of the movement in order to accelerate learning further, okay? So, accelerate learning further, okay? So, accelerate learning further, okay? So, to be very clear, cuz I know many of you to be very clear, cuz I know many of you to be very clear, cuz I know many of you are interested in concrete protocols, are interested in concrete protocols, are interested in concrete protocols, it's not just that you would only focus it's not just that you would only focus it's not just that you would only focus let errors cue your attention on the let errors cue your attention on the let errors cue your attention on the first session. You might do that for one first session. You might do that for one first session. You might do that for one session or five sessions. It's going to session or five sessions. It's going to session or five sessions. It's going to depend. But, once you're familiar with depend. But, once you're familiar with depend. But, once you're familiar with something and you're performing it well something and you're performing it well something and you're performing it well every once in a while, you're every once in a while, you're every once in a while, you're accomplishing it better accomplishing it better accomplishing it better every once in a while, then you can every once in a while, then you can every once in a while, then you can start to cue your attention in very start to cue your attention in very start to cue your attention in very deliberate ways. And the question deliberate ways. And the question deliberate ways. And the question therefore becomes what to cue your therefore becomes what to cue your therefore becomes what to cue your attention to. And the good news is, it attention to. And the good news is, it attention to. And the good news is, it doesn't matter. doesn't matter. doesn't matter. There is a beautiful set of experiments There is a beautiful set of experiments There is a beautiful set of experiments that have been done looking at that have been done looking at that have been done looking at sequences of keys being played on a sequences of keys being played on a sequences of keys being played on a piano. This is work that was published uh just This is work that was published uh just This is work that was published uh just a couple years ago. There are actually a couple years ago. There are actually a couple years ago. There are actually several papers now that are focused on several papers now that are focused on several papers now that are focused on this. One of them uh was published in 2018. One of them uh was published in 2018. One of them uh was published in 2018. This is from uh Claudia Lappe and This is from uh Claudia Lappe and This is from uh Claudia Lappe and colleagues, l a p e. She's done some colleagues, l a p e. She's done some colleagues, l a p e. She's done some really nice work, which talks about the really nice work, which talks about the really nice work, which talks about the influence of pitch feedback on the influence of pitch feedback on the influence of pitch feedback on learning of motor timing and sequencing. learning of motor timing and sequencing. learning of motor timing and sequencing. And this was done with piano, but it And this was done with piano, but it And this was done with piano, but it carries over to athletic performance as carries over to athletic performance as carries over to athletic performance as well. So, I'm going to describe this well. So, I'm going to describe this well. So, I'm going to describe this study to you, but before I describe it, study to you, but before I describe it, study to you, but before I describe it, what is so interesting about this study what is so interesting about this study what is so interesting about this study that I want you to know about is that I want you to know about is that I want you to know about is that it turns out it doesn't matter so much it turns out it doesn't matter so much it turns out it doesn't matter so much what you pay attention to during the what you pay attention to during the what you pay attention to during the learning sequence, provided it's learning sequence, provided it's learning sequence, provided it's something related to the motor behavior something related to the motor behavior something related to the motor behavior that you're performing. Right? That that you're performing. Right? That that you're performing. Right? That seems incredible, right? I'm not good at seems incredible, right? I'm not good at seems incredible, right? I'm not good at a tennis serve. So, if I've done, you a tennis serve. So, if I've done, you a tennis serve. So, if I've done, you know, let's say a thousand repetitions know, let's say a thousand repetitions know, let's say a thousand repetitions of the tennis serve, maybe I got it of the tennis serve, maybe I got it of the tennis serve, maybe I got it right three to ten times. Now, I'm being right three to ten times. Now, I'm being right three to ten times. Now, I'm being even more generous with myself, and I do even more generous with myself, and I do even more generous with myself, and I do this post-training session where I let this post-training session where I let this post-training session where I let my brain idle, and I get some good my brain idle, and I get some good my brain idle, and I get some good sleep, and I come back, and now I start sleep, and I come back, and now I start sleep, and I come back, and now I start generating errors again, presumably or generating errors again, presumably or generating errors again, presumably or hopefully fewer errors, hopefully fewer errors, hopefully fewer errors, but I decide I'm going to cue my but I decide I'm going to cue my but I decide I'm going to cue my attention to something very specific attention to something very specific attention to something very specific like maybe like maybe like maybe uh how tightly I'm holding the racket or uh how tightly I'm holding the racket or uh how tightly I'm holding the racket or maybe it's my stance or maybe it's maybe it's my stance or maybe it's maybe it's my stance or maybe it's whether or not I rotate my right whether or not I rotate my right whether or not I rotate my right shoulder in as I as I hit the ball shoulder in as I as I hit the ball shoulder in as I as I hit the ball across and I'm making this up again. I across and I'm making this up again. I across and I'm making this up again. I don't play tennis. don't play tennis. don't play tennis. Turns out that as long as it's the same Turns out that as long as it's the same Turns out that as long as it's the same thing throughout the session, learning thing throughout the session, learning thing throughout the session, learning is accelerated and I will explain why is accelerated and I will explain why is accelerated and I will explain why this is makes sense in a moment, but this is makes sense in a moment, but this is makes sense in a moment, but just to be really clear just to be really clear just to be really clear you can and one should you can and one should you can and one should use your powers of attention to direct use your powers of attention to direct use your powers of attention to direct your attention to particular aspects of your attention to particular aspects of your attention to particular aspects of a motor movement once you're familiar a motor movement once you're familiar a motor movement once you're familiar with the general theme of the movement, with the general theme of the movement, with the general theme of the movement, but what you pay attention to exactly is but what you pay attention to exactly is but what you pay attention to exactly is not important. What's important is that not important. What's important is that not important. What's important is that you pay attention to one specific thing. you pay attention to one specific thing. you pay attention to one specific thing. So what Claudia Lappe and colleagues So what Claudia Lappe and colleagues So what Claudia Lappe and colleagues showed was that showed was that showed was that if people are trying to learn a sequence if people are trying to learn a sequence if people are trying to learn a sequence of keys on the piano of keys on the piano of keys on the piano there are multiple forms of feedback. There are multiple forms of feedback. There are multiple forms of feedback. There are error signals if for instance they are error signals if for instance they are error signals if for instance they hear a piece of music and then they're hear a piece of music and then they're hear a piece of music and then they're told to press the keys in a particular told to press the keys in a particular told to press the keys in a particular sequence and sequence and sequence and the noise that comes out the sound that noise that comes out the sound that noise that comes out the sound that comes out of the piano comes out of the piano comes out of the piano does not sound like the song they just does not sound like the song they just does not sound like the song they just heard, right? So instead of and here heard, right? So instead of and here heard, right? So instead of and here forgive me because I can neither I'm forgive me because I can neither I'm forgive me because I can neither I'm neither musical nor can I sing, but neither musical nor can I sing, but neither musical nor can I sing, but instead of da instead of da instead of da they hear that da they hear that da they hear that da and then instead when they play or da and then instead when they play or da and then instead when they play or me it would sound something like da me it would sound something like da me it would sound something like da it wouldn't sound right. Okay, it wouldn't sound right. Okay, it wouldn't sound right. Okay, it wouldn't sound right because I likely wouldn't sound right because I likely wouldn't sound right because I likely got the sequence wrong or I was pressing got the sequence wrong or I was pressing got the sequence wrong or I was pressing too hard on the keys or too lightly on too hard on the keys or too lightly on too hard on the keys or too lightly on the keys etc. the keys etc. the keys etc. What they showed was What they showed was What they showed was if they just instruct people about the if they just instruct people about the if they just instruct people about the correct sequence to press on the keys correct sequence to press on the keys correct sequence to press on the keys it actually doesn't matter what sound it actually doesn't matter what sound it actually doesn't matter what sound comes back provided it's the correct comes back provided it's the correct comes back provided it's the correct sound or it's the same sound. All right, so or it's the same sound. All right, so or it's the same sound. All right, so here's the experiment. They had people here's the experiment. They had people here's the experiment. They had people press on these keys and the key was a press on these keys and the key was a press on these keys and the key was a typical piano and it generated the typical piano and it generated the typical piano and it generated the particular sequence of sounds that would particular sequence of sounds that would particular sequence of sounds that would be generated by pressing the keys on the be generated by pressing the keys on the be generated by pressing the keys on the piano. Or, they modified the keyboard in this Or, they modified the keyboard in this Or, they modified the keyboard in this case or piano such that when people case or piano such that when people case or piano such that when people pressed on the keys, a random tone pressed on the keys, a random tone pressed on the keys, a random tone different tones were played each time different tones were played each time different tones were played each time they pressed on the keys. So, it sounded they pressed on the keys. So, it sounded they pressed on the keys. So, it sounded crazy. It sounded like noise. But, the crazy. It sounded like noise. But, the crazy. It sounded like noise. But, the motor sequence was the same. motor sequence was the same. motor sequence was the same. Or, they had a single tone Or, they had a single tone Or, they had a single tone that was played every time they pressed that was played every time they pressed that was played every time they pressed a key. And the job or the task of the a key. And the job or the task of the a key. And the job or the task of the subject was just to press the sequence subject was just to press the sequence subject was just to press the sequence it press the keys in the proper it press the keys in the proper it press the keys in the proper sequence. So, instead of da sequence. So, instead of da sequence. So, instead of da it was just da it was just da it was just da Instead of da Instead of da Instead of da it's da da. It's even it's da da. It's even it's da da. It's even hard for me to say it at a at even a hard for me to say it at a at even a hard for me to say it at a at even a tone, but you get the idea. So, a tone, but you get the idea. So, a tone, but you get the idea. So, a singular tone. Just think a doorbell singular tone. Just think a doorbell singular tone. Just think a doorbell being rung with each press of the key. being rung with each press of the key. being rung with each press of the key. It would be really annoying. Okay? It would be really annoying. Okay? It would be really annoying. Okay? But, it turns out that the rate to motor But, it turns out that the rate to motor But, it turns out that the rate to motor learning was the same was the same was the same whether or not they were getting whether or not they were getting whether or not they were getting feedback that was accurate to the keys of the that was accurate to the keys of the that was accurate to the keys of the piano or whether or not it was a piano or whether or not it was a piano or whether or not it was a constant tone. constant tone. constant tone. Performance was terrible and the rates Performance was terrible and the rates Performance was terrible and the rates of learning were terrible if they were of learning were terrible if they were of learning were terrible if they were getting random tones back. So, what this getting random tones back. So, what this getting random tones back. So, what this means is that learning to play the piano means is that learning to play the piano means is that learning to play the piano at least at these early stages is really at least at these early stages is really at least at these early stages is really just about generating the motor just about generating the motor just about generating the motor commands. It's not about paying attention to the It's not about paying attention to the It's not about paying attention to the sound that's coming out of the piano. sound that's coming out of the piano. sound that's coming out of the piano. And this makes sense because when we are And this makes sense because when we are And this makes sense because when we are beginners, we are trying to focus our beginners, we are trying to focus our beginners, we are trying to focus our attention on the things that we can attention on the things that we can attention on the things that we can control. And control. And control. And if you if you if you think about this, if you conceptualize think about this, if you conceptualize think about this, if you conceptualize this, pressing the keys on the piano and pressing the keys on the piano and pressing the keys on the piano and paying attention to the sounds that are paying attention to the sounds that are paying attention to the sounds that are coming out are two things. So, what this coming out are two things. So, what this coming out are two things. So, what this means is that as you get deeper and means is that as you get deeper and means is that as you get deeper and deeper into our practice, deeper into our practice, deeper into our practice, focusing purely on the motor execution focusing purely on the motor execution focusing purely on the motor execution can be beneficial. Now, this is going to can be beneficial. Now, this is going to can be beneficial. Now, this is going to be harder to do with open-loop type be harder to do with open-loop type be harder to do with open-loop type things where you're getting feedback. I things where you're getting feedback. I things where you're getting feedback. I guess a good example of open-loop would guess a good example of open-loop would guess a good example of open-loop would be the attempt at a backflip, right? If be the attempt at a backflip, right? If be the attempt at a backflip, right? If you get it wrong, you will immediately you get it wrong, you will immediately you get it wrong, you will immediately know. If you get it right, you'll know. If you get it right, you'll know. If you get it right, you'll immediately know. Please don't go out immediately know. Please don't go out immediately know. Please don't go out and try and do a backflip on the and try and do a backflip on the and try and do a backflip on the solid ground or even on a trampoline if solid ground or even on a trampoline if solid ground or even on a trampoline if you don't know what you're doing because you don't know what you're doing because you don't know what you're doing because very likely you'll get it wrong and very likely you'll get it wrong and very likely you'll get it wrong and you'll get injured. you'll get injured. you'll get injured. But, if it's something that is closed-loop if it's something that is closed-loop if it's something that is closed-loop where you can repeat again and again and where you can repeat again and again and where you can repeat again and again and again and again, that is advantageous again and again, that is advantageous again and again, that is advantageous because you can perform many, many because you can perform many, many because you can perform many, many repetitions and you can start to focus repetitions and you can start to focus repetitions and you can start to focus or learn to focus your attention just on or learn to focus your attention just on or learn to focus your attention just on the pattern of movement. In other words, the pattern of movement. In other words, the pattern of movement. In other words, you can learn to play the piano just as you can learn to play the piano just as you can learn to play the piano just as fast or maybe even faster fast or maybe even faster fast or maybe even faster by just focusing on the sequence that by just focusing on the sequence that by just focusing on the sequence that you're moving your digits, your fingers, you're moving your digits, your fingers, you're moving your digits, your fingers, and not the feedback. Now, I'm sure and not the feedback. Now, I'm sure and not the feedback. Now, I'm sure there are music teachers out there and there are music teachers out there and there are music teachers out there and piano teachers that are screaming, "No, piano teachers that are screaming, "No, piano teachers that are screaming, "No, you're going to ruin the practice that you're going to ruin the practice that you're going to ruin the practice that all of us have embedded in our minds and all of us have embedded in our minds and all of us have embedded in our minds and our students." our students." our students." And I agree, at some point And I agree, at some point And I agree, at some point you need to start including feedback you need to start including feedback you need to start including feedback about whether or not things sound about whether or not things sound about whether or not things sound correct. But, one of the beauties of correct. But, one of the beauties of correct. But, one of the beauties of skill learning is that you can choose to skill learning is that you can choose to skill learning is that you can choose to parameterize it, meaning you can choose parameterize it, meaning you can choose parameterize it, meaning you can choose to just focus on the motor sequence or to just focus on the motor sequence or to just focus on the motor sequence or just focus on the sounds that are coming just focus on the sounds that are coming just focus on the sounds that are coming back and then integrate those. back and then integrate those. back and then integrate those. And so, we hear a lot about chunking, And so, we hear a lot about chunking, And so, we hear a lot about chunking, about breaking things down into their about breaking things down into their about breaking things down into their component parts. But, one of the biggest component parts. But, one of the biggest component parts. But, one of the biggest challenges for skill learning is knowing challenges for skill learning is knowing challenges for skill learning is knowing where to place your attention. So, to where to place your attention. So, to where to place your attention. So, to dial out again, we're building a dial out again, we're building a dial out again, we're building a protocol across this episode. Early protocol across this episode. Early protocol across this episode. Early sessions, maybe it's the first one, sessions, maybe it's the first one, sessions, maybe it's the first one, maybe it's the first 10, maybe it's the maybe it's the first 10, maybe it's the maybe it's the first 10, maybe it's the first 100. It depends on how many first 100. It depends on how many first 100. It depends on how many repetitions you're packing in. But, repetitions you're packing in. But, repetitions you're packing in. But, during those initial sessions, the key during those initial sessions, the key during those initial sessions, the key is to make many errors, to let the is to make many errors, to let the is to make many errors, to let the reward process reward process reward process govern the plasticity, let the errors govern the plasticity, let the errors govern the plasticity, let the errors open the plasticity, and then after the open the plasticity, and then after the open the plasticity, and then after the learning sessions to let the brain go learning sessions to let the brain go learning sessions to let the brain go idle. At least for a short period of time. And At least for a short period of time. And At least for a short period of time. And of course to maximize sleep. As you of course to maximize sleep. As you of course to maximize sleep. As you start incorporating more sessions, you start incorporating more sessions, you start incorporating more sessions, you start to gain some skill level. start to gain some skill level. start to gain some skill level. Learning to harness and focus your Learning to harness and focus your Learning to harness and focus your attention on particular features of the attention on particular features of the attention on particular features of the movement independent of the rewards and movement independent of the rewards and movement independent of the rewards and the feedback, right? So the reward is no the feedback, right? So the reward is no the feedback, right? So the reward is no longer in the tone coming from the piano longer in the tone coming from the piano longer in the tone coming from the piano or whether or not you struck the target or whether or not you struck the target or whether or not you struck the target correctly, but simply the motor correctly, but simply the motor correctly, but simply the motor movement. Focusing your movement. Focusing your movement. Focusing your uh for instance in a dart throw on the uh for instance in a dart throw on the uh for instance in a dart throw on the action of your arm. That is embedding action of your arm. That is embedding action of your arm. That is embedding the plasticity in the motor pattern most the plasticity in the motor pattern most the plasticity in the motor pattern most deeply. That's what's been shown by the deeply. That's what's been shown by the deeply. That's what's been shown by the scientific literature. I'm sure there scientific literature. I'm sure there scientific literature. I'm sure there are coaches and teachers out there that are coaches and teachers out there that are coaches and teachers out there that will entirely disagree with me, and will entirely disagree with me, and will entirely disagree with me, and that's great. Please, you know, let me that's great. Please, you know, let me that's great. Please, you know, let me know what you prefer. Let me know where know what you prefer. Let me know where know what you prefer. Let me know where you think this is wrong. you think this is wrong. you think this is wrong. Uh and it rarely happens, but let me Uh and it rarely happens, but let me Uh and it rarely happens, but let me know where you think this might be right know where you think this might be right know where you think this might be right as well. So we're breaking the learning as well. So we're breaking the learning as well. So we're breaking the learning process down into its component parts. process down into its component parts. process down into its component parts. As we get more and more skilled, meaning As we get more and more skilled, meaning As we get more and more skilled, meaning as we make fewer and fewer errors per a as we make fewer and fewer errors per a as we make fewer and fewer errors per a given session per unit time, given session per unit time, given session per unit time, that's when attention can start to that's when attention can start to that's when attention can start to migrate from migrate from migrate from one feature such as the motor sequence one feature such as the motor sequence one feature such as the motor sequence to another feature, which is perhaps to another feature, which is perhaps to another feature, which is perhaps um one's stance and another sequence uh um one's stance and another sequence uh um one's stance and another sequence uh component of the sequence, which would component of the sequence, which would component of the sequence, which would be the result that's one getting on a be the result that's one getting on a be the result that's one getting on a trial-to-trial basis, right? So changing trial-to-trial basis, right? So changing trial-to-trial basis, right? So changing it up each time. So maybe I serve the it up each time. So maybe I serve the it up each time. So maybe I serve the tennis ball and I'm focusing on where tennis ball and I'm focusing on where tennis ball and I'm focusing on where the ball lands, and then I'm focusing on the ball lands, and then I'm focusing on the ball lands, and then I'm focusing on the speed, then I'm focusing on my grip, the speed, then I'm focusing on my grip, the speed, then I'm focusing on my grip, then I'm focusing on my stance from then I'm focusing on my stance from then I'm focusing on my stance from trial to trial. trial to trial. trial to trial. But until we've mastered the core motor But until we've mastered the core motor But until we've mastered the core motor movements, which is done session to movements, which is done session to movements, which is done session to session, that, at least according to the session, that, at least according to the session, that, at least according to the literature that I have access to here, literature that I have access to here, literature that I have access to here, seems to be suboptimal. So hopefully seems to be suboptimal. So hopefully seems to be suboptimal. So hopefully this is starting to make sense, which is this is starting to make sense, which is this is starting to make sense, which is that these connections between upper that these connections between upper that these connections between upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons, and motor neurons, lower motor neurons, and motor neurons, lower motor neurons, and central pattern generators, central pattern generators, central pattern generators, you can't attack them all at once. You you can't attack them all at once. You you can't attack them all at once. You can't try and change them all at once, can't try and change them all at once, can't try and change them all at once, and so what we're doing is we're and so what we're doing is we're and so what we're doing is we're breaking things down into their breaking things down into their breaking things down into their component parts. component parts. component parts. Some of you may be wondering about speed Some of you may be wondering about speed Some of you may be wondering about speed of movement. of movement. of movement. There are some data, meaning some decent There are some data, meaning some decent There are some data, meaning some decent papers out there, showing that papers out there, showing that papers out there, showing that ultra-slow movements, performing a ultra-slow movements, performing a ultra-slow movements, performing a movement it essentially in slow motion, movement it essentially in slow motion, movement it essentially in slow motion, can be beneficial for enhancing the rate can be beneficial for enhancing the rate can be beneficial for enhancing the rate of skill learning. of skill learning. of skill learning. However, at least from my read of the literature, at least from my read of the literature, at least from my read of the literature, it appears that ultra-slow movements it appears that ultra-slow movements it appears that ultra-slow movements should be performed after some degree of should be performed after some degree of should be performed after some degree of proficiency has already been gained in proficiency has already been gained in proficiency has already been gained in that particular movement. Now, that's that particular movement. Now, that's that particular movement. Now, that's not the way I would have thought about not the way I would have thought about not the way I would have thought about it. I would have thought, well, you it. I would have thought, well, you it. I would have thought, well, you know, if you're learning how to do a know, if you're learning how to do a know, if you're learning how to do a proper kick or a punch in martial arts proper kick or a punch in martial arts proper kick or a punch in martial arts or something that ultra-slow movements or something that ultra-slow movements or something that ultra-slow movements at first are going to be the way that at first are going to be the way that at first are going to be the way that one can, one can, one can, uh, you know, best learn how to perform uh, you know, best learn how to perform uh, you know, best learn how to perform a movement, and then you just gradually a movement, and then you just gradually a movement, and then you just gradually increase the speed. It turns out that's increase the speed. It turns out that's increase the speed. It turns out that's not the case. not the case. not the case. And I probably should have known that, And I probably should have known that, And I probably should have known that, and you should probably know that, and you should probably know that, and you should probably know that, because it turns out that when you do because it turns out that when you do because it turns out that when you do ultra-slow movements, two things aren't ultra-slow movements, two things aren't ultra-slow movements, two things aren't available to you. One is the available to you. One is the available to you. One is the proprioceptive feedback is not accurate proprioceptive feedback is not accurate proprioceptive feedback is not accurate because fast movements of limbs are very because fast movements of limbs are very because fast movements of limbs are very different than slow movements of limbs. different than slow movements of limbs. different than slow movements of limbs. So, you don't get the opportunity to So, you don't get the opportunity to So, you don't get the opportunity to build in the proprioceptive feedback, build in the proprioceptive feedback, build in the proprioceptive feedback, but the other reason why it doesn't work but the other reason why it doesn't work but the other reason why it doesn't work is that it's too accurate. You don't is that it's too accurate. You don't is that it's too accurate. You don't generate errors. And so, the data that I generate errors. And so, the data that I generate errors. And so, the data that I was able to find showed that very slow was able to find showed that very slow was able to find showed that very slow movements can be beneficial if one is movements can be beneficial if one is movements can be beneficial if one is already proficient in a practice, but already proficient in a practice, but already proficient in a practice, but very slow movements at the beginning very slow movements at the beginning very slow movements at the beginning don't allow you to learn more quickly don't allow you to learn more quickly don't allow you to learn more quickly because you never generate errors, and because you never generate errors, and because you never generate errors, and therefore the brain doesn't it's not therefore the brain doesn't it's not therefore the brain doesn't it's not open for change. The window for open for change. The window for open for change. The window for plasticity is never swung open, so to plasticity is never swung open, so to plasticity is never swung open, so to speak. So, speak. So, speak. So, brings us back to this theme that errors brings us back to this theme that errors brings us back to this theme that errors allow for plasticity. Correct allow for plasticity. Correct allow for plasticity. Correct performance of movements or semi-correct performance of movements or semi-correct performance of movements or semi-correct performance of movements, cues the performance of movements, cues the performance of movements, cues the synapses in the brain areas and spinal synapses in the brain areas and spinal synapses in the brain areas and spinal circuits that need to change, and then circuits that need to change, and then circuits that need to change, and then those changes occur in the period those changes occur in the period those changes occur in the period immediately after skill learning and in immediately after skill learning and in immediately after skill learning and in sleep. So, super slow movements can be So, super slow movements can be So, super slow movements can be beneficial once you already have some beneficial once you already have some beneficial once you already have some proficiency. So, this might be standing proficiency. So, this might be standing proficiency. So, this might be standing in your living room and just in ultra in your living room and just in ultra in your living room and just in ultra slow motion performing your tennis slow motion performing your tennis slow motion performing your tennis serve, learning to or thinking about how serve, learning to or thinking about how serve, learning to or thinking about how you're adjusting your elbow and your arm you're adjusting your elbow and your arm you're adjusting your elbow and your arm in the trajectory exactly how you were in the trajectory exactly how you were in the trajectory exactly how you were taught by your tennis coach, but trying taught by your tennis coach, but trying taught by your tennis coach, but trying to learn it that way from the outset to learn it that way from the outset to learn it that way from the outset does not appear to be the best way to does not appear to be the best way to does not appear to be the best way to learn a skill. learn a skill. learn a skill. When should you start to introduce slow When should you start to introduce slow When should you start to introduce slow learning? Well, obviously talk to your learning? Well, obviously talk to your learning? Well, obviously talk to your coaches about this, but if you're doing coaches about this, but if you're doing coaches about this, but if you're doing this recreationally or you don't have a this recreationally or you don't have a this recreationally or you don't have a coach, I realize many of you don't. I coach, I realize many of you don't. I coach, I realize many of you don't. I don't have a coach for anything that I don't have a coach for anything that I don't have a coach for anything that I do. I'm kind of just navigating it do. I'm kind of just navigating it do. I'm kind of just navigating it through the by using the scientific through the by using the scientific through the by using the scientific literature. It appears that once you're hitting It appears that once you're hitting It appears that once you're hitting success rates of about 25% or 30%, success rates of about 25% or 30%, success rates of about 25% or 30%, that's where the super slow movements that's where the super slow movements that's where the super slow movements can start to be beneficial. But, can start to be beneficial. But, can start to be beneficial. But, if you're still performing things at a if you're still performing things at a if you're still performing things at a rate of, you know, 5% or 10% correct and rate of, you know, 5% or 10% correct and rate of, you know, 5% or 10% correct and the rest are errors, then the super slow the rest are errors, then the super slow the rest are errors, then the super slow movements are probably not going to movements are probably not going to movements are probably not going to benefit you that much. Also, super slow benefit you that much. Also, super slow benefit you that much. Also, super slow movements are not really applicable to a movements are not really applicable to a movements are not really applicable to a lot of things. lot of things. lot of things. For instance, you could imagine throwing For instance, you could imagine throwing For instance, you could imagine throwing a dart super slow motion, but if you a dart super slow motion, but if you a dart super slow motion, but if you actually try and throw an actual dart, actually try and throw an actual dart, actually try and throw an actual dart, the dart's just going to fall to the dart's just going to fall to the dart's just going to fall to the floor, obviously. So, there are a number floor, obviously. So, there are a number floor, obviously. So, there are a number of things like, you know, baseball bat of things like, you know, baseball bat of things like, you know, baseball bat swing, which you can practice in super swing, which you can practice in super swing, which you can practice in super slow motion, but if you try and do that slow motion, but if you try and do that slow motion, but if you try and do that with an actual baseball or softball or with an actual baseball or softball or with an actual baseball or softball or something like that, that's not going to something like that, that's not going to something like that, that's not going to give you any kind of feedback about how give you any kind of feedback about how give you any kind of feedback about how effective it was. So, super slow effective it was. So, super slow effective it was. So, super slow movements or decelerated movement has movements or decelerated movement has movements or decelerated movement has its has its place, but once you're already has its place, but once you're already has its place, but once you're already performing things reasonably well, like performing things reasonably well, like performing things reasonably well, like maybe 25% to 30% success rate. You know, maybe 25% to 30% success rate. You know, maybe 25% to 30% success rate. You know, and I've tried this. I actually I and I've tried this. I actually I and I've tried this. I actually I struggle with basketball for whatever struggle with basketball for whatever struggle with basketball for whatever reason, and my free throw is terrible. reason, and my free throw is terrible. reason, and my free throw is terrible. So, I practiced free throws in super So, I practiced free throws in super So, I practiced free throws in super slow motion, and I nailed them every slow motion, and I nailed them every slow motion, and I nailed them every time. That The problem is there's no time. That The problem is there's no time. That The problem is there's no ball. Some of you already have a fair degree Some of you already have a fair degree Some of you already have a fair degree of proficiency, of skill, in a given of proficiency, of skill, in a given of proficiency, of skill, in a given practice, or sport, or sport, or sport, or instrument, and if you're in the sort or instrument, and if you're in the sort or instrument, and if you're in the sort of advanced intermediate or advanced of advanced intermediate or advanced of advanced intermediate or advanced levels of proficiency for something, levels of proficiency for something, levels of proficiency for something, there is a practice that you can find there is a practice that you can find there is a practice that you can find interesting data for in the literature, interesting data for in the literature, interesting data for in the literature, which involves metronoming. which involves metronoming. which involves metronoming. So, this So, this So, this you'll realize relates to generating you'll realize relates to generating you'll realize relates to generating repetitions, and it relates to the tone repetitions, and it relates to the tone repetitions, and it relates to the tone experiment, where it doesn't really experiment, where it doesn't really experiment, where it doesn't really matter what your attention is cued to as matter what your attention is cued to as matter what your attention is cued to as long as you are performing many, many long as you are performing many, many long as you are performing many, many reps of the motor sequence. reps of the motor sequence. reps of the motor sequence. You can use a metronome, and obviously You can use a metronome, and obviously You can use a metronome, and obviously musicians do this, but athletes can do musicians do this, but athletes can do musicians do this, but athletes can do this, too. this, too. this, too. You can use a metronome to set the You can use a metronome to set the You can use a metronome to set the cadence of your repetitions. cadence of your repetitions. cadence of your repetitions. Now, for swimmers, there's actually a Now, for swimmers, there's actually a Now, for swimmers, there's actually a device that I was able to find online. I device that I was able to find online. I device that I was able to find online. I forget what the brand name was, and I forget what the brand name was, and I forget what the brand name was, and I That's not what this is about, but that That's not what this is about, but that That's not what this is about, but that actually goes in the swim cap, that can actually goes in the swim cap, that can actually goes in the swim cap, that can cue you to when you need to perform cue you to when you need to perform cue you to when you need to perform another stroke. And for runners, there's another stroke. And for runners, there's another stroke. And for runners, there's uh there are other metronome type uh there are other metronome type uh there are other metronome type devices that through headphones or devices that through headphones or devices that through headphones or through a tone in the room, if you're through a tone in the room, if you're through a tone in the room, if you're running indoors or on a treadmill, will running indoors or on a treadmill, will running indoors or on a treadmill, will cue you to when you basically you need cue you to when you basically you need cue you to when you basically you need to lift your heels. And if you do that, to lift your heels. And if you do that, to lift your heels. And if you do that, what athletes find is they can perform what athletes find is they can perform what athletes find is they can perform more repetitions, they can generate more repetitions, they can generate more repetitions, they can generate more output, you can increase speed. output, you can increase speed. output, you can increase speed. A number of really interesting things A number of really interesting things A number of really interesting things are being done with auditory are being done with auditory are being done with auditory metronoming, and then I'm involved in a metronoming, and then I'm involved in a metronoming, and then I'm involved in a little bit of work now that hopefully little bit of work now that hopefully little bit of work now that hopefully I'll be able to report back to you about I'll be able to report back to you about I'll be able to report back to you about using stroboscopic metronoming, so using stroboscopic metronoming, so using stroboscopic metronoming, so actually changing the speed of the actually changing the speed of the actually changing the speed of the visual environment. These are fun visual environment. These are fun visual environment. These are fun experiments, expl- basically changing experiments, expl- basically changing experiments, expl- basically changing one's perception of how fast they're one's perception of how fast they're one's perception of how fast they're moving through space by playing with the moving through space by playing with the moving through space by playing with the visual system. Something for a future visual system. Something for a future visual system. Something for a future discussion. But you can start to use discussion. But you can start to use discussion. But you can start to use auditory metronoming for generating more auditory metronoming for generating more auditory metronoming for generating more movements per unit time movements per unit time movements per unit time and generating more errors and therefore and generating more errors and therefore and generating more errors and therefore more successes and more neuroplasticity. more successes and more neuroplasticity. more successes and more neuroplasticity. There are a number of different apps out There are a number of different apps out There are a number of different apps out there. Um, I found several free apps there. Um, I found several free apps there. Um, I found several free apps where you can set in a metronome pace. where you can set in a metronome pace. where you can set in a metronome pace. So, it might be tick So, it might be tick So, it might be tick tick. That's a little fast for most tick. That's a little fast for most tick. That's a little fast for most things, but you can imagine if this were things, but you can imagine if this were things, but you can imagine if this were uh darts or this were uh golf swings that darts or this were uh golf swings that darts or this were uh golf swings that it might be tick or it might be tick or it might be tick or something more like tick something more like tick something more like tick tick. And every time the metronome goes, tick. And every time the metronome goes, tick. And every time the metronome goes, you swing. Every time the metronome you swing. Every time the metronome you swing. Every time the metronome goes, you throw a dart. There are goes, you throw a dart. There are goes, you throw a dart. There are actually some wild experiments out actually some wild experiments out actually some wild experiments out there. You know, there's a world there. You know, there's a world there. You know, there's a world championship of cup stacking. There's a championship of cup stacking. There's a championship of cup stacking. There's a young lady who um I saw could take all a young lady who um I saw could take all a young lady who um I saw could take all these cups spread out on a table and these cups spread out on a table and these cups spread out on a table and basically just stack them into the basically just stack them into the basically just stack them into the perfect pyramid in the least amount of perfect pyramid in the least amount of perfect pyramid in the least amount of time. So, all the kids go wild. This is time. So, all the kids go wild. This is time. So, all the kids go wild. This is something I've never thought to pursue something I've never thought to pursue something I've never thought to pursue and frankly never will pursue um and frankly never will pursue um and frankly never will pursue um unless my life depends on it for some unless my life depends on it for some unless my life depends on it for some reason, but it's really impressive. And reason, but it's really impressive. And reason, but it's really impressive. And if you look at the sequence cuz these if you look at the sequence cuz these if you look at the sequence cuz these have been recorded, you can look this up have been recorded, you can look this up have been recorded, you can look this up on YouTube. Uh what you'll find is on YouTube. Uh what you'll find is on YouTube. Uh what you'll find is that these expert cup stackers it's just all these expert cup stackers it's just all these expert cup stackers it's just all about error elimination. But there too about error elimination. But there too about error elimination. But there too metronoming and auditory cues can metronoming and auditory cues can metronoming and auditory cues can actually cue them to pick up the cups actually cue them to pick up the cups actually cue them to pick up the cups faster than they would ordinarily and to faster than they would ordinarily and to faster than they would ordinarily and to learn to do that. You can do this for learn to do that. You can do this for learn to do that. You can do this for anything. I think cup stacking um is anything. I think cup stacking um is anything. I think cup stacking um is probably not a skill most of you are probably not a skill most of you are probably not a skill most of you are interested in doing, but interested in doing, but interested in doing, but um for any skill um for any skill um for any skill if you figure out at what rate you are if you figure out at what rate you are if you figure out at what rate you are performing repetitions per unit time and performing repetitions per unit time and performing repetitions per unit time and you want to increase that slightly, you want to increase that slightly, you want to increase that slightly, you set a metronome which is slightly faster set a metronome which is slightly faster set a metronome which is slightly faster than your current rate and you just than your current rate and you just than your current rate and you just start generating more repetitions. Now, start generating more repetitions. Now, start generating more repetitions. Now, what's interesting about this and is what's interesting about this and is what's interesting about this and is cool is it relates back to the cool is it relates back to the cool is it relates back to the experiment from experiment from experiment from Lappe and colleagues which is Lappe and colleagues which is Lappe and colleagues which is your attention is now harnessed to the your attention is now harnessed to the your attention is now harnessed to the tone to the metronome, not necessarily tone to the metronome, not necessarily tone to the metronome, not necessarily to what you're doing in terms of the to what you're doing in terms of the to what you're doing in terms of the motor movement. And so really you need a motor movement. And so really you need a motor movement. And so really you need a bit of proficiency. Again, this is for bit of proficiency. Again, this is for bit of proficiency. Again, this is for people who are in intermediate or people who are in intermediate or people who are in intermediate or advanced intermediate or advanced. But, advanced intermediate or advanced. But, advanced intermediate or advanced. But, what you're essentially doing is you're what you're essentially doing is you're what you're essentially doing is you're creating an outside pressure, a creating an outside pressure, a creating an outside pressure, a contingency, so that you generate, contingency, so that you generate, contingency, so that you generate, again, more errors. So, it's all about again, more errors. So, it's all about again, more errors. So, it's all about the errors that you get. And now, these the errors that you get. And now, these the errors that you get. And now, these aren't errors where all the cups tumble aren't errors where all the cups tumble aren't errors where all the cups tumble or you have to stop or you can't keep or you have to stop or you can't keep or you have to stop or you can't keep up. You have to set the pace just a up. You have to set the pace just a up. You have to set the pace just a little bit beyond what you currently can little bit beyond what you currently can little bit beyond what you currently can do. And when you when you do that, do. And when you when you do that, do. And when you when you do that, you're essentially forcing the nervous you're essentially forcing the nervous you're essentially forcing the nervous system to make errors and correct the system to make errors and correct the system to make errors and correct the errors inside of the session. errors inside of the session. errors inside of the session. I find this really interesting because I find this really interesting because I find this really interesting because what it means is, again, you've got what it means is, again, you've got what it means is, again, you've got sensory perception, what you're paying sensory perception, what you're paying sensory perception, what you're paying attention to, proprioception, where your attention to, proprioception, where your attention to, proprioception, where your limbs are, and the motor neurons in your limbs are, and the motor neurons in your limbs are, and the motor neurons in your upper lower motor neurons and central upper lower motor neurons and central upper lower motor neurons and central pattern generators. pattern generators. pattern generators. And you can't pay attention to it. Well, And you can't pay attention to it. Well, And you can't pay attention to it. Well, there are my upper motor neurons, there are my upper motor neurons, there are my upper motor neurons, there are my lower motor neurons. Forget that. are my lower motor neurons. Forget that. are my lower motor neurons. Forget that. You're not going to do that. You can't You're not going to do that. You can't You're not going to do that. You can't pay attention to your proprioception too pay attention to your proprioception too pay attention to your proprioception too much. That would be the super slow much. That would be the super slow much. That would be the super slow motion would be the proprioception. But, motion would be the proprioception. But, motion would be the proprioception. But, you have to harness your attention to you have to harness your attention to you have to harness your attention to something. And if you harness your something. And if you harness your something. And if you harness your attention to this outside contingency, attention to this outside contingency, attention to this outside contingency, this metronome that's firing off and this metronome that's firing off and this metronome that's firing off and saying, "Now, go. Now, go. Now, go." saying, "Now, go. Now, go. Now, go." saying, "Now, go. Now, go. Now, go." Not only can you increase the number of Not only can you increase the number of Not only can you increase the number of repetitions, errors, and successes, but repetitions, errors, and successes, but repetitions, errors, and successes, but for some reason, and we don't know why, for some reason, and we don't know why, for some reason, and we don't know why, the regular cadence of the tone of the regular cadence of the tone of the regular cadence of the tone of the metronome, and the fact that you are anchoring your and the fact that you are anchoring your and the fact that you are anchoring your movements to some external force, to movements to some external force, to movements to some external force, to some external pressure or cue, some external pressure or cue, some external pressure or cue, seems to accelerate the plasticity seems to accelerate the plasticity seems to accelerate the plasticity and the changes and the acquisition of and the changes and the acquisition of and the changes and the acquisition of skills beyond what it would be if you skills beyond what it would be if you skills beyond what it would be if you just did the same number of repetitions just did the same number of repetitions just did the same number of repetitions without that outside pressure. We don't without that outside pressure. We don't without that outside pressure. We don't know exactly what the mechanism is. know exactly what the mechanism is. know exactly what the mechanism is. Presumably, it's neurochemical. Like, Presumably, it's neurochemical. Like, Presumably, it's neurochemical. Like, there's something about keeping up with there's something about keeping up with there's something about keeping up with a timer or with a pace that, presumably, a timer or with a pace that, presumably, a timer or with a pace that, presumably, and I'm speculating here, causes the and I'm speculating here, causes the and I'm speculating here, causes the release of particular chemicals. But, I release of particular chemicals. But, I release of particular chemicals. But, I think it's really cool. Metronomes, think it's really cool. Metronomes, think it's really cool. Metronomes, they're totally inexpensive, at least they're totally inexpensive, at least they're totally inexpensive, at least the ones that you use outside of water the ones that you use outside of water the ones that you use outside of water are very inexpensive. You can find these are very inexpensive. You can find these are very inexpensive. You can find these free apps. Um you can use a musical free apps. Um you can use a musical free apps. Um you can use a musical metronome. So, metronomes are a powerful metronome. So, metronomes are a powerful metronome. So, metronomes are a powerful tool as well. tool as well. tool as well. In particular for speed work, so for In particular for speed work, so for In particular for speed work, so for sprinting or swimming or running where sprinting or swimming or running where sprinting or swimming or running where the goal is to generate more strokes the goal is to generate more strokes the goal is to generate more strokes or more efficient strokes or more steps, or more efficient strokes or more steps, or more efficient strokes or more steps, etc. The rate of the metronome etc. The rate of the metronome etc. The rate of the metronome obviously is going to be very important. obviously is going to be very important. obviously is going to be very important. Sometimes you're trying to lengthen your Sometimes you're trying to lengthen your Sometimes you're trying to lengthen your stride. Sometimes you're trying stride. Sometimes you're trying stride. Sometimes you're trying to take fewer strokes but glide further to take fewer strokes but glide further to take fewer strokes but glide further in the pool for instance. But the value in the pool for instance. But the value in the pool for instance. But the value of occasionally just increasing the of occasionally just increasing the of occasionally just increasing the number of repetitions, the number of number of repetitions, the number of number of repetitions, the number of strokes or steps, etc. per unit time is strokes or steps, etc. per unit time is strokes or steps, etc. per unit time is also that you're training the central also that you're training the central also that you're training the central pattern generators to operate at that pattern generators to operate at that pattern generators to operate at that higher speed. higher speed. higher speed. You know, one of the sports that's kind You know, one of the sports that's kind You know, one of the sports that's kind of interesting to me is speed walking. of interesting to me is speed walking. of interesting to me is speed walking. It's not one I engage in or ever plan to It's not one I engage in or ever plan to It's not one I engage in or ever plan to engage in. engage in. engage in. But if you've ever tried to really speed But if you've ever tried to really speed But if you've ever tried to really speed walk, it's actually difficult to walk, it's actually difficult to walk, it's actually difficult to walk very fast without breaking walk very fast without breaking walk very fast without breaking into a run. All animals have these kind into a run. All animals have these kind into a run. All animals have these kind of crossover points where of crossover points where of crossover points where they go where you go, you know, I think they go where you go, you know, I think they go where you go, you know, I think uh with horses it's like they what is it uh with horses it's like they what is it uh with horses it's like they what is it they trot then they gallop I don't they trot then they gallop I don't they trot then they gallop I don't know what's the next thing. I know what's the next thing. I know what's the next thing. I know clearly I don't know anything about uh clearly I don't know anything about uh clearly I don't know anything about uh about horses about horses about horses um except that they're beautiful uh and um except that they're beautiful uh and um except that they're beautiful uh and I like them very much. But they I like them very much. But they I like them very much. But they break into a different kind of stride break into a different kind of stride break into a different kind of stride and that's because you shift over to and that's because you shift over to and that's because you shift over to different central pattern generators. different central pattern generators. different central pattern generators. So, when you're walking or a horse is So, when you're walking or a horse is So, when you're walking or a horse is moving very slowly and then it breaks moving very slowly and then it breaks moving very slowly and then it breaks into a jog and then into a full sprint into a jog and then into a full sprint into a jog and then into a full sprint or I got to get gallop for the horse. or I got to get gallop for the horse. or I got to get gallop for the horse. You're actually engaging different You're actually engaging different You're actually engaging different central pattern generators. And those central pattern generators. And those central pattern generators. And those central pattern generators always have a central pattern generators always have a central pattern generators always have a range of speeds that they're happiest to range of speeds that they're happiest to range of speeds that they're happiest to function at. So, with the metronoming function at. So, with the metronoming function at. So, with the metronoming for speed purposes, what you do is for speed purposes, what you do is for speed purposes, what you do is you can you can basically bring the you can you can basically bring the you can you can basically bring the activity of those central pattern activity of those central pattern activity of those central pattern generators into their upper range generators into their upper range generators into their upper range and maybe even extend their range. And and maybe even extend their range. And and maybe even extend their range. And there's a fascinating biology of how there's a fascinating biology of how there's a fascinating biology of how central pattern generators work central pattern generators work central pattern generators work together. Uh there's coupling of central together. Uh there's coupling of central together. Uh there's coupling of central pattern generators etc. in order to pattern generators etc. in order to pattern generators etc. in order to achieve maximal speeds and etc. It's a achieve maximal speeds and etc. It's a achieve maximal speeds and etc. It's a topic for a kind of an advanced session. topic for a kind of an advanced session. topic for a kind of an advanced session. Costel loves this topic. He just barked. Costel loves this topic. He just barked. Costel loves this topic. He just barked. It And he loves it so much he barked It And he loves it so much he barked It And he loves it so much he barked again. In any event, the metronome is a again. In any event, the metronome is a again. In any event, the metronome is a powerful tool again for more advanced powerful tool again for more advanced powerful tool again for more advanced practitioners or for advanced practitioners or for advanced practitioners or for advanced intermediate practitioners, but intermediate practitioners, but intermediate practitioners, but um it's interesting because it brings um it's interesting because it brings um it's interesting because it brings back the point that what we put our back the point that what we put our back the point that what we put our attention to while we're skill learning attention to while we're skill learning attention to while we're skill learning is important to the extent that it's on is important to the extent that it's on is important to the extent that it's on one thing at least for the moment or one thing at least for the moment or one thing at least for the moment or trial to trial, but that what we focus trial to trial, but that what we focus trial to trial, but that what we focus our attention on can be external, it can our attention on can be external, it can our attention on can be external, it can be internal, and ultimately the skill be internal, and ultimately the skill be internal, and ultimately the skill learning is where all that is brought learning is where all that is brought learning is where all that is brought together. So, let's talk about where together. So, let's talk about where together. So, let's talk about where skill learning occurs in the nervous skill learning occurs in the nervous skill learning occurs in the nervous system, and then I'm going to give you a system, and then I'm going to give you a system, and then I'm going to give you a really uh what I think is a really cool really uh what I think is a really cool really uh what I think is a really cool tool that can increase flexibility and a that can increase flexibility and a that can increase flexibility and a range of motion range of motion range of motion based on this particular brain area. based on this particular brain area. based on this particular brain area. It's a tool that I used and when I first It's a tool that I used and when I first It's a tool that I used and when I first heard about I did not believe would heard about I did not believe would heard about I did not believe would work. Uh this is not a hack. This is work. Uh this is not a hack. This is work. Uh this is not a hack. This is actually anchored deeply in the biology actually anchored deeply in the biology actually anchored deeply in the biology of a particular brain region that we all of a particular brain region that we all of a particular brain region that we all have, uh which whose meaning is mini have, uh which whose meaning is mini have, uh which whose meaning is mini brain, and that mini brain that we all brain, and that mini brain that we all brain, and that mini brain that we all have is called your cerebellum. The have is called your cerebellum. The have is called your cerebellum. The cerebellum is called the mini brain cerebellum is called the mini brain cerebellum is called the mini brain because it's in the back of your brain. because it's in the back of your brain. because it's in the back of your brain. It looks like a little mini version of It looks like a little mini version of It looks like a little mini version of the rest of your brain. It's an the rest of your brain. It's an the rest of your brain. It's an absolutely incredible structure that's absolutely incredible structure that's absolutely incredible structure that's involved in movement. It also has a lot involved in movement. It also has a lot involved in movement. It also has a lot of non-movement associated functions. of non-movement associated functions. of non-movement associated functions. In brief, In brief, In brief, the cerebellum the cerebellum the cerebellum gets input from your senses, gets input from your senses, gets input from your senses, particularly your eyes, and pays particularly your eyes, and pays particularly your eyes, and pays attention to where your eyes are in attention to where your eyes are in attention to where your eyes are in space, what you're looking at. It space, what you're looking at. It space, what you're looking at. It basically takes information about three basically takes information about three basically takes information about three aspects of your eyes and eye movements, aspects of your eyes and eye movements, aspects of your eyes and eye movements, which are occurring when your head goes like are occurring when your head goes like are occurring when your head goes like this, which is called pitch. Okay, so this, which is called pitch. Okay, so this, which is called pitch. Okay, so this is pitch. Um for those of you that this is pitch. Um for those of you that this is pitch. Um for those of you that listening, I'm just nodding up and down. listening, I'm just nodding up and down. listening, I'm just nodding up and down. Then there's yaw, which is like shaking Then there's yaw, which is like shaking Then there's yaw, which is like shaking your head no from side to side, and then your head no from side to side, and then your head no from side to side, and then there's roll, which you know, is like there's roll, which you know, is like there's roll, which you know, is like sometimes if you see a primate, like a sometimes if you see a primate, like a sometimes if you see a primate, like a marmoset or something, they will roll marmoset or something, they will roll marmoset or something, they will roll their head when they look at you. their head when they look at you. their head when they look at you. Actually, the reason they do that is it Actually, the reason they do that is it Actually, the reason they do that is it helps generate depth perception. It's a helps generate depth perception. It's a helps generate depth perception. It's a kind of form of motion parallax if kind of form of motion parallax if kind of form of motion parallax if you're curious why they do that. It's you're curious why they do that. It's you're curious why they do that. It's not to look cute. They do it because not to look cute. They do it because not to look cute. They do it because when they do that, even if you're when they do that, even if you're when they do that, even if you're stationary and they're stationary, they stationary and they're stationary, they stationary and they're stationary, they get better depth perception as to how get better depth perception as to how get better depth perception as to how far away from them you are. So, you've far away from them you are. So, you've far away from them you are. So, you've got pitch, yaw, and roll. got pitch, yaw, and roll. got pitch, yaw, and roll. And as you move your head and as you And as you move your head and as you And as you move your head and as you move your body and you move through move your body and you move through move your body and you move through space, the image on your retina moves, pitch, the image on your retina moves, pitch, the image on your retina moves, pitch, yaw, and roll in some combination. That yaw, and roll in some combination. That yaw, and roll in some combination. That information is relayed to your information is relayed to your information is relayed to your cerebellum. So, it's rich with visual cerebellum. So, it's rich with visual cerebellum. So, it's rich with visual information. There's also a map of your information. There's also a map of your information. There's also a map of your body surface and your movements and body surface and your movements and body surface and your movements and timing in the cerebellum. So, it's an timing in the cerebellum. So, it's an timing in the cerebellum. So, it's an incredible structure that brings incredible structure that brings incredible structure that brings together timing of movements, which together timing of movements, which together timing of movements, which limbs are moving, limbs are moving, limbs are moving, and has proprioception information. It and has proprioception information. It and has proprioception information. It really is a mini brain. It's just the really is a mini brain. It's just the really is a mini brain. It's just the coolest little structure back there. And coolest little structure back there. And coolest little structure back there. And in humans, actually not that little. in humans, actually not that little. in humans, actually not that little. It's just an incredible structure. Now, It's just an incredible structure. Now, It's just an incredible structure. Now, all this information is integrated all this information is integrated all this information is integrated there, but what most people don't tell us is that a what most people don't tell us is that a what most people don't tell us is that a lot of learning lot of learning lot of learning of motor sequences, of skill learning of motor sequences, of skill learning of motor sequences, of skill learning that involve timing, occurs in the that involve timing, occurs in the that involve timing, occurs in the cerebellum. Now, you can't really use that Now, you can't really use that Now, you can't really use that information except to know that after you learn except to know that after you learn except to know that after you learn something pretty well, it's handed off something pretty well, it's handed off something pretty well, it's handed off or kind of handled by your cerebellum. or kind of handled by your cerebellum. or kind of handled by your cerebellum. But there is something that you can do But there is something that you can do But there is something that you can do with your cerebellum to increase range with your cerebellum to increase range with your cerebellum to increase range of motion and flexibility. of motion and flexibility. of motion and flexibility. Much of our flexibility, believe it or Much of our flexibility, believe it or Much of our flexibility, believe it or not, is not because our tendons are of is not because our tendons are of is not because our tendons are of particular length or uh elasticity, particular length or uh elasticity, particular length or uh elasticity, although that plays it some role. It's although that plays it some role. It's although that plays it some role. It's not because our muscles are short. I not because our muscles are short. I not because our muscles are short. I don't know what that would even mean. don't know what that would even mean. don't know what that would even mean. Some people have longer muscle Some people have longer muscle Some people have longer muscle bellies or shorter muscle bellies, but bellies or shorter muscle bellies, but bellies or shorter muscle bellies, but your muscles always essentially span the your muscles always essentially span the your muscles always essentially span the entire length of the of the bone or entire length of the of the bone or entire length of the of the bone or limb or close to it along with your limb or close to it along with your limb or close to it along with your tendons. But, has to do with the neural innervation of has to do with the neural innervation of has to do with the neural innervation of muscle and the fact that when muscles muscle and the fact that when muscles muscle and the fact that when muscles are elongated, there's a point at which are elongated, there's a point at which are elongated, there's a point at which they won't stretch out any longer and they won't stretch out any longer and they won't stretch out any longer and the nerves fire and they shut down. You the nerves fire and they shut down. You the nerves fire and they shut down. You actually have inhibitory pathways that actually have inhibitory pathways that actually have inhibitory pathways that prevent you from contracting the that prevent you from contracting the that prevent you from contracting the muscles or from extending them from muscles or from extending them from muscles or from extending them from stretching them out any more. So, you stretching them out any more. So, you stretching them out any more. So, you can do this right now. If you're can do this right now. If you're can do this right now. If you're driving, don't do it because unless you driving, don't do it because unless you driving, don't do it because unless you have a self-driving car, you'll need to have a self-driving car, you'll need to have a self-driving car, you'll need to take your hands off the steering wheel, take your hands off the steering wheel, take your hands off the steering wheel, but because of the way that vision and your because of the way that vision and your because of the way that vision and your muscles are muscles are muscles are represented in your cerebellum, it turns represented in your cerebellum, it turns represented in your cerebellum, it turns out that your range of visual motion out that your range of visual motion out that your range of visual motion and your range of vision, literally how and your range of vision, literally how and your range of vision, literally how wide a field of view you take, wide a field of view you take, wide a field of view you take, impacts how far you can extend your impacts how far you can extend your impacts how far you can extend your limbs. Okay? So, limbs. Okay? So, limbs. Okay? So, we'll talk about this in a second we'll talk about this in a second we'll talk about this in a second and out exactly how to do this and out exactly how to do this and out exactly how to do this and explore this. explore this. explore this. But, as you move through space, as you walk as you move through space, as you walk as you move through space, as you walk forward or you walk backward or you tilt forward or you walk backward or you tilt forward or you walk backward or you tilt your head or you learn a skill or you your head or you learn a skill or you your head or you learn a skill or you just operate in the normal ways just operate in the normal ways just operate in the normal ways throughout your day, driving, biking, throughout your day, driving, biking, throughout your day, driving, biking, etc., your eyes are generating etc., your eyes are generating etc., your eyes are generating spontaneous movements to offset vision spontaneous movements to offset vision spontaneous movements to offset vision visual slip. In other words, you don't visual slip. In other words, you don't visual slip. In other words, you don't see the world as blurry even though see the world as blurry even though see the world as blurry even though you're moving because your eyes are you're moving because your eyes are you're moving because your eyes are generating little compensatory eye generating little compensatory eye generating little compensatory eye movements to offset your motion. So, if movements to offset your motion. So, if movements to offset your motion. So, if I spin we could do this experiment. I spin we could do this experiment. I spin we could do this experiment. There's a fun experiment we do with There's a fun experiment we do with There's a fun experiment we do with medical students medical students medical students where you where you where you spin them around in a chair with their spin them around in a chair with their spin them around in a chair with their eyes closed and then you stop and you eyes closed and then you stop and you eyes closed and then you stop and you have them open their eyes and their eyes have them open their eyes and their eyes have them open their eyes and their eyes are going like this. are going like this. are going like this. It's nystagmus. I don't suggest you do It's nystagmus. I don't suggest you do It's nystagmus. I don't suggest you do this experiment. When we were kids, we this experiment. When we were kids, we this experiment. When we were kids, we did a different experiment which was to did a different experiment which was to did a different experiment which was to take a stick and to look at the top of take a stick and to look at the top of take a stick and to look at the top of the stick and to spin around on the lawn the stick and to spin around on the lawn the stick and to spin around on the lawn looking at the top of the stick, then looking at the top of the stick, then looking at the top of the stick, then put it down on the ground and try and put it down on the ground and try and put it down on the ground and try and jump over it, and you end up like jump over it, and you end up like jump over it, and you end up like jumping to the side, you miss the thing jumping to the side, you miss the thing jumping to the side, you miss the thing entirely. The reason those two {quote} The reason those two {quote} The reason those two {quote} experiments, which I hope you don't do, experiments, which I hope you don't do, experiments, which I hope you don't do, or force somebody else to do, the reason or force somebody else to do, the reason or force somebody else to do, the reason they work is because normally your eye they work is because normally your eye they work is because normally your eye movements and your balance and your limb movements and your balance and your limb movements and your balance and your limb movements are coordinated, but when you movements are coordinated, but when you movements are coordinated, but when you spin around looking up at the stick, spin around looking up at the stick, spin around looking up at the stick, what you're doing is you're fixating what you're doing is you're fixating what you're doing is you're fixating your eyes on one location while you're your eyes on one location while you're your eyes on one location while you're moving. And then when you stop, those moving. And then when you stop, those moving. And then when you stop, those two mechanisms are completely uncoupled, two mechanisms are completely uncoupled, two mechanisms are completely uncoupled, and it's like being you know, thrown and it's like being you know, thrown and it's like being you know, thrown into outer space. into outer space. into outer space. Never been to outer space, but probably Never been to outer space, but probably Never been to outer space, but probably something like that, low gravity, zero something like that, low gravity, zero something like that, low gravity, zero gravity. If you spin around in your chair with If you spin around in your chair with If you spin around in your chair with your eyes closed, you're not giving the your eyes closed, you're not giving the your eyes closed, you're not giving the visual input that you're spinning, and visual input that you're spinning, and visual input that you're spinning, and then you open the eyes, and then the then you open the eyes, and then the then you open the eyes, and then the eyes only have the uh what we call eyes only have the uh what we call eyes only have the uh what we call the vestibular signal, your eyes jolting the vestibular signal, your eyes jolting the vestibular signal, your eyes jolting back and forth, back and forth. Again, back and forth, back and forth. Again, back and forth, back and forth. Again, these aren't experiments you need to do these aren't experiments you need to do these aren't experiments you need to do cuz I just told you the result. cuz I just told you the result. cuz I just told you the result. However, if you want to extend your However, if you want to extend your However, if you want to extend your range of motion, range of motion, range of motion, you can do that by you can do that by you can do that by These things always look goofy, but at These things always look goofy, but at These things always look goofy, but at this point I'm just kind of used to this point I'm just kind of used to this point I'm just kind of used to doing these things. If I want to extend doing these things. If I want to extend doing these things. If I want to extend my range of movement, first I want to my range of movement, first I want to my range of movement, first I want to measure my range of motion. So, I'm measure my range of motion. So, I'm measure my range of motion. So, I'm trying to If you're listening, what I'm trying to If you're listening, what I'm trying to If you're listening, what I'm doing is I'm stretching out my arms from doing is I'm stretching out my arms from doing is I'm stretching out my arms from uh like a T uh from on either side, and uh like a T uh from on either side, and uh like a T uh from on either side, and I'm trying to push them as far back as I I'm trying to push them as far back as I I'm trying to push them as far back as I can, which for me is, you know, feels can, which for me is, you know, feels can, which for me is, you know, feels like it's in line with my shoulders, and like it's in line with my shoulders, and like it's in line with my shoulders, and I can't get much further. I'm not really I can't get much further. I'm not really I can't get much further. I'm not really super flexible, nor am I particularly um super flexible, nor am I particularly um super flexible, nor am I particularly um inflexible, at least uh physically. at least uh physically. at least uh physically. So, what I would then do is stop, I So, what I would then do is stop, I So, what I would then do is stop, I would move my eyes to the far periphery, would move my eyes to the far periphery, would move my eyes to the far periphery, right? So, I'm moving my eyes all the right? So, I'm moving my eyes all the right? So, I'm moving my eyes all the way to the left while keeping my head way to the left while keeping my head way to the left while keeping my head and body stationary. I'm trying to look and body stationary. I'm trying to look and body stationary. I'm trying to look over my left shoulder as far as I can, over my left shoulder as far as I can, over my left shoulder as far as I can, then off to the right. then off to the right. then off to the right. It's a little awkward to do this, then It's a little awkward to do this, then It's a little awkward to do this, then up, then down, but I'm mostly going to just then down, but I'm mostly going to just then down, but I'm mostly going to just focus on left, focus on left, focus on left, and then and then and then right. Now, what that's doing is it's right. Now, what that's doing is it's right. Now, what that's doing is it's sending a signal to my cerebellum that sending a signal to my cerebellum that sending a signal to my cerebellum that my field of view is way over to there my field of view is way over to there my field of view is way over to there and way over to there. Remember, your and way over to there. Remember, your and way over to there. Remember, your visual attention has an aperture. It can visual attention has an aperture. It can visual attention has an aperture. It can be narrow or it can be broad, and I've be narrow or it can be broad, and I've be narrow or it can be broad, and I've talked about some of the benefits of talked about some of the benefits of talked about some of the benefits of taking a broad visual aperture in order taking a broad visual aperture in order taking a broad visual aperture in order to relax the nervous system. This is to relax the nervous system. This is to relax the nervous system. This is just moving my eyes, not my head like I just moving my eyes, not my head like I just moving my eyes, not my head like I just did for a second, from side to just did for a second, from side to just did for a second, from side to side. Now, I can retest, and actually, side. Now, I can retest, and actually, side. Now, I can retest, and actually, you get about a 5 to 15° increase in you get about a 5 to 15° increase in you get about a 5 to 15° increase in your range of motion. Now, I'm doing your range of motion. Now, I'm doing your range of motion. Now, I'm doing this for you, you can say, "Well, you this for you, you can say, "Well, you this for you, you can say, "Well, you know, he gamed it cuz he knew the know, he gamed it cuz he knew the know, he gamed it cuz he knew the result that he was hoping for." But, you result that he was hoping for." But, you result that he was hoping for." But, you can try this, okay? So, and you can do can try this, okay? So, and you can do can try this, okay? So, and you can do this for legs, too, right? You can do this for legs, too, right? You can do this for legs, too, right? You can do this for any limb, essentially, and this for any limb, essentially, and this for any limb, essentially, and that's it's purely cerebellar, and it's that's it's purely cerebellar, and it's that's it's purely cerebellar, and it's because the proprioceptive, visual, and limb the proprioceptive, visual, and limb the proprioceptive, visual, and limb movement feedback movement feedback movement feedback converge in their in the ways that we converge in their in the ways that we converge in their in the ways that we control our muscle spindles and the way control our muscle spindles and the way control our muscle spindles and the way we control the muscle fibers and the we control the muscle fibers and the we control the muscle fibers and the tendons. Essentially, you can get bigger tendons. Essentially, you can get bigger tendons. Essentially, you can get bigger range of motion. So, I actually will range of motion. So, I actually will range of motion. So, I actually will warm up before exercise or for before warm up before exercise or for before warm up before exercise or for before skill learning by both doing movements skill learning by both doing movements skill learning by both doing movements for my body, but also moving my eyes for my body, but also moving my eyes for my body, but also moving my eyes from side to side in order to generate from side to side in order to generate from side to side in order to generate larger range of motion if range of larger range of motion if range of larger range of motion if range of motion is something that I'm interested motion is something that I'm interested motion is something that I'm interested in. So, that's a fun one that you can in. So, that's a fun one that you can in. So, that's a fun one that you can play with a little bit. play with a little bit. play with a little bit. Um, and it's purely cerebellar. Some Um, and it's purely cerebellar. Some Um, and it's purely cerebellar. Some other time, we'll get back into uh other time, we'll get back into uh other time, we'll get back into uh cerebellar function. There's all sorts cerebellar function. There's all sorts cerebellar function. There's all sorts of just incredible stuff that you can do of just incredible stuff that you can do of just incredible stuff that you can do with cerebellum. Uh, I talked in an with cerebellum. Uh, I talked in an with cerebellum. Uh, I talked in an earlier episode on neuroplasticity about earlier episode on neuroplasticity about earlier episode on neuroplasticity about how you can disrupt your vestibular how you can disrupt your vestibular how you can disrupt your vestibular world. In other words, by getting uh world. In other words, by getting uh world. In other words, by getting uh into modes of acceleration, moving into modes of acceleration, moving into modes of acceleration, moving through space where you're tilted in through space where you're tilted in through space where you're tilted in certain ways, it can open up the windows certain ways, it can open up the windows certain ways, it can open up the windows for plasticity in yet other ways. Um, for plasticity in yet other ways. Um, for plasticity in yet other ways. Um, so, you can check that out. Uh, it's one so, you can check that out. Uh, it's one so, you can check that out. Uh, it's one of the earlier episodes on of the earlier episodes on of the earlier episodes on neuroplasticity. Everything's time neuroplasticity. Everything's time neuroplasticity. Everything's time stamped. But, meanwhile, if you want to stamped. But, meanwhile, if you want to stamped. But, meanwhile, if you want to expand your range of motion before doing expand your range of motion before doing expand your range of motion before doing a skill learning or afterward, this is a skill learning or afterward, this is a skill learning or afterward, this is a fun one. It's also kind of neat because fun one. It's also kind of neat because fun one. It's also kind of neat because um, I have kind of aversion to um, I have kind of aversion to um, I have kind of aversion to stretching work. It never seems like stretching work. It never seems like stretching work. It never seems like something I want to do, and so I always something I want to do, and so I always something I want to do, and so I always put it off. So, if I start with the put it off. So, if I start with the put it off. So, if I start with the visual practice of expanding my field of view practice of expanding my field of view practice of expanding my field of view to off to one side or the other side or to off to one side or the other side or to off to one side or the other side or up or down, then what I find is I'm up or down, then what I find is I'm up or down, then what I find is I'm naturally more flexible. I'm not naturally more flexible. I'm not naturally more flexible. I'm not naturally more flexible. What's happened naturally more flexible. What's happened naturally more flexible. What's happened is I've expanded my range of motion. is I've expanded my range of motion. is I've expanded my range of motion. Let's talk about visualization Let's talk about visualization Let's talk about visualization and mental rehearsal. and mental rehearsal. and mental rehearsal. I've been asked about this a lot, and I I've been asked about this a lot, and I I've been asked about this a lot, and I think it relates back to that kind of think it relates back to that kind of think it relates back to that kind of matrix Hollywood idea that we can just matrix Hollywood idea that we can just matrix Hollywood idea that we can just be embedded with a skill. Although, in be embedded with a skill. Although, in be embedded with a skill. Although, in this case, in fairness, visualization this case, in fairness, visualization this case, in fairness, visualization involves some work. involves some work. involves some work. And I've talked about this on an earlier And I've talked about this on an earlier And I've talked about this on an earlier episode that some people find it very episode that some people find it very episode that some people find it very hard to mentally visualize things. hard to mentally visualize things. hard to mentally visualize things. And some people find it very easy. There And some people find it very easy. There And some people find it very easy. There was great work that was done in the was great work that was done in the was great work that was done in the 1960s by Roger Shepard at 1960s by Roger Shepard at 1960s by Roger Shepard at Stanford and by others looking at Stanford and by others looking at Stanford and by others looking at people's ability to rotate people's ability to rotate people's ability to rotate three-dimensional objects in their mind. three-dimensional objects in their mind. three-dimensional objects in their mind. And some people are really good at this, And some people are really good at this, And some people are really good at this, and some people are less good at this. and some people are less good at this. and some people are less good at this. And one can get better at it by And one can get better at it by And one can get better at it by repeating it, but the question we're repeating it, but the question we're repeating it, but the question we're going to deal with today is does it going to deal with today is does it going to deal with today is does it help? Does it let you learn things help? Does it let you learn things help? Does it let you learn things faster? And indeed, the answer appears to be And indeed, the answer appears to be And indeed, the answer appears to be yes. It can. However, despite what you've It can. However, despite what you've It can. However, despite what you've heard, it is not as good. It is not a heard, it is not as good. It is not a heard, it is not as good. It is not a total replacement for physical total replacement for physical total replacement for physical performance itself. Okay, so I'm going performance itself. Okay, so I'm going performance itself. Okay, so I'm going to be really concrete about this. to be really concrete about this. to be really concrete about this. I hear all the time that just imagining I hear all the time that just imagining I hear all the time that just imagining contracting a muscle can lead to the contracting a muscle can lead to the contracting a muscle can lead to the same gains as actually contracting that same gains as actually contracting that same gains as actually contracting that muscle. Just imagining a skill can lead muscle. Just imagining a skill can lead muscle. Just imagining a skill can lead to the same increases in performance as to the same increases in performance as to the same increases in performance as actually executing that skill. And actually executing that skill. And actually executing that skill. And that's simply not the case. that's simply not the case. that's simply not the case. However, it can supplement or support However, it can supplement or support However, it can supplement or support physical training and skill learning in physical training and skill learning in physical training and skill learning in ways that are quite powerful. ways that are quite powerful. ways that are quite powerful. One of the more interesting studies on One of the more interesting studies on One of the more interesting studies on this was from Ranganathan this was from Ranganathan this was from Ranganathan et al. Forgive me for the pronunciation. et al. Forgive me for the pronunciation. et al. Forgive me for the pronunciation. Um this was uh a slightly older paper, this was uh a slightly older paper, this was uh a slightly older paper, 2004, but nonetheless was uh one that I 2004, but nonetheless was uh one that I 2004, but nonetheless was uh one that I thought had particularly impressive thought had particularly impressive thought had particularly impressive results and included all the appropriate results and included all the appropriate results and included all the appropriate controls, et cetera. And what they did is they et cetera. And what they did is they et cetera. And what they did is they looked at 30 subjects. They divided them looked at 30 subjects. They divided them looked at 30 subjects. They divided them into different groups. Um they had one into different groups. Um they had one into different groups. Um they had one group perform essentially finger group perform essentially finger group perform essentially finger flexion. So, it's actually sort of the flexion. So, it's actually sort of the flexion. So, it's actually sort of the uh imagine if you're just listening to uh imagine if you're just listening to uh imagine if you're just listening to this that, you know, come here uh finger this that, you know, come here uh finger this that, you know, come here uh finger movement. Um movement. Um movement. Um they also had uh elbow flexion, so it's they also had uh elbow flexion, so it's they also had uh elbow flexion, so it's a bicep curl type movement. And they a bicep curl type movement. And they a bicep curl type movement. And they either had subjects do a actual physical either had subjects do a actual physical either had subjects do a actual physical movement against resistance or to movement against resistance or to movement against resistance or to imagine moving uh their finger or their imagine moving uh their finger or their imagine moving uh their finger or their uh wrist towards the shoulder, meaning uh wrist towards the shoulder, meaning uh wrist towards the shoulder, meaning at the bending at the elbow, uh towards at the bending at the elbow, uh towards at the bending at the elbow, uh towards actual resistance. Uh actual resistance. Uh actual resistance. Uh just to make a long story short, what just to make a long story short, what just to make a long story short, what they found was they found was they found was that there were increases in this finger there were increases in this finger there were increases in this finger adduction strength abduction, excuse me, adduction strength abduction, excuse me, adduction strength abduction, excuse me, strength of about 35% strength of about 35% strength of about 35% and the elbow flexion strength by about and the elbow flexion strength by about and the elbow flexion strength by about 13.5%. Which are pretty impressive considering Which are pretty impressive considering Which are pretty impressive considering that it was just done mentally. So, they that it was just done mentally. So, they that it was just done mentally. So, they had people imagine moving against a had people imagine moving against a had people imagine moving against a weight, uh a very heavy weight or uh had weight, uh a very heavy weight or uh had weight, uh a very heavy weight or uh had imagined people moving their wrist imagined people moving their wrist imagined people moving their wrist towards their shoulder um against a very towards their shoulder um against a very towards their shoulder um against a very heavy weight, but it again they weren't heavy weight, but it again they weren't heavy weight, but it again they weren't doing it. They were just imagining it. doing it. They were just imagining it. doing it. They were just imagining it. Other experiments looked at the brain Other experiments looked at the brain Other experiments looked at the brain and what was happening in the brain and what was happening in the brain and what was happening in the brain during this time. Uh so, we'll talk during this time. Uh so, we'll talk during this time. Uh so, we'll talk about that in a moment. But essentially about that in a moment. But essentially about that in a moment. But essentially what they found were what they found were what they found were improvements in strength of anywhere improvements in strength of anywhere improvements in strength of anywhere from 13.5% from 13.5% from 13.5% to 35%. to 35%. to 35%. However, the actual physical training However, the actual physical training However, the actual physical training group, the groups that actually moved group, the groups that actually moved group, the groups that actually moved their wrist or moved their finger their wrist or moved their finger their wrist or moved their finger against an actual physical weight had against an actual physical weight had against an actual physical weight had improvements of about 53%. improvements of about 53%. improvements of about 53%. So, this repeats over and over So, this repeats over and over So, this repeats over and over throughout the literature. Mental throughout the literature. Mental throughout the literature. Mental rehearsal can cause increases in rehearsal can cause increases in rehearsal can cause increases in strength. It can strength. It can strength. It can create increases in skill acquisition create increases in skill acquisition create increases in skill acquisition and learning, but they are never as and learning, but they are never as and learning, but they are never as great if done alone as compared if done alone as compared if done alone as compared to the actual physical execution of to the actual physical execution of to the actual physical execution of those movements or the physical movement those movements or the physical movement those movements or the physical movement of those weights, which shouldn't come of those weights, which shouldn't come of those weights, which shouldn't come as so surprising. However, if we step as so surprising. However, if we step as so surprising. However, if we step back and we say, "Well, what is the back and we say, "Well, what is the back and we say, "Well, what is the source of this improvement?" source of this improvement?" source of this improvement?" You might not care what the source is You might not care what the source is You might not care what the source is because I could tell you it's one brain because I could tell you it's one brain because I could tell you it's one brain area or another brain area, what area or another brain area, what area or another brain area, what difference would it make? But if again, difference would it make? But if again, difference would it make? But if again, if you can understand mechanism a little if you can understand mechanism a little if you can understand mechanism a little bit, you're in a position to create bit, you're in a position to create bit, you're in a position to create newer and even better protocols. newer and even better protocols. newer and even better protocols. What mental rehearsal appears to do is What mental rehearsal appears to do is What mental rehearsal appears to do is engage the activity of those upper motor engage the activity of those upper motor engage the activity of those upper motor neurons that we talked about way back at neurons that we talked about way back at neurons that we talked about way back at the beginning of the episode. the beginning of the episode. the beginning of the episode. Remember you have upper motor neurons Remember you have upper motor neurons Remember you have upper motor neurons that control deliberate action. You've that control deliberate action. You've that control deliberate action. You've got lower motor neurons that actually got lower motor neurons that actually got lower motor neurons that actually connect to the muscles and move those connect to the muscles and move those connect to the muscles and move those muscles and you have central pattern muscles and you have central pattern muscles and you have central pattern generators. Mental rehearsal, closing generators. Mental rehearsal, closing generators. Mental rehearsal, closing one's eyes typically, and thinking about one's eyes typically, and thinking about one's eyes typically, and thinking about a particular sequence of movement, and a particular sequence of movement, and a particular sequence of movement, and visualizing it in one's {quote} mind visualizing it in one's {quote} mind visualizing it in one's {quote} mind mind's eye, mind's eye, mind's eye, creates activation of the upper motor creates activation of the upper motor creates activation of the upper motor neurons that's very similar if not the neurons that's very similar if not the neurons that's very similar if not the same as the actual movement. And that same as the actual movement. And that same as the actual movement. And that makes sense because the upper motor makes sense because the upper motor makes sense because the upper motor neurons are all about the command for neurons are all about the command for neurons are all about the command for movement. They are not the ones that movement. They are not the ones that movement. They are not the ones that actually execute the movement, okay? actually execute the movement, okay? actually execute the movement, okay? Remember, upper motor neurons are the Remember, upper motor neurons are the Remember, upper motor neurons are the ones that generate the command for ones that generate the command for ones that generate the command for movement, not the actual movement. The movement, not the actual movement. The movement, not the actual movement. The ones that generate the actual movement ones that generate the actual movement ones that generate the actual movement are the lower motor neurons and the are the lower motor neurons and the are the lower motor neurons and the central pattern generators. central pattern generators. central pattern generators. So, visualization is a powerful tool. So, visualization is a powerful tool. So, visualization is a powerful tool. How can you use uh visualization? Well, How can you use uh visualization? Well, How can you use uh visualization? Well, in this study, they had people perform in this study, they had people perform in this study, they had people perform this uh 5 days a week. Uh I believe that this uh 5 days a week. Uh I believe that this uh 5 days a week. Uh I believe that uh it was 15 yes, it was 15 minutes per uh it was 15 yes, it was 15 minutes per uh it was 15 yes, it was 15 minutes per day, 5 days a week for 12 weeks. So, day, 5 days a week for 12 weeks. So, day, 5 days a week for 12 weeks. So, that's a lot of mental rehearsal. that's a lot of mental rehearsal. that's a lot of mental rehearsal. You know, it's not a ton of time each You know, it's not a ton of time each You know, it's not a ton of time each day, 15 minutes per day, but sitting day, 15 minutes per day, but sitting day, 15 minutes per day, but sitting down, closing your eyes, and imagining down, closing your eyes, and imagining down, closing your eyes, and imagining going through a particular skill, going through a particular skill, going through a particular skill, uh, practice, or moving a weight, uh, practice, or moving a weight, uh, practice, or moving a weight, um, maybe it's, uh, playing keys on a um, maybe it's, uh, playing keys on a um, maybe it's, uh, playing keys on a piano, if that's, uh, your thing, or piano, if that's, uh, your thing, or piano, if that's, uh, your thing, or strings on a guitar, for 15 minutes a strings on a guitar, for 15 minutes a strings on a guitar, for 15 minutes a day, 5 days per week, for 12 weeks, is day, 5 days per week, for 12 weeks, is day, 5 days per week, for 12 weeks, is considerable. I think most people, given considerable. I think most people, given considerable. I think most people, given the fact that the actual practice, the fact that the actual practice, the fact that the actual practice, the physical practice, is going to lead to physical practice, is going to lead to physical practice, is going to lead to larger improvements, greater improvements, than improvements, greater improvements, than improvements, greater improvements, than would the mental training, would opt for would the mental training, would opt for would the mental training, would opt for the actual physical training. But, of the actual physical training. But, of the actual physical training. But, of course, if you're on a plane, and you course, if you're on a plane, and you course, if you're on a plane, and you don't have access to your guitar, and don't have access to your guitar, and don't have access to your guitar, and you're certainly not going to be you're certainly not going to be you're certainly not going to be sprinting up and down the aisle, or you sprinting up and down the aisle, or you sprinting up and down the aisle, or you are very serious about your craft, and are very serious about your craft, and are very serious about your craft, and you want to accelerate per- performance you want to accelerate per- performance you want to accelerate per- performance of your craft, or strength increases, or of your craft, or strength increases, or of your craft, or strength increases, or something of that sort, then augmenting, something of that sort, then augmenting, something of that sort, then augmenting, or adding in the visualization training, or adding in the visualization training, or adding in the visualization training, very likely will compound the effects of very likely will compound the effects of very likely will compound the effects of the actual physical training. There are the actual physical training. There are the actual physical training. There are not a lot of studies looking at how not a lot of studies looking at how not a lot of studies looking at how visualization on top of visualization on top of visualization on top of pure physical training pure physical training pure physical training can increase the can increase the can increase the rates of learning and con- consolidation rates of learning and con- consolidation rates of learning and con- consolidation of learning, etc. of learning, etc. of learning, etc. It's actually a hard study to do, It's actually a hard study to do, It's actually a hard study to do, because it's hard to control for, because it's hard to control for, because it's hard to control for, because what would you do in its place? because what would you do in its place? because what would you do in its place? You would probably add actual physical You would probably add actual physical You would probably add actual physical training, and then it that's always training, and then it that's always training, and then it that's always going to lead to greater effects. So, going to lead to greater effects. So, going to lead to greater effects. So, the point is, if you want to use the point is, if you want to use the point is, if you want to use visualization training, great, but visualization training, great, but visualization training, great, but forget the idea that visualization forget the idea that visualization forget the idea that visualization training is as good as the actual training is as good as the actual training is as good as the actual behavior. You hear this all the time. behavior. You hear this all the time. behavior. You hear this all the time. People say, "Do you know that if you People say, "Do you know that if you People say, "Do you know that if you imagine an experience, to your brain, imagine an experience, to your brain, imagine an experience, to your brain, and to your body, it's exactly the same and to your body, it's exactly the same and to your body, it's exactly the same as the actual experience?" Absolutely as the actual experience?" Absolutely as the actual experience?" Absolutely not. This is not the way the nervous not. This is not the way the nervous not. This is not the way the nervous system works. I'm sorry. I don't mean to system works. I'm sorry. I don't mean to system works. I'm sorry. I don't mean to burst anybody's bubble, but, um, your burst anybody's bubble, but, um, your burst anybody's bubble, but, um, your bubble is made of myths, and the fact of bubble is made of myths, and the fact of bubble is made of myths, and the fact of the matter is that the brain, when the matter is that the brain, when the matter is that the brain, when it executes movement, is generating it executes movement, is generating it executes movement, is generating proprioceptive feedback, and that proprioceptive feedback, and that proprioceptive feedback, and that proprioceptive feedback is critically proprioceptive feedback is critically proprioceptive feedback is critically involved in generating our sense of the involved in generating our sense of the involved in generating our sense of the experience and in things like learning. experience and in things like learning. experience and in things like learning. So, I don't say this So, I don't say this So, I don't say this um, because I don't like the idea that because I don't like the idea that because I don't like the idea that visualization couldn't work. In fact, visualization couldn't work. In fact, visualization couldn't work. In fact, visualization does work, but it doesn't visualization does work, but it doesn't visualization does work, but it doesn't work as well. It doesn't create the same work as well. It doesn't create the same work as well. It doesn't create the same milieu, the same chemical milieu, the milieu, the same chemical milieu, the milieu, the same chemical milieu, the same environment as actual physically same environment as actual physically same environment as actual physically engaging in the behavior, the skill, the engaging in the behavior, the skill, the engaging in the behavior, the skill, the resistance training, et cetera. And I'd resistance training, et cetera. And I'd resistance training, et cetera. And I'd be willing to wager that the same is be willing to wager that the same is be willing to wager that the same is true for true for true for experiences of all kinds. You know, PTSD experiences of all kinds. You know, PTSD experiences of all kinds. You know, PTSD is this incredibly unfortunate is this incredibly unfortunate is this incredibly unfortunate circumstance in which there's a replay often of the in which there's a replay often of the in which there's a replay often of the traumatic event that feels very real, traumatic event that feels very real, traumatic event that feels very real, but that's not to say that the replay but that's not to say that the replay but that's not to say that the replay itself is the same as the actual event. itself is the same as the actual event. itself is the same as the actual event. And of course, PTSD needs to be dealt And of course, PTSD needs to be dealt And of course, PTSD needs to be dealt with um, with the utmost level of with um, with the utmost level of with um, with the utmost level of seriousness. It should be treated. seriousness. It should be treated. seriousness. It should be treated. Um, in fact, my lab works on these sorts Um, in fact, my lab works on these sorts Um, in fact, my lab works on these sorts of things, but my point about of things, but my point about of things, but my point about visualization and imagining something visualization and imagining something visualization and imagining something not being the same as the actual not being the same as the actual not being the same as the actual experience is grounded in this idea of experience is grounded in this idea of experience is grounded in this idea of proprioception and the fact that proprioception and the fact that proprioception and the fact that feedback to the cerebellum, the feedback to the cerebellum, the feedback to the cerebellum, the cerebellum talking to other areas of the cerebellum talking to other areas of the cerebellum talking to other areas of the brain, are critically involved in brain, are critically involved in brain, are critically involved in communicating to the rest of our nervous communicating to the rest of our nervous communicating to the rest of our nervous system that not just that we believe system that not just that we believe system that not just that we believe something is happening, but something is something is happening, but something is something is happening, but something is actually happening. And in the case of actually happening. And in the case of actually happening. And in the case of muscle loads, muscles actually be muscle loads, muscles actually be muscle loads, muscles actually be feeling tension, the actual feeling of feeling tension, the actual feeling of feeling tension, the actual feeling of tension in the muscle, the contracting tension in the muscle, the contracting tension in the muscle, the contracting of the muscle under that tension, is of the muscle under that tension, is of the muscle under that tension, is part of the important adaptation part of the important adaptation part of the important adaptation process. In a future episode, we'll talk process. In a future episode, we'll talk process. In a future episode, we'll talk about hypertrophy and how that works at about hypertrophy and how that works at about hypertrophy and how that works at the level of upper motor neurons, lower the level of upper motor neurons, lower the level of upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons, and muscle itself. But motor neurons, and muscle itself. But motor neurons, and muscle itself. But for now, just know that visualization for now, just know that visualization for now, just know that visualization can work. It doesn't work as well as can work. It doesn't work as well as can work. It doesn't work as well as real physical training and practice, but real physical training and practice, but real physical training and practice, but um, these effects of, you know, 35% or um, these effects of, you know, 35% or um, these effects of, you know, 35% or 13.5% increases 13.5% increases 13.5% increases are pretty considerable. They're just are pretty considerable. They're just are pretty considerable. They're just not as great as the 53% increases that not as great as the 53% increases that not as great as the 53% increases that come from actual physical training. For come from actual physical training. For come from actual physical training. For those of you that are interested in some those of you that are interested in some those of you that are interested in some of this skill learning that more relates of this skill learning that more relates of this skill learning that more relates to musical training, but also how to musical training, but also how to musical training, but also how cadence and metronoming and tones, etc. cadence and metronoming and tones, etc. cadence and metronoming and tones, etc. can support physical learning. can support physical learning. can support physical learning. If you're interested in that, you If you're interested in that, you If you're interested in that, you aficionados, they there is a wonderful aficionados, they there is a wonderful aficionados, they there is a wonderful review also published in the journal Neuron. also published in the journal Neuron. also published in the journal Neuron. Again, excellent journal by Herholz and Again, excellent journal by Herholz and Again, excellent journal by Herholz and Zatorre. That's h e r h o l z and Zatorre. That's h e r h o l z and Zatorre. That's h e r h o l z and Zatorre, z a t o r e. Zatorre, z a t o r e. Zatorre, z a t o r e. That really describes in detail how musical really describes in detail how musical really describes in detail how musical training can impact all sorts of training can impact all sorts of training can impact all sorts of different things and how cadence different things and how cadence different things and how cadence training, uh, whether or not with tones or uh, whether or not with tones or uh, whether or not with tones or auditory feedback and things of that auditory feedback and things of that auditory feedback and things of that sort carries over to not just, um, sort carries over to not just, um, sort carries over to not just, um, instrumental music training, but also instrumental music training, but also instrumental music training, but also physical skill learning of various physical skill learning of various physical skill learning of various kinds. So, if you want to do the deep kinds. So, if you want to do the deep kinds. So, if you want to do the deep dive, that would be the place. Uh, you dive, that would be the place. Uh, you dive, that would be the place. Uh, you can find it easily online. It's can find it easily online. It's can find it easily online. It's available as a complete article free of available as a complete article free of available as a complete article free of charge, etc. charge, etc. charge, etc. Many of you are probably asking, "What Many of you are probably asking, "What Many of you are probably asking, "What can I take in order to accelerate skill can I take in order to accelerate skill can I take in order to accelerate skill learning?" Well, the conditions are going to vary, Well, the conditions are going to vary, Well, the conditions are going to vary, but motivation is key. You have to show but motivation is key. You have to show but motivation is key. You have to show up to the training session motivated up to the training session motivated up to the training session motivated enough to focus your attention to focus your attention to focus your attention and to perform a lot of repetitions in and to perform a lot of repetitions in and to perform a lot of repetitions in the training sequence. the training sequence. the training sequence. That's just a prerequisite, all right? That's just a prerequisite, all right? That's just a prerequisite, all right? There's no pill that's going to allow There's no pill that's going to allow There's no pill that's going to allow you to do fewer repetitions and extract you to do fewer repetitions and extract you to do fewer repetitions and extract more learning out of fewer repetitions. more learning out of fewer repetitions. more learning out of fewer repetitions. It's actually more a question of what It's actually more a question of what It's actually more a question of what are the conditions that you can create are the conditions that you can create are the conditions that you can create for yourself for yourself for yourself such that you can generate more such that you can generate more such that you can generate more repetitions per unit time. I think repetitions per unit time. I think repetitions per unit time. I think that's the right way to think about it. that's the right way to think about it. that's the right way to think about it. What what are the conditions that you What what are the conditions that you What what are the conditions that you can create for yourself in your mind and can create for yourself in your mind and can create for yourself in your mind and in your body that are going to allow you in your body that are going to allow you in your body that are going to allow you to focus. to focus. to focus. And I've talked about focus and And I've talked about focus and And I've talked about focus and plasticity and motivation in previous plasticity and motivation in previous plasticity and motivation in previous episodes. Please see those episodes if episodes. Please see those episodes if episodes. Please see those episodes if you have questions about that. I detail you have questions about that. I detail you have questions about that. I detail a lot of tools and the underlying a lot of tools and the underlying a lot of tools and the underlying science. So, for some people it might be science. So, for some people it might be science. So, for some people it might be drinking a cup or two of coffee and drinking a cup or two of coffee and drinking a cup or two of coffee and getting hydrated before the training getting hydrated before the training getting hydrated before the training session. For some of you it might be session. For some of you it might be session. For some of you it might be avoiding coffee because it makes you too avoiding coffee because it makes you too avoiding coffee because it makes you too jittery and your attention jumps all jittery and your attention jumps all jittery and your attention jumps all over the place. It's going to vary over the place. It's going to vary over the place. It's going to vary tremendously. There's no real there is tremendously. There's no real there is tremendously. There's no real there is no magic pill that's going to allow you no magic pill that's going to allow you no magic pill that's going to allow you to get more out of less. That's just not to get more out of less. That's just not to get more out of less. That's just not going to happen. It's simply not going to happen. It's simply not going to happen. It's simply not going to happen. You're not going to get more to happen. You're not going to get more to happen. You're not going to get more learning out of fewer repetitions or learning out of fewer repetitions or learning out of fewer repetitions or less time. However, there are a few less time. However, there are a few less time. However, there are a few compounds that I think worth are worth mentioning that I think worth are worth mentioning that I think worth are worth mentioning because of their ability to improve the because of their ability to improve the because of their ability to improve the actual physical performance, the actual physical performance, the actual physical performance, the actual execution of certain types of movements. execution of certain types of movements. execution of certain types of movements. And some of these have also been shown And some of these have also been shown And some of these have also been shown to improve cognitive function, to improve cognitive function, to improve cognitive function, especially in older populations. So, I'd especially in older populations. So, I'd especially in older populations. So, I'd be remiss if I didn't at least mention be remiss if I didn't at least mention be remiss if I didn't at least mention them. I'm only going to mention one them. I'm only going to mention one them. I'm only going to mention one today, in fact. today, in fact. today, in fact. The one that's particularly interesting The one that's particularly interesting The one that's particularly interesting and for which there really are a lot of and for which there really are a lot of and for which there really are a lot of data is alpha GPC. data is alpha GPC. data is alpha GPC. And I'm going to attempt to uh And I'm going to attempt to uh And I'm going to attempt to uh pronounce what alpha GPC actually is. pronounce what alpha GPC actually is. pronounce what alpha GPC actually is. It's alpha glyceryl phospho-choline, It's alpha glyceryl phospho-choline, It's alpha glyceryl phospho-choline, right? Alpha GPC. Alpha glyceryl right? Alpha GPC. Alpha glyceryl right? Alpha GPC. Alpha glyceryl phospho-choline. See, if I keep doing it phospho-choline. See, if I keep doing it phospho-choline. See, if I keep doing it over and over, repetitions. Alpha over and over, repetitions. Alpha over and over, repetitions. Alpha glyceryl phospho-choline. Uh there, I glyceryl phospho-choline. Uh there, I glyceryl phospho-choline. Uh there, I made an error. Okay, so made an error. Okay, so made an error. Okay, so the point is that alpha GPC, which is at the point is that alpha GPC, which is at the point is that alpha GPC, which is at least in the United States is sold over least in the United States is sold over least in the United States is sold over the counter, typically is taken in the counter, typically is taken in the counter, typically is taken in dosages of about 300 to 600 mg. dosages of about 300 to 600 mg. dosages of about 300 to 600 mg. Um that's a single dose or uh have been Um that's a single dose or uh have been Um that's a single dose or uh have been shown to do a number of things that for shown to do a number of things that for shown to do a number of things that for some of you might be beneficial. Um one some of you might be beneficial. Um one some of you might be beneficial. Um one is to enhance power output. So, if is to enhance power output. So, if is to enhance power output. So, if you're engaging in something like shot you're engaging in something like shot you're engaging in something like shot put throwing or resistance training or put throwing or resistance training or put throwing or resistance training or sprinting or something where you have to sprinting or something where you have to sprinting or something where you have to generate a lot of power, maybe you're generate a lot of power, maybe you're generate a lot of power, maybe you're doing rock climbing but you're working doing rock climbing but you're working doing rock climbing but you're working on a particular aspect of your rock on a particular aspect of your rock on a particular aspect of your rock climbing that involves generating a lot climbing that involves generating a lot climbing that involves generating a lot of force, a lot of power, well then of force, a lot of power, well then of force, a lot of power, well then in theory, Alpha GPC could be beneficial in theory, Alpha GPC could be beneficial in theory, Alpha GPC could be beneficial to you. For the cognitive effects, the to you. For the cognitive effects, the to you. For the cognitive effects, the dosages are much higher, dosages are much higher, dosages are much higher, uh up to 1,200 mg daily divided into uh up to 1,200 mg daily divided into uh up to 1,200 mg daily divided into three doses of 400 mg is what the three doses of 400 mg is what the three doses of 400 mg is what the studies that I was able to find show or studies that I was able to find show or studies that I was able to find show or used. The effects on cognitive decline used. The effects on cognitive decline used. The effects on cognitive decline are described as notable. Notable are described as notable. Notable are described as notable. Notable meaning several studies showed a meaning several studies showed a meaning several studies showed a significant but modest effect on significant but modest effect on significant but modest effect on in offsetting cognitive decline, in offsetting cognitive decline, in offsetting cognitive decline, in particular in older populations and some particular in older populations and some particular in older populations and some populations even with some uh populations even with some uh populations even with some uh reported neurodegeneration. reported neurodegeneration. reported neurodegeneration. Power output was notable. Power output was notable. Power output was notable. How notable? What does that mean How notable? What does that mean How notable? What does that mean notable? Um a study noted a 14% increase in power a study noted a 14% increase in power a study noted a 14% increase in power output. Um output. Um output. Um that's pretty substantial, you know, 14% that's pretty substantial, you know, 14% that's pretty substantial, you know, 14% if you think about it, but it wasn't if you think about it, but it wasn't if you think about it, but it wasn't like a doubling or something of that like a doubling or something of that like a doubling or something of that sort. Believe it or not, the symptoms of sort. Believe it or not, the symptoms of sort. Believe it or not, the symptoms of Alzheimer's have been shown Alzheimer's have been shown Alzheimer's have been shown at least among the nutraceuticals, at least among the nutraceuticals, at least among the nutraceuticals, uh of which Alpha GPC is, to uh of which Alpha GPC is, to uh of which Alpha GPC is, to significantly improve cognition in significantly improve cognition in significantly improve cognition in people with Alzheimer's. Now, this people with Alzheimer's. Now, this people with Alzheimer's. Now, this episode isn't about cognitive decline episode isn't about cognitive decline episode isn't about cognitive decline and longevity, we will talk about that, and longevity, we will talk about that, and longevity, we will talk about that, but this is a uh but this is a uh but this is a uh so-called uh another effect of Alpha so-called uh another effect of Alpha so-called uh another effect of Alpha GPC. Fat oxidation is increased by Alpha GPC. Fat oxidation is increased by Alpha GPC. Fat oxidation is increased by Alpha GPC. Growth hormone release is GPC. Growth hormone release is GPC. Growth hormone release is promoted by Alpha GPC, although to a promoted by Alpha GPC, although to a promoted by Alpha GPC, although to a small degree. So, as you can see, small degree. So, as you can see, small degree. So, as you can see, things like Alpha GPC, in particular things like Alpha GPC, in particular things like Alpha GPC, in particular when they are combined with low levels when they are combined with low levels when they are combined with low levels of caffeine, can have these effects of caffeine, can have these effects of caffeine, can have these effects of improving power output, can improve improving power output, can improve improving power output, can improve growth hormone release, can improve fat growth hormone release, can improve fat growth hormone release, can improve fat oxidation. All these things, in theory, oxidation. All these things, in theory, oxidation. All these things, in theory, can support skill learning. But, what can support skill learning. But, what can support skill learning. But, what they're really doing is they're really doing is they're really doing is they're adjusting the foundation upon which you adjusting the foundation upon which you adjusting the foundation upon which you are going to execute these many, many are going to execute these many, many are going to execute these many, many repetitions, okay? The same thing would repetitions, okay? The same thing would repetitions, okay? The same thing would be said for caffeine itself. If that's be said for caffeine itself. If that's be said for caffeine itself. If that's something that motivates you and gets something that motivates you and gets something that motivates you and gets you out of a chair to actually do the you out of a chair to actually do the you out of a chair to actually do the physical training, then that's something physical training, then that's something physical training, then that's something that can perhaps improve or enhance the that can perhaps improve or enhance the that can perhaps improve or enhance the rate of skill learning and how well you rate of skill learning and how well you rate of skill learning and how well you retain those skills. Now, on a previous retain those skills. Now, on a previous retain those skills. Now, on a previous episode I talked about, and this was the episode I talked about, and this was the episode I talked about, and this was the episode on epinephrine, on adrenaline, I talked epinephrine, on adrenaline, I talked epinephrine, on adrenaline, I talked about how for mental, for cognitive about how for mental, for cognitive about how for mental, for cognitive learning, it makes sense to spike learning, it makes sense to spike learning, it makes sense to spike epinephrine, to bump epinephrine levels epinephrine, to bump epinephrine levels epinephrine, to bump epinephrine levels up, adrenaline levels up after cognitive up, adrenaline levels up after cognitive up, adrenaline levels up after cognitive learning. For physical learning, it learning. For physical learning, it learning. For physical learning, it appears to be the opposite. That if you appears to be the opposite. That if you appears to be the opposite. That if you are if caffeine is in your practice or are if caffeine is in your practice or are if caffeine is in your practice or if you decide to try Alpha-GPC that you if you decide to try Alpha-GPC that you if you decide to try Alpha-GPC that you would want to do that before the would want to do that before the would want to do that before the training, take it before the training, take it before the training, take it before the training, use it its effect should extend into the use it its effect should extend into the use it its effect should extend into the training, presumably throughout, and training, presumably throughout, and training, presumably throughout, and then afterward, if you're thinking about then afterward, if you're thinking about then afterward, if you're thinking about following some of the protocols that we following some of the protocols that we following some of the protocols that we discussed today, that you would use discussed today, that you would use discussed today, that you would use some sort of idle time where the brain some sort of idle time where the brain some sort of idle time where the brain can replay these motor sequences in can replay these motor sequences in can replay these motor sequences in reverse, and then of course you want to reverse, and then of course you want to reverse, and then of course you want to do things to optimize your sleep. Um a do things to optimize your sleep. Um a do things to optimize your sleep. Um a lot of the questions I get are about how lot of the questions I get are about how lot of the questions I get are about how different protocols and things that I different protocols and things that I different protocols and things that I describe start to collide with one describe start to collide with one describe start to collide with one another. So, let's say for instance you another. So, let's say for instance you another. So, let's say for instance you go to bed at 10:30 and you're going to go to bed at 10:30 and you're going to go to bed at 10:30 and you're going to do your do your do your uh skill training at 9:30, well, taking uh skill training at 9:30, well, taking uh skill training at 9:30, well, taking a lot of caffeine then is not going to a lot of caffeine then is not going to a lot of caffeine then is not going to be a good idea cuz it's going to be a good idea cuz it's going to be a good idea cuz it's going to compromise your sleep. So, I'm not um compromise your sleep. So, I'm not um compromise your sleep. So, I'm not um here to design the perfect schedule for here to design the perfect schedule for here to design the perfect schedule for you because everyone's situation is you because everyone's situation is you because everyone's situation is varied. So, the things to optimize are varied. So, the things to optimize are varied. So, the things to optimize are repetitions, failures, more repetitions, more failures, more repetitions, more failures, more repetitions, more failures, at the offset of training having some at the offset of training having some at the offset of training having some idle time that could be straight into idle time that could be straight into idle time that could be straight into sleep or it could be simply letting the sleep or it could be simply letting the sleep or it could be simply letting the brain just go idle for 5 to 10 minutes, brain just go idle for 5 to 10 minutes, brain just go idle for 5 to 10 minutes, meaning not focusing on anything, not meaning not focusing on anything, not meaning not focusing on anything, not scrolling social media, not emailing, scrolling social media, not emailing, scrolling social media, not emailing, not ideally not even talking to not ideally not even talking to not ideally not even talking to somebody, just lying down or sitting somebody, just lying down or sitting somebody, just lying down or sitting quietly with your eyes closed, letting quietly with your eyes closed, letting quietly with your eyes closed, letting those motor sequences replay. Then we those motor sequences replay. Then we those motor sequences replay. Then we talked about how one can come back for talked about how one can come back for talked about how one can come back for additional training sessions, use things additional training sessions, use things additional training sessions, use things like metronoming where you're queuing like metronoming where you're queuing like metronoming where you're queuing your attention to some external cue, your attention to some external cue, your attention to some external cue, some stimulus, in this case an auditory some stimulus, in this case an auditory some stimulus, in this case an auditory stimulus most likely, and trying to stimulus most likely, and trying to stimulus most likely, and trying to generate more repetitions per unit time. generate more repetitions per unit time. generate more repetitions per unit time. So, again, it's repetitions and errors. So, again, it's repetitions and errors. So, again, it's repetitions and errors. That's key. That's key. That's key. And then, we also talked about some And then, we also talked about some And then, we also talked about some things that you can do involving things that you can do involving things that you can do involving cerebellar neurophysiology to extend cerebellar neurophysiology to extend cerebellar neurophysiology to extend range of motion if that's what's range of motion if that's what's range of motion if that's what's limiting for you, or to use limiting for you, or to use limiting for you, or to use visualization to augment the practice, visualization to augment the practice, visualization to augment the practice, or let's say your particular skill or let's say your particular skill or let's say your particular skill involves nice weather and it's raining involves nice weather and it's raining involves nice weather and it's raining or snowing outside and you can't get or snowing outside and you can't get or snowing outside and you can't get outside, a thunderstorm, then that's outside, a thunderstorm, then that's outside, a thunderstorm, then that's where visualization training might be a where visualization training might be a where visualization training might be a good replacement under those conditions. good replacement under those conditions. good replacement under those conditions. Or, in most cases, it's going to be the Or, in most cases, it's going to be the Or, in most cases, it's going to be the kind of thing that you're going to want kind of thing that you're going to want kind of thing that you're going to want to do in addition to the actual physical to do in addition to the actual physical to do in addition to the actual physical skill or strength training session done, skill or strength training session done, skill or strength training session done, at least in the study that we described, at least in the study that we described, at least in the study that we described, for 15 minutes a day, five days a week, for 15 minutes a day, five days a week, for 15 minutes a day, five days a week, over a period of 10 to 12 weeks or so. over a period of 10 to 12 weeks or so. over a period of 10 to 12 weeks or so. So, hopefully that makes it clear. So, hopefully that makes it clear. So, hopefully that makes it clear. Today, we've covered a lot of mechanism. Today, we've covered a lot of mechanism. Today, we've covered a lot of mechanism. We talked so much about the different We talked so much about the different We talked so much about the different motor pathways, central pattern motor pathways, central pattern motor pathways, central pattern generators. So, you now are armed with a generators. So, you now are armed with a generators. So, you now are armed with a lot of information about how you lot of information about how you lot of information about how you generate movement, and I like to think generate movement, and I like to think generate movement, and I like to think that you're also armed with a lot of that you're also armed with a lot of that you're also armed with a lot of information about how to design information about how to design information about how to design protocols that are optimized for you, or protocols that are optimized for you, or protocols that are optimized for you, or if you're a coach, for your if you're a coach, for your if you're a coach, for your uh for your trainees in order to optimize for your trainees in order to optimize for your trainees in order to optimize their learning of skills their learning of skills their learning of skills of various kinds. Today, we focused of various kinds. Today, we focused of various kinds. Today, we focused almost entirely on motor skills, things almost entirely on motor skills, things almost entirely on motor skills, things like musical skills or physical skills. like musical skills or physical skills. like musical skills or physical skills. These have some overlap. They're These have some overlap. They're These have some overlap. They're partially overlapping with partially overlapping with partially overlapping with neuroplasticity for learning things like neuroplasticity for learning things like neuroplasticity for learning things like languages, or math, or engineering, or languages, or math, or engineering, or languages, or math, or engineering, or neuroscience for that matter. neuroscience for that matter. neuroscience for that matter. Before we depart, I just want to make Before we depart, I just want to make Before we depart, I just want to make sure that I return to a concept which is sure that I return to a concept which is sure that I return to a concept which is the ultradian cycle. Ultradian cycles the ultradian cycle. Ultradian cycles the ultradian cycle. Ultradian cycles are these 90-minute cycles that we go are these 90-minute cycles that we go are these 90-minute cycles that we go through throughout sleep and wakefulness through throughout sleep and wakefulness through throughout sleep and wakefulness that are optimal for learning and that are optimal for learning and that are optimal for learning and attention. In the waking state, there they are the In the waking state, there they are the In the waking state, there they are the stages of in which of sleep in which we stages of in which of sleep in which we stages of in which of sleep in which we have either predominantly slow wave have either predominantly slow wave have either predominantly slow wave sleep or REM sleep. sleep or REM sleep. sleep or REM sleep. Some of you who have been following this Some of you who have been following this Some of you who have been following this podcast for a while might be asking, podcast for a while might be asking, podcast for a while might be asking, well, should a physical practice be 90 well, should a physical practice be 90 well, should a physical practice be 90 minutes? That's going to depend because with That's going to depend because with That's going to depend because with physical practices often times, for physical practices often times, for physical practices often times, for instance, with strength training, that instance, with strength training, that instance, with strength training, that might be too long. You're not going to might be too long. You're not going to might be too long. You're not going to be able to generate enough force output be able to generate enough force output be able to generate enough force output for it to be worthwhile. For golfing, I for it to be worthwhile. For golfing, I for it to be worthwhile. For golfing, I don't know, I've never played golf, don't know, I've never played golf, don't know, I've never played golf, although my friends that play golf, they although my friends that play golf, they although my friends that play golf, they disappear on the golf course for many disappear on the golf course for many disappear on the golf course for many hours. So, I know there's a lot of hours. So, I know there's a lot of hours. So, I know there's a lot of walking and driving and you know, walking and driving and you know, walking and driving and you know, other stuff. I even hear that somebody other stuff. I even hear that somebody other stuff. I even hear that somebody carries your stuff around for you. carries your stuff around for you. carries your stuff around for you. Um sometimes, not always, but you know, it sometimes, not always, but you know, it sometimes, not always, but you know, it it's going to differ. You know, in a it's going to differ. You know, in a it's going to differ. You know, in a 4-hour golf game, you're probably not 4-hour golf game, you're probably not 4-hour golf game, you're probably not swinging the golf club for 4 hours. So, swinging the golf club for 4 hours. So, swinging the golf club for 4 hours. So, it's going to depend. I would say that it's going to depend. I would say that it's going to depend. I would say that the ultradian cycle is not necessarily a the ultradian cycle is not necessarily a the ultradian cycle is not necessarily a good constraint for skill learning in good constraint for skill learning in good constraint for skill learning in most cases. And I should say that for most cases. And I should say that for most cases. And I should say that for those of you that are short on time or those of you that are short on time or those of you that are short on time or have limited amounts of time, 10 minutes have limited amounts of time, 10 minutes have limited amounts of time, 10 minutes of maximum repetitions, maximum focus of maximum repetitions, maximum focus of maximum repetitions, maximum focus skill learning work is going to be very skill learning work is going to be very skill learning work is going to be very beneficial. Whereas 2 hours of kind of haphazard, Whereas 2 hours of kind of haphazard, Whereas 2 hours of kind of haphazard, not really focused work not really focused work not really focused work or where you're not generating very many or where you're not generating very many or where you're not generating very many repetitions cuz you're doing a few repetitions cuz you're doing a few repetitions cuz you're doing a few repetitions and you're texting on your repetitions and you're texting on your repetitions and you're texting on your phone or paying attention to something phone or paying attention to something phone or paying attention to something else, that's not going to be beneficial. else, that's not going to be beneficial. else, that's not going to be beneficial. It's really about the density of It's really about the density of It's really about the density of training inside of a session. So, I training inside of a session. So, I training inside of a session. So, I think you should let the think you should let the think you should let the work toward maximal or near maximal work toward maximal or near maximal work toward maximal or near maximal density of repetitions and failures, density of repetitions and failures, density of repetitions and failures, provided they're failures you can provided they're failures you can provided they're failures you can perform safely, perform safely, perform safely, in order to accelerate skill learning. in order to accelerate skill learning. in order to accelerate skill learning. And don't let some arbitrary or in this And don't let some arbitrary or in this And don't let some arbitrary or in this case the ultradian constraint prevent case the ultradian constraint prevent case the ultradian constraint prevent you from engaging in that practice. In you from engaging in that practice. In you from engaging in that practice. In other words, get the work in, get as other words, get the work in, get as other words, get the work in, get as much work done as you can per unit time, much work done as you can per unit time, much work done as you can per unit time, and based on the science, based on and based on the science, based on and based on the science, based on things that I've seen, based on things that I've seen, based on things that I've seen, based on things that now involved in with various that now involved in with various that now involved in with various communities, you will see the skill communities, you will see the skill communities, you will see the skill improve vastly at various stages. improve vastly at various stages. improve vastly at various stages. Sometimes it's a little bit stutter Sometimes it's a little bit stutter Sometimes it's a little bit stutter start. It's not always a linear start. It's not always a linear start. It's not always a linear improvement, but you will see incredible improvement, but you will see incredible improvement, but you will see incredible improvement in skill. If you're enjoying improvement in skill. If you're enjoying improvement in skill. If you're enjoying this podcast and you're finding the this podcast and you're finding the this podcast and you're finding the information interesting and/or of use to information interesting and/or of use to information interesting and/or of use to you, please subscribe on YouTube. That really please subscribe on YouTube. That really please subscribe on YouTube. That really helps us. As well, please subscribe and helps us. As well, please subscribe and helps us. As well, please subscribe and download the episodes on Apple and download the episodes on Apple and download the episodes on Apple and Spotify. On Apple, you also have the opportunity On Apple, you also have the opportunity On Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review if to leave us up to a five-star review if to leave us up to a five-star review if you think we deserve that. you think we deserve that. you think we deserve that. And on YouTube, please hit the thumbs up And on YouTube, please hit the thumbs up And on YouTube, please hit the thumbs up button if you like the episode. And button if you like the episode. And button if you like the episode. And please give us feedback. Please share please give us feedback. Please share please give us feedback. Please share your feedback in the comment section. your feedback in the comment section. your feedback in the comment section. That's a place to tell us how we're That's a place to tell us how we're That's a place to tell us how we're doing, but also to ask us questions. We doing, but also to ask us questions. We doing, but also to ask us questions. We read all the comments. It takes us some read all the comments. It takes us some read all the comments. It takes us some time to work through them, but we read time to work through them, but we read time to work through them, but we read all of them and we use your comments and all of them and we use your comments and all of them and we use your comments and your feedback to sculpt the content and your feedback to sculpt the content and your feedback to sculpt the content and the direction of future episodes. the direction of future episodes. the direction of future episodes. As well, please check out our sponsors. As well, please check out our sponsors. As well, please check out our sponsors. The sponsors that we mentioned at the The sponsors that we mentioned at the The sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of each podcast episode are beginning of each podcast episode are beginning of each podcast episode are really important in order to support our really important in order to support our really important in order to support our production And as well, we have a Patreon. It's And as well, we have a Patreon. It's And as well, we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There you can support us at any level There you can support us at any level There you can support us at any level that you like. that you like. that you like. In previous episodes and in this In previous episodes and in this In previous episodes and in this episode, I mentioned some supplements. episode, I mentioned some supplements. episode, I mentioned some supplements. Supplements certainly have their place Supplements certainly have their place Supplements certainly have their place for various things. They aren't for various things. They aren't for various things. They aren't necessary, but many people, including necessary, but many people, including necessary, but many people, including myself, derive benefit from supplements myself, derive benefit from supplements myself, derive benefit from supplements for things like improving sleep and for things like improving sleep and for things like improving sleep and immune system function and learning and immune system function and learning and immune system function and learning and so forth. If you're interested in seeing so forth. If you're interested in seeing so forth. If you're interested in seeing the supplements that I take, you can go the supplements that I take, you can go the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com to thorne.com to thorne.com /u, that's the letter u, /huberman, and /u, that's the letter u, /huberman, and /u, that's the letter u, /huberman, and you can see the supplements that I take. you can see the supplements that I take. you can see the supplements that I take. If you want to try any of those If you want to try any of those If you want to try any of those supplements, you can get 20% off simply supplements, you can get 20% off simply supplements, you can get 20% off simply by accessing the Thorne web page through by accessing the Thorne web page through by accessing the Thorne web page through that portal, as well as 20% off any of that portal, as well as 20% off any of that portal, as well as 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. the other supplements that Thorne makes. the other supplements that Thorne makes. The reason we've partnered with Thorne The reason we've partnered with Thorne The reason we've partnered with Thorne is because Thorne has the very highest is because Thorne has the very highest is because Thorne has the very highest levels of stringency in terms of the levels of stringency in terms of the levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the supplements and the quality of the supplements and the quality of the supplements and the accuracy about the amounts of each accuracy about the amounts of each accuracy about the amounts of each supplement that are in the bottle. One supplement that are in the bottle. One supplement that are in the bottle. One of the major problems in the supplement of the major problems in the supplement of the major problems in the supplement industry is that when supplements get industry is that when supplements get industry is that when supplements get tested, often it's the case tested, often it's the case tested, often it's the case that the amount of a given ingredient is that the amount of a given ingredient is that the amount of a given ingredient is far lower or far greater than far lower or far greater than far lower or far greater than what's reported on the bottle. That's what's reported on the bottle. That's what's reported on the bottle. That's not the case for Thorne. Thorne has not the case for Thorne. Thorne has not the case for Thorne. Thorne has very high levels of stringency. They very high levels of stringency. They very high levels of stringency. They partnered with the Mayo Clinic and all partnered with the Mayo Clinic and all partnered with the Mayo Clinic and all the major sports teams and that's why the major sports teams and that's why the major sports teams and that's why we've partnered with them as well. So, we've partnered with them as well. So, we've partnered with them as well. So, if you want to check those out, again, if you want to check those out, again, if you want to check those out, again, it's Thorne, t h o r n e / the letter u it's Thorne, t h o r n e / the letter u it's Thorne, t h o r n e / the letter u / Huberman to get 20% off any of the / Huberman to get 20% off any of the / Huberman to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. supplements that Thorne makes. supplements that Thorne makes. And last but not least, I want to thank And last but not least, I want to thank And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention. I very you for your time and attention. I very you for your time and attention. I very much appreciate your interest in much appreciate your interest in much appreciate your interest in neuroscience and in physiology and in neuroscience and in physiology and in neuroscience and in physiology and in tools that are informed by neuroscience tools that are informed by neuroscience tools that are informed by neuroscience and physiology. and physiology. and physiology. Today, we talked all about skill Today, we talked all about skill Today, we talked all about skill learning. I hope that you'll consider learning. I hope that you'll consider learning. I hope that you'll consider the information. You might even decide the information. You might even decide the information. You might even decide to try some of these tools. If you do, to try some of these tools. If you do, to try some of these tools. If you do, please let us know your results with please let us know your results with please let us know your results with them. Give us feedback in the comments. them. Give us feedback in the comments. them. Give us feedback in the comments. And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your interest in science.