Do you ever recommend people memorize Do you ever recommend people memorize Do you ever recommend people memorize speeches? Never. The reason memorizing speeches? Never. The reason memorizing speeches? Never. The reason memorizing is so bad is it burdens your cognitive is so bad is it burdens your cognitive is so bad is it burdens your cognitive load. You've created the right way to load. You've created the right way to load. You've created the right way to say it and you're constantly comparing say it and you're constantly comparing say it and you're constantly comparing what you wanted to say to what you're what you wanted to say to what you're what you wanted to say to what you're actually saying. So, having a road map, actually saying. So, having a road map, actually saying. So, having a road map, having a structure, having some having a structure, having some having a structure, having some familiarity with some ideas are familiarity with some ideas are familiarity with some ideas are important. If there's certain words that important. If there's certain words that important. If there's certain words that you really want to get across or certain you really want to get across or certain you really want to get across or certain data, have a note card, read it. I'd data, have a note card, read it. I'd data, have a note card, read it. I'd rather you do that than put the rather you do that than put the rather you do that than put the cognitive burden on yourself of cognitive burden on yourself of cognitive burden on yourself of memorizing. Several people asked about memorizing. Several people asked about memorizing. Several people asked about how best to communicate with people who how best to communicate with people who how best to communicate with people who are not very good at communicating. I are not very good at communicating. I are not very good at communicating. I would encourage people to lead with would encourage people to lead with would encourage people to lead with questions. Draw the other person out. questions. Draw the other person out. questions. Draw the other person out. Often, if you can get them talking about Often, if you can get them talking about Often, if you can get them talking about something that's important to them or something that's important to them or something that's important to them or connected to what you want, then you can connected to what you want, then you can connected to what you want, then you can engage in that conversation. So, again, engage in that conversation. So, again, engage in that conversation. So, again, it's pre-work. It's thinking about it's pre-work. It's thinking about it's pre-work. It's thinking about what's of value. Lead with questions and what's of value. Lead with questions and what's of value. Lead with questions and then as soon as the person responds, then as soon as the person responds, then as soon as the person responds, give them space to tell more. My give them space to tell more. My give them space to tell more. My mother-in-law had a black belt in small mother-in-law had a black belt in small mother-in-law had a black belt in small talk. She was amazing. She was from the talk. She was amazing. She was from the talk. She was amazing. She was from the Midwest. Every time she'd fly out to Midwest. Every time she'd fly out to Midwest. Every time she'd fly out to visit, she'd come off the plane with visit, she'd come off the plane with visit, she'd come off the plane with three new best friends. And her secret, three new best friends. And her secret, three new best friends. And her secret, and you mentioned this earlier, were and you mentioned this earlier, were and you mentioned this earlier, were three words, tell me more. Once somebody three words, tell me more. Once somebody three words, tell me more. Once somebody answers a question, give them that space answers a question, give them that space answers a question, give them that space to say more and that really draws them to say more and that really draws them to say more and that really draws them out and gives you some ideas of what's out and gives you some ideas of what's out and gives you some ideas of what's important to them so you can latch on important to them so you can latch on important to them so you can latch on and talk about it more. So, lead with and talk about it more. So, lead with and talk about it more. So, lead with questions, give space for more questions, give space for more questions, give space for more communication. That's how you draw communication. That's how you draw communication. That's how you draw somebody who might be reticent or not somebody who might be reticent or not somebody who might be reticent or not comfortable speaking. comfortable speaking. comfortable speaking. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools [music] for everyday science-based tools [music] for everyday science-based tools [music] for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Matt Abrahams from Stanford today is Matt Abrahams from Stanford today is Matt Abrahams from Stanford Graduate School of Business. Matt is an Graduate School of Business. Matt is an Graduate School of Business. Matt is an expert in speaking and communication on expert in speaking and communication on expert in speaking and communication on stage, online, in person, and in all stage, online, in person, and in all stage, online, in person, and in all circumstances. During today's episode, circumstances. During today's episode, circumstances. During today's episode, we discuss how to become a better we discuss how to become a better we discuss how to become a better communicator. Everything from protocols communicator. Everything from protocols communicator. Everything from protocols that work to eliminate ums, how to deal that work to eliminate ums, how to deal that work to eliminate ums, how to deal with on stage fright, how to practice with on stage fright, how to practice with on stage fright, how to practice speaking more clearly, and equally speaking more clearly, and equally speaking more clearly, and equally important, how to remember important important, how to remember important important, how to remember important facts and synthesize information that facts and synthesize information that facts and synthesize information that you learn from others. you learn from others. you learn from others. Humans are extremely visual and we are Humans are extremely visual and we are Humans are extremely visual and we are extremely verbal and what we hear sticks extremely verbal and what we hear sticks extremely verbal and what we hear sticks with us and how things are said matters with us and how things are said matters with us and how things are said matters tremendously, too. We all register tremendously, too. We all register tremendously, too. We all register people's levels of confidence or anxiety people's levels of confidence or anxiety people's levels of confidence or anxiety when they speak and that determines what when they speak and that determines what when they speak and that determines what we remember and what we forget and also we remember and what we forget and also we remember and what we forget and also what we remember and forget about them. what we remember and forget about them. what we remember and forget about them. During today's episode, Matt explains During today's episode, Matt explains During today's episode, Matt explains tools that have been proven to work that tools that have been proven to work that tools that have been proven to work that you can practice alone or that you can you can practice alone or that you can you can practice alone or that you can use in real time to improve your use in real time to improve your use in real time to improve your communication skills. He also explains communication skills. He also explains communication skills. He also explains what it really means to communicate what it really means to communicate what it really means to communicate authentically. We hear about authentically. We hear about authentically. We hear about authenticity all the time, but Matt authenticity all the time, but Matt authenticity all the time, but Matt makes clear exactly what that is, how to makes clear exactly what that is, how to makes clear exactly what that is, how to tap into it, and how to deliver tap into it, and how to deliver tap into it, and how to deliver information in your own unique voice. He information in your own unique voice. He information in your own unique voice. He also offers great tools for when things also offers great tools for when things also offers great tools for when things go wrong and how to recover from those go wrong and how to recover from those go wrong and how to recover from those situations with grace. Matt Abrahams is situations with grace. Matt Abrahams is situations with grace. Matt Abrahams is considered one of the foremost experts considered one of the foremost experts considered one of the foremost experts in communication and I'm sure that in communication and I'm sure that in communication and I'm sure that everyone, women, men, young and old will everyone, women, men, young and old will everyone, women, men, young and old will benefit from what he teaches today. benefit from what he teaches today. benefit from what he teaches today. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Matt And now for my discussion with Matt And now for my discussion with Matt Abrahams. Matt Abrahams, welcome. Abrahams. Matt Abrahams, welcome. Abrahams. Matt Abrahams, welcome. Thanks, Andrew. I'm thrilled to be here. Thanks, Andrew. I'm thrilled to be here. Thanks, Andrew. I'm thrilled to be here. Teach us how to communicate better. But Teach us how to communicate better. But Teach us how to communicate better. But please do it in the context of not just please do it in the context of not just please do it in the context of not just public speaking, but one-on-one public speaking, but one-on-one public speaking, but one-on-one interactions, spontaneous interactions, spontaneous interactions, spontaneous interactions, as well as planned interactions. as well as planned interactions. as well as planned interactions. Basically, I'm asking you to solve a Basically, I'm asking you to solve a Basically, I'm asking you to solve a number of problems that people have, but number of problems that people have, but number of problems that people have, but I think we often hear that one of the I think we often hear that one of the I think we often hear that one of the major fears people have is public major fears people have is public major fears people have is public speaking. Yeah. But I think it's highly speaking. Yeah. But I think it's highly speaking. Yeah. But I think it's highly contextual. Like when we think public contextual. Like when we think public contextual. Like when we think public speaking, we think like being forced out speaking, we think like being forced out speaking, we think like being forced out on a stage to talk about a topic we on a stage to talk about a topic we on a stage to talk about a topic we don't know or something, but what do you don't know or something, but what do you don't know or something, but what do you think that fear of public speaking is think that fear of public speaking is think that fear of public speaking is really about? Is it the fear of being really about? Is it the fear of being really about? Is it the fear of being ashamed, of saying something stupid, of ashamed, of saying something stupid, of ashamed, of saying something stupid, of like dissolving into a puddle of our own like dissolving into a puddle of our own like dissolving into a puddle of our own tears on stage? What is it? Because some tears on stage? What is it? Because some tears on stage? What is it? Because some sense it's kind of illogical. sense it's kind of illogical. sense it's kind of illogical. Well, those of us who study this believe Well, those of us who study this believe Well, those of us who study this believe it actually has an evolutionary basis. it actually has an evolutionary basis. it actually has an evolutionary basis. That when our species was hanging around That when our species was hanging around That when our species was hanging around in groups of about 150 people, your in groups of about 150 people, your in groups of about 150 people, your relative status meant everything. And relative status meant everything. And relative status meant everything. And I'm not talking about who has the fancy I'm not talking about who has the fancy I'm not talking about who has the fancy car or who gets the most likes on social car or who gets the most likes on social car or who gets the most likes on social media. It's who got access to resources, media. It's who got access to resources, media. It's who got access to resources, food, shelter, reproduction. And if you food, shelter, reproduction. And if you food, shelter, reproduction. And if you did something that put your status at did something that put your status at did something that put your status at risk, that could be really bad news for risk, that could be really bad news for risk, that could be really bad news for you. So, those of us who study this you. So, those of us who study this you. So, those of us who study this believe it's ingrained in who we are to believe it's ingrained in who we are to believe it's ingrained in who we are to be very sensitive to anything that puts be very sensitive to anything that puts be very sensitive to anything that puts our status at risk. And that can be our status at risk. And that can be our status at risk. And that can be being up in front of a big crowd or being up in front of a big crowd or being up in front of a big crowd or talking to my boss about an important talking to my boss about an important talking to my boss about an important issue. All of those put us at risk. We issue. All of those put us at risk. We issue. All of those put us at risk. We often hear that often hear that often hear that what is being said is perhaps not as what is being said is perhaps not as what is being said is perhaps not as important as how it's being said, the important as how it's being said, the important as how it's being said, the timbre of one's voice, the eye contact, timbre of one's voice, the eye contact, timbre of one's voice, the eye contact, the body language, etc. Whenever I hear the body language, etc. Whenever I hear the body language, etc. Whenever I hear that, I often think like it's kind of a that, I often think like it's kind of a that, I often think like it's kind of a skewed perspective. It's got to be the skewed perspective. It's got to be the skewed perspective. It's got to be the sum total of it all, right? Yeah, the sum total of it all, right? Yeah, the sum total of it all, right? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, what you say is absolutely. I mean, what you say is absolutely. I mean, what you say is really important. If it doesn't make really important. If it doesn't make really important. If it doesn't make sense, if it's not logical, if it's sense, if it's not logical, if it's sense, if it's not logical, if it's confusing, that puts you in a bad light. confusing, that puts you in a bad light. confusing, that puts you in a bad light. But similarly, how you say it, if you're But similarly, how you say it, if you're But similarly, how you say it, if you're confident, if you're upright, if you use confident, if you're upright, if you use confident, if you're upright, if you use a strong voice, that matters, too. So, a strong voice, that matters, too. So, a strong voice, that matters, too. So, those of us who do what I do are really those of us who do what I do are really those of us who do what I do are really intent in helping people not only craft intent in helping people not only craft intent in helping people not only craft messages that are meaningful, but to messages that are meaningful, but to messages that are meaningful, but to deliver them in a way that can actually deliver them in a way that can actually deliver them in a way that can actually be connected, authentic, and be connected, authentic, and be connected, authentic, and engaging. Both are important. engaging. Both are important. engaging. Both are important. So, when I think about online So, when I think about online So, when I think about online communications and in-person communications and in-person communications and in-person communications where somebody is on a communications where somebody is on a communications where somebody is on a stage and they're stage and they're stage and they're selected to get talk about it something selected to get talk about it something selected to get talk about it something and the expectation is that they're and the expectation is that they're and the expectation is that they're going to engage us. going to engage us. going to engage us. I like to think of this concept that a I like to think of this concept that a I like to think of this concept that a friend told me about of, you know, that friend told me about of, you know, that friend told me about of, you know, that the first thing we want to know as a as an first thing we want to know as a as an first thing we want to know as a as an audience member is, you know, has this audience member is, you know, has this audience member is, you know, has this person earned the right to have my time? person earned the right to have my time? person earned the right to have my time? So, typically, people will talk about So, typically, people will talk about So, typically, people will talk about their, you know, their titles and their their, you know, their titles and their their, you know, their titles and their experience and experience and experience and so how much of the fear of and so how much of the fear of and so how much of the fear of public speaking do you think comes from public speaking do you think comes from public speaking do you think comes from people's need to need to need to kind of explain or justify that they've kind of explain or justify that they've kind of explain or justify that they've like earned the right to actually take like earned the right to actually take like earned the right to actually take your time and talk to you? You your time and talk to you? You your time and talk to you? You cuz you hear a lot of filling of cuz you hear a lot of filling of cuz you hear a lot of filling of credentials and things like that. credentials and things like that. credentials and things like that. Let me just sort of counter that with Let me just sort of counter that with Let me just sort of counter that with the possibility that came to me, which the possibility that came to me, which the possibility that came to me, which is that people don't want to hear that is that people don't want to hear that is that people don't want to hear that at all. They just want to hear what at all. They just want to hear what at all. They just want to hear what somebody has to say. Right. And I tend somebody has to say. Right. And I tend somebody has to say. Right. And I tend to agree with that. I coach my to agree with that. I coach my to agree with that. I coach my students, the folks I work with students, the folks I work with students, the folks I work with in the corporate world, that what's in the corporate world, that what's in the corporate world, that what's really important is connection. So, if really important is connection. So, if really important is connection. So, if you can show that you have some value to you can show that you have some value to you can show that you have some value to bring by getting people engaged with bring by getting people engaged with bring by getting people engaged with your topic and showing that there is your topic and showing that there is your topic and showing that there is relevance and salience for them, that's relevance and salience for them, that's relevance and salience for them, that's all that really matters. Your all that really matters. Your all that really matters. Your credibility, while it informs what you credibility, while it informs what you credibility, while it informs what you say, doesn't need to be the first thing say, doesn't need to be the first thing say, doesn't need to be the first thing you say. I'm on a personal mission to you say. I'm on a personal mission to you say. I'm on a personal mission to stop presentations and meetings from stop presentations and meetings from stop presentations and meetings from starting with people just giving their starting with people just giving their starting with people just giving their credentials, telling the titles of what credentials, telling the titles of what credentials, telling the titles of what they're saying. Get us hooked. I tell they're saying. Get us hooked. I tell they're saying. Get us hooked. I tell people it's like an action movie. How people it's like an action movie. How people it's like an action movie. How does every action movie you've ever seen does every action movie you've ever seen does every action movie you've ever seen start? With action. Do something that start? With action. Do something that start? With action. Do something that engages the audience. I'm not saying engages the audience. I'm not saying engages the audience. I'm not saying crash a car and jump out of a plane, but crash a car and jump out of a plane, but crash a car and jump out of a plane, but make a provocative statement, ask a make a provocative statement, ask a make a provocative statement, ask a question, give some interesting question, give some interesting question, give some interesting statistics. Show what you're saying statistics. Show what you're saying statistics. Show what you're saying means for the people and then you're means for the people and then you're means for the people and then you're enabled to engage them in a dialogue and enabled to engage them in a dialogue and enabled to engage them in a dialogue and that's where connection happens. So, that's where connection happens. So, that's where connection happens. So, credentialing is important, but it credentialing is important, but it credentialing is important, but it doesn't happen right away. You doesn't happen right away. You doesn't happen right away. You demonstrate your credibility. I teach demonstrate your credibility. I teach demonstrate your credibility. I teach my students that there're two types of my students that there're two types of my students that there're two types of credibility. There's your career and credibility. There's your career and credibility. There's your career and college credibility, something you'd see college credibility, something you'd see college credibility, something you'd see in your LinkedIn profile, your resume, in your LinkedIn profile, your resume, in your LinkedIn profile, your resume, and then what I call Costco credibility. and then what I call Costco credibility. and then what I call Costco credibility. You know, when you go to Costco, they You know, when you go to Costco, they You know, when you go to Costco, they give you free samples. You try it, you give you free samples. You try it, you give you free samples. You try it, you like it. Show people through the like it. Show people through the like it. Show people through the questions you ask, through the questions you ask, through the questions you ask, through the engagement you have, through the engagement you have, through the engagement you have, through the relevance you bring, that's how you relevance you bring, that's how you relevance you bring, that's how you build credibility. I totally agree and build credibility. I totally agree and build credibility. I totally agree and this raises that issue not only of this raises that issue not only of this raises that issue not only of credibility, but of authenticity. We credibility, but of authenticity. We credibility, but of authenticity. We hear so much about authenticity, hear so much about authenticity, hear so much about authenticity, authenticity and I've been thinking a authenticity and I've been thinking a authenticity and I've been thinking a lot about that recently. What is this lot about that recently. What is this lot about that recently. What is this authenticity thing? Uh you know, in authenticity thing? Uh you know, in authenticity thing? Uh you know, in terms of people being able to tap into terms of people being able to tap into terms of people being able to tap into it um or maybe that runs counter to it um or maybe that runs counter to it um or maybe that runs counter to authenticity. Like you're not supposed authenticity. Like you're not supposed authenticity. Like you're not supposed to tap into anything, you're supposed to tap into anything, you're supposed to tap into anything, you're supposed to just be you. Yeah. So, I think it just be you. Yeah. So, I think it just be you. Yeah. So, I think it comes down to really understanding comes down to really understanding comes down to really understanding what's important to you and what you what's important to you and what you what's important to you and what you stand for and coming from that place. stand for and coming from that place. stand for and coming from that place. So, what does that mean? That means when So, what does that mean? That means when So, what does that mean? That means when you're talking about anything on a big you're talking about anything on a big you're talking about anything on a big stage or in a one-on-one interaction, stage or in a one-on-one interaction, stage or in a one-on-one interaction, understanding where the value is for you understanding where the value is for you understanding where the value is for you and then articulating that in as clear a and then articulating that in as clear a and then articulating that in as clear a way as possible. So, just way as possible. So, just way as possible. So, just be true to your beliefs, but you have to true to your beliefs, but you have to true to your beliefs, but you have to first understand and take the time to first understand and take the time to first understand and take the time to think about what those are. Many of us think about what those are. Many of us think about what those are. Many of us are nervous or so worried about getting are nervous or so worried about getting are nervous or so worried about getting through all our material, we don't focus through all our material, we don't focus through all our material, we don't focus on coming from a firm, clear, connected on coming from a firm, clear, connected on coming from a firm, clear, connected place. So, it really has to do with place. So, it really has to do with place. So, it really has to do with introspection first and then you convert introspection first and then you convert introspection first and then you convert that into something that's meaningful that into something that's meaningful that into something that's meaningful for the audience. That's what I think for the audience. That's what I think for the audience. That's what I think authenticity is. Yeah, I feel like part authenticity is. Yeah, I feel like part authenticity is. Yeah, I feel like part of this authenticity thing that we're of this authenticity thing that we're of this authenticity thing that we're exploring also has to do with exploring also has to do with exploring also has to do with the person delivering the information the person delivering the information the person delivering the information that they're doing it in a way where that they're doing it in a way where that they're doing it in a way where they are not constantly monitoring they are not constantly monitoring they are not constantly monitoring what the audience thinks of them. what the audience thinks of them. what the audience thinks of them. This seems to be like central to This seems to be like central to This seems to be like central to effective communication. That monitoring effective communication. That monitoring effective communication. That monitoring for one's performance Right. and other for one's performance Right. and other for one's performance Right. and other people's perception of them, trying to people's perception of them, trying to people's perception of them, trying to get a running score of how well they're get a running score of how well they're get a running score of how well they're doing is really runs counter to doing is really runs counter to doing is really runs counter to effective communication. effective communication. effective communication. &gt;&gt; Absolutely, 100%. It is the more we &gt;&gt; Absolutely, 100%. It is the more we &gt;&gt; Absolutely, 100%. It is the more we are in our heads judging and evaluating, are in our heads judging and evaluating, are in our heads judging and evaluating, the more difficult it is to be present the more difficult it is to be present the more difficult it is to be present and connected to somebody. I do this and connected to somebody. I do this and connected to somebody. I do this activity in my class on the first day activity in my class on the first day activity in my class on the first day that really shows how in our heads that really shows how in our heads that really shows how in our heads we can get. I borrowed this from we can get. I borrowed this from we can get. I borrowed this from improvisation. I have my students stand improvisation. I have my students stand improvisation. I have my students stand up and for 15 seconds, they just point up and for 15 seconds, they just point up and for 15 seconds, they just point at different objects in the room and the at different objects in the room and the at different objects in the room and the only rule is to call it something that only rule is to call it something that only rule is to call it something that it is not. So, you point at the ceiling it is not. So, you point at the ceiling it is not. So, you point at the ceiling and you call it a car. You point at the and you call it a car. You point at the and you call it a car. You point at the floor and you call it a calculator. floor and you call it a calculator. floor and you call it a calculator. And for 15 seconds this is very And for 15 seconds this is very And for 15 seconds this is very challenging. I had a student once who's challenging. I had a student once who's challenging. I had a student once who's pointing at a chair. Nothing's coming pointing at a chair. Nothing's coming pointing at a chair. Nothing's coming out of his mouth. And I go up I say, out of his mouth. And I go up I say, out of his mouth. And I go up I say, "What's going on?" He said, "I'm not "What's going on?" He said, "I'm not "What's going on?" He said, "I'm not being wrong enough." being wrong enough." being wrong enough." I gave no rubric, no requirements. I gave no rubric, no requirements. I gave no rubric, no requirements. I said, "Tell me more." He said, "Well, I said, "Tell me more." He said, "Well, I said, "Tell me more." He said, "Well, I was going to call the chair a cat, but a was going to call the chair a cat, but a was going to call the chair a cat, but a cat has four legs and a chair has four cat has four legs and a chair has four cat has four legs and a chair has four legs. I'm not being wrong enough. legs. I'm not being wrong enough. legs. I'm not being wrong enough. Sometimes a cat sits on a chair. I'm not Sometimes a cat sits on a chair. I'm not Sometimes a cat sits on a chair. I'm not being wrong enough." being wrong enough." being wrong enough." We are all on this continuum he's on We are all on this continuum he's on We are all on this continuum he's on judging and evaluating. He's clearly judging and evaluating. He's clearly judging and evaluating. He's clearly several standard deviations away from several standard deviations away from several standard deviations away from most of us, but we all carry around this most of us, but we all carry around this most of us, but we all carry around this judgment in our head and what it does is judgment in our head and what it does is judgment in our head and what it does is it locks us internally and not allows us it locks us internally and not allows us it locks us internally and not allows us to be external. So, you're absolutely to be external. So, you're absolutely to be external. So, you're absolutely right. And when I'm focused on judging right. And when I'm focused on judging right. And when I'm focused on judging what I'm saying, what I'm saying, what I'm saying, I'm using precious cognitive bandwidth I'm using precious cognitive bandwidth I'm using precious cognitive bandwidth that I could be spending on making sure that I could be spending on making sure that I could be spending on making sure you clearly understand my message. This you clearly understand my message. This you clearly understand my message. This is why memorizing what you're trying to is why memorizing what you're trying to is why memorizing what you're trying to say works against you because that say works against you because that say works against you because that precious cognitive bandwidth trying to precious cognitive bandwidth trying to precious cognitive bandwidth trying to get it right gets in the way of actually get it right gets in the way of actually get it right gets in the way of actually doing it. So, we need to train ourselves doing it. So, we need to train ourselves doing it. So, we need to train ourselves to understand that the magic of to understand that the magic of to understand that the magic of communication happens in the moment and communication happens in the moment and communication happens in the moment and not what's happening in your head not what's happening in your head not what's happening in your head before. What a great exercise. Uh do you What a great exercise. Uh do you What a great exercise. Uh do you recommend people do that on their own if recommend people do that on their own if recommend people do that on their own if they're As long as they're not driving. they're As long as they're not driving. they're As long as they're not driving. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; And you know who's really good at it? &gt;&gt; And you know who's really good at it? &gt;&gt; And you know who's really good at it? &gt;&gt; a red light. That's a green light. &gt;&gt; a red light. That's a green light. &gt;&gt; a red light. That's a green light. Exactly. Um Exactly. Um Exactly. Um it's a wonderful Children are fantastic it's a wonderful Children are fantastic it's a wonderful Children are fantastic at this because they don't have the at this because they don't have the at this because they don't have the inhibitions that we do. But inhibitions that we do. But inhibitions that we do. But anything that gets you to disrupt the anything that gets you to disrupt the anything that gets you to disrupt the judgment and evaluation that you do can judgment and evaluation that you do can judgment and evaluation that you do can be really helpful. Mhm. So, if just a be really helpful. Mhm. So, if just a be really helpful. Mhm. So, if just a simple game like that, other improv simple game like that, other improv simple game like that, other improv activities as well. It just gets you to activities as well. It just gets you to activities as well. It just gets you to see here's what I'm doing. This is my see here's what I'm doing. This is my see here's what I'm doing. This is my pattern, my habit. It it identifies the pattern, my habit. It it identifies the pattern, my habit. It it identifies the heuristics that we carry around that heuristics that we carry around that heuristics that we carry around that actually get in the way of our actually get in the way of our actually get in the way of our communication. Oh, that's so cool. I sometimes like to Oh, that's so cool. I sometimes like to Oh, that's so cool. I sometimes like to play the game that I played when I was a play the game that I played when I was a play the game that I played when I was a kid where you look at clouds and you try kid where you look at clouds and you try kid where you look at clouds and you try and see what they look like. and see what they look like. and see what they look like. And it's so much fun. And it's a very And it's so much fun. And it's a very And it's so much fun. And it's a very childlike game. Right. But it forces you childlike game. Right. But it forces you childlike game. Right. But it forces you to see to see to see clouds differently. Um the contours clouds differently. Um the contours clouds differently. Um the contours Yeah. uh become certain things. And then Yeah. uh become certain things. And then Yeah. uh become certain things. And then um it's interesting that almost always um it's interesting that almost always um it's interesting that almost always if you do this with somebody else, it's if you do this with somebody else, it's if you do this with somebody else, it's kind of fun to do. Um it gives way to kind of fun to do. Um it gives way to kind of fun to do. Um it gives way to narration where it looks like one cloud narration where it looks like one cloud narration where it looks like one cloud is eating another cloud. You start is eating another cloud. You start is eating another cloud. You start creating this narrative. creating this narrative. creating this narrative. &gt;&gt; Yes. Right? And um I did this recently &gt;&gt; Yes. Right? And um I did this recently &gt;&gt; Yes. Right? And um I did this recently with someone and it was it was a lot of with someone and it was it was a lot of with someone and it was it was a lot of fun. Yeah. And it And then at some point fun. Yeah. And it And then at some point fun. Yeah. And it And then at some point you're like, "Wow, that really looks you're like, "Wow, that really looks you're like, "Wow, that really looks like" and then you know, whatever it was like" and then you know, whatever it was like" and then you know, whatever it was that we happened to see. What I think enables we happened to see. What I think enables we happened to see. What I think enables that and what allows you to have that and what allows you to have that and what allows you to have that fun is that you're suspending judgment fun is that you're suspending judgment fun is that you're suspending judgment for a little bit and you're just letting for a little bit and you're just letting for a little bit and you're just letting things flow freely. And it is in doing things flow freely. And it is in doing things flow freely. And it is in doing that you begin to build a that you begin to build a that you begin to build a confidence in what happens in the confidence in what happens in the confidence in what happens in the moment. A lot of my work recently has moment. A lot of my work recently has moment. A lot of my work recently has been on spontaneous speaking, speaking been on spontaneous speaking, speaking been on spontaneous speaking, speaking in the moment. And you can actually in the moment. And you can actually in the moment. And you can actually prepare to be spontaneous. If you think prepare to be spontaneous. If you think prepare to be spontaneous. If you think of an athlete, they do a lot of drills of an athlete, they do a lot of drills of an athlete, they do a lot of drills and a lot of repetit- repetitive and a lot of repetit- repetitive and a lot of repetit- repetitive motions. So, when they're in the game, they can So, when they're in the game, they can So, when they're in the game, they can respond appropriately. You can do the respond appropriately. You can do the respond appropriately. You can do the same thing with your speaking, but part same thing with your speaking, but part same thing with your speaking, but part of it is that mindset you have to take. of it is that mindset you have to take. of it is that mindset you have to take. Get out of your own way. See what Get out of your own way. See what Get out of your own way. See what happens in the moment and that frees you happens in the moment and that frees you happens in the moment and that frees you up to do what needs to be done when up to do what needs to be done when up to do what needs to be done when you're in that interaction. you're in that interaction. you're in that interaction. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called Autopilot, which is an AI feature called Autopilot, which is an AI feature called Autopilot, which is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your head if you're snoring and it makes head if you're snoring and it makes head if you're snoring and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get up to $700 off the Pod 5 Ultra. to get up to $700 off the Pod 5 Ultra. to get up to $700 off the Pod 5 Ultra. This is Eight Sleep's biggest sale of This is Eight Sleep's biggest sale of This is Eight Sleep's biggest sale of the year. It goes from now until the year. It goes from now until the year. It goes from now until December 1st, 2025. Eight Sleep ships to December 1st, 2025. Eight Sleep ships to December 1st, 2025. Eight Sleep ships to many countries worldwide including many countries worldwide including many countries worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save up to $700 now through December to save up to $700 now through December to save up to $700 now through December 1st, 2025. Today's episode is also 1st, 2025. Today's episode is also 1st, 2025. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely online. Now, I've been doing weekly therapy for Now, I've been doing weekly therapy for Now, I've been doing weekly therapy for well over 30 years and I've found it to well over 30 years and I've found it to well over 30 years and I've found it to be an extremely important component to be an extremely important component to be an extremely important component to my overall health. my overall health. my overall health. There are essentially three things that There are essentially three things that There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First, it great therapy provides. First, it great therapy provides. First, it provides good rapport with somebody that provides good rapport with somebody that provides good rapport with somebody that you can trust and discuss issues with. you can trust and discuss issues with. you can trust and discuss issues with. Second of all, it provides support in Second of all, it provides support in Second of all, it provides support in the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or directed guidance. And third, expert directed guidance. And third, expert directed guidance. And third, expert therapy provides useful insights. therapy provides useful insights. therapy provides useful insights. Insights that can allow you to make Insights that can allow you to make Insights that can allow you to make changes to and improve your life. Not changes to and improve your life. Not changes to and improve your life. Not just your emotional life and your just your emotional life and your just your emotional life and your relationship life, but also your relationship life, but also your relationship life, but also your professional life. With BetterHelp, they professional life. With BetterHelp, they professional life. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy to find an expert make it very easy to find an expert make it very easy to find an expert therapist that can help provide the therapist that can help provide the therapist that can help provide the benefits that come from effective benefits that come from effective benefits that come from effective therapy. Also, because BetterHelp is therapy. Also, because BetterHelp is therapy. Also, because BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's very time done entirely online, it's very time done entirely online, it's very time efficient. There's no driving to a efficient. There's no driving to a efficient. There's no driving to a therapist's office, looking for parking, therapist's office, looking for parking, therapist's office, looking for parking, etc. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go etc. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go etc. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to betterhelp.com/huberman to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. When I do When I do When I do public lectures like we do or when we do public lectures like we do or when we do public lectures like we do or when we do live events, live events, live events, sometimes um do some crowd work sometimes um do some crowd work sometimes um do some crowd work where I'll just cold call for I usually where I'll just cold call for I usually where I'll just cold call for I usually ask for a body part and I'm always ask for a body part and I'm always ask for a body part and I'm always afraid of like, "What body part afraid of like, "What body part afraid of like, "What body part [laughter] is he going to say?" I'm [laughter] is he going to say?" I'm [laughter] is he going to say?" I'm afraid cold call for afraid cold call for afraid cold call for &gt;&gt; I try and weave it to some real &gt;&gt; I try and weave it to some real &gt;&gt; I try and weave it to some real neuroscience or health related fact. And neuroscience or health related fact. And neuroscience or health related fact. And it's always a lot of fun, but I do it it's always a lot of fun, but I do it it's always a lot of fun, but I do it as a way to break up the um the cadence. as a way to break up the um the cadence. as a way to break up the um the cadence. Uh-huh. Sometimes I think the difficulty Uh-huh. Sometimes I think the difficulty Uh-huh. Sometimes I think the difficulty in public speaking comes from the fact in public speaking comes from the fact in public speaking comes from the fact that as we go out there, we we've done that as we go out there, we we've done that as we go out there, we we've done some preparation. some preparation. some preparation. &gt;&gt; Right. And maybe we've memorized &gt;&gt; Right. And maybe we've memorized &gt;&gt; Right. And maybe we've memorized it. I typically don't. But we have it. I typically don't. But we have it. I typically don't. But we have some sense of what we're going to say, some sense of what we're going to say, some sense of what we're going to say, beginning, middle, end, etc. beginning, middle, end, etc. beginning, middle, end, etc. &gt;&gt; Right. Uh what's on the slides. But that &gt;&gt; Right. Uh what's on the slides. But that &gt;&gt; Right. Uh what's on the slides. But that the cadence can become so regular the cadence can become so regular the cadence can become so regular Yeah. that we lose people. Yeah. that we lose people. Yeah. that we lose people. Yeah. And breaking up that cadence can Yeah. And breaking up that cadence can Yeah. And breaking up that cadence can be helpful, I think. Um and when I step be helpful, I think. Um and when I step be helpful, I think. Um and when I step back from public speaking experiences back from public speaking experiences back from public speaking experiences both as a the speaker, but also as an both as a the speaker, but also as an both as a the speaker, but also as an audience member, audience member, audience member, I feel like there's a almost a song-like I feel like there's a almost a song-like I feel like there's a almost a song-like nature to a talk. Right. Where it has nature to a talk. Right. Where it has nature to a talk. Right. Where it has an opener and then it has a an opener and then it has a an opener and then it has a you know, a quicker pace and then it you know, a quicker pace and then it you know, a quicker pace and then it repeats itself and it's got some repeats itself and it's got some repeats itself and it's got some melodies and rhythms and I like to think melodies and rhythms and I like to think melodies and rhythms and I like to think that really effective podcasting Yeah. that really effective podcasting Yeah. that really effective podcasting Yeah. not to make ourselves conscious of not to make ourselves conscious of not to make ourselves conscious of what we're doing here has some of the of what we're doing here has some of the of what we're doing here has some of the same. Yeah, I want to tell you a story that Yeah, I want to tell you a story that Yeah, I want to tell you a story that relates to that, but I at some point relates to that, but I at some point relates to that, but I at some point I'm going to shout out the word earlobe I'm going to shout out the word earlobe I'm going to shout out the word earlobe and I want to hear how you respond to and I want to hear how you respond to and I want to hear how you respond to that cuz I just I I'm amazed that you that cuz I just I I'm amazed that you that cuz I just I I'm amazed that you get up and ask people to call out body get up and ask people to call out body get up and ask people to call out body parts. Uh I did some work uh when I was Uh I did some work uh when I was Uh I did some work uh when I was researching my recent book where I researching my recent book where I researching my recent book where I interviewed the gentleman who's in interviewed the gentleman who's in interviewed the gentleman who's in charge of all LEGO manuals. Uh I don't charge of all LEGO manuals. Uh I don't charge of all LEGO manuals. Uh I don't know if you've ever built LEGO or not. know if you've ever built LEGO or not. know if you've ever built LEGO or not. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. As a kid, yeah. Their manuals &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. As a kid, yeah. Their manuals &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. As a kid, yeah. Their manuals have no words. have no words. have no words. And I was I've always been fascinated by And I was I've always been fascinated by And I was I've always been fascinated by it. In my class, I will do a lesson it. In my class, I will do a lesson it. In my class, I will do a lesson where I will bring in a LEGO manual and where I will bring in a LEGO manual and where I will bring in a LEGO manual and an IKEA manual, which is they're an IKEA manual, which is they're an IKEA manual, which is they're antithetical. And I have my students antithetical. And I have my students antithetical. And I have my students just discuss communication as using just discuss communication as using just discuss communication as using these as two representations of ways to these as two representations of ways to these as two representations of ways to get information across. The gentleman get information across. The gentleman get information across. The gentleman who runs that group shared with me that who runs that group shared with me that who runs that group shared with me that LEGO manual designers see the manual as LEGO manual designers see the manual as LEGO manual designers see the manual as a story, as a narrative. All you're a story, as a narrative. All you're a story, as a narrative. All you're doing is putting pieces together. But doing is putting pieces together. But doing is putting pieces together. But what they found is if you put all the what they found is if you put all the what they found is if you put all the same steps in the same order. You could same steps in the same order. You could same steps in the same order. You could you could each step could be the same you could each step could be the same you could each step could be the same number of moves with the same number of number of moves with the same number of number of moves with the same number of pieces. People have a very different pieces. People have a very different pieces. People have a very different experience than if you give some moves experience than if you give some moves experience than if you give some moves that have a lot of hard detailed work, that have a lot of hard detailed work, that have a lot of hard detailed work, some that are simpler, some that are some that are simpler, some that are some that are simpler, some that are faster. So, that rhythm you're talking faster. So, that rhythm you're talking faster. So, that rhythm you're talking about builds that motivation, builds about builds that motivation, builds about builds that motivation, builds that sense of accomplishment. They're that sense of accomplishment. They're that sense of accomplishment. They're looking to bring emotion into the act of looking to bring emotion into the act of looking to bring emotion into the act of building LEGO models. Wow. building LEGO models. Wow. building LEGO models. Wow. &gt;&gt; Isn't that interesting? And and that &gt;&gt; Isn't that interesting? And and that &gt;&gt; Isn't that interesting? And and that just emphasizes what you were talking just emphasizes what you were talking just emphasizes what you were talking about. Is it the Scandinavians that It's about. Is it the Scandinavians that It's about. Is it the Scandinavians that It's out of Denmark, yeah. Oh, okay. My out of Denmark, yeah. Oh, okay. My out of Denmark, yeah. Oh, okay. My stepmom will be very pleased that we're stepmom will be very pleased that we're stepmom will be very pleased that we're talking about LEGO. She's Danish. Yeah, talking about LEGO. She's Danish. Yeah, talking about LEGO. She's Danish. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Um yeah, yeah. Um yeah, yeah. Um amazing. Yeah, isn't that fascinating? amazing. Yeah, isn't that fascinating? amazing. Yeah, isn't that fascinating? And if you can do it with a manual that And if you can do it with a manual that And if you can do it with a manual that has no words, that's just have to you has no words, that's just have to you has no words, that's just have to you putting bricks together, think about putting bricks together, think about putting bricks together, think about what you could do in your communication what you could do in your communication what you could do in your communication one-on-one or one-to-many. What you're one-on-one or one-to-many. What you're one-on-one or one-to-many. What you're talking about, the rhythm, the patterns, talking about, the rhythm, the patterns, talking about, the rhythm, the patterns, the pattern disruption, all of that can the pattern disruption, all of that can the pattern disruption, all of that can lead to that engagement. lead to that engagement. lead to that engagement. I think about the way that we learn I think about the way that we learn I think about the way that we learn things as kids like um the ABCs. as kids like um the ABCs. as kids like um the ABCs. [clears throat] [clears throat] [clears throat] Yeah. Not just a string of letters, but Yeah. Not just a string of letters, but Yeah. Not just a string of letters, but it has prosody, right? There's it has prosody, right? There's it has prosody, right? There's inflections and Right. inflections and Right. inflections and Right. A B C D. Everyone knows that, right? As A B C D. Everyone knows that, right? As A B C D. Everyone knows that, right? As opposed to just A B C D. Kids don't opposed to just A B C D. Kids don't opposed to just A B C D. Kids don't learn that way. learn that way. learn that way. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And putting things to music, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And putting things to music, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And putting things to music, putting things visually are lots of ways putting things visually are lots of ways putting things visually are lots of ways to help you remember. to help you remember. to help you remember. These days we hear a lot about the fact These days we hear a lot about the fact These days we hear a lot about the fact that people want short-form content. people want short-form content. people want short-form content. &gt;&gt; Yes. And yet people I can attest listen &gt;&gt; Yes. And yet people I can attest listen &gt;&gt; Yes. And yet people I can attest listen to long-form podcasts and are still to long-form podcasts and are still to long-form podcasts and are still doing that. doing that. doing that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I have a theory that's not &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I have a theory that's not &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I have a theory that's not based on any data that I've seen that based on any data that I've seen that based on any data that I've seen that people need a lot of um updating of people need a lot of um updating of people need a lot of um updating of visual information nowadays. Yeah. You visual information nowadays. Yeah. You visual information nowadays. Yeah. You know, they're scrolling know, they're scrolling know, they're scrolling Instagram, they're scrolling TikTok, Instagram, they're scrolling TikTok, Instagram, they're scrolling TikTok, they're updating I don't like they're updating I don't like they're updating I don't like this YouTube video, switching to another this YouTube video, switching to another this YouTube video, switching to another one very fast. one very fast. one very fast. But with audio, long-form continuous um But with audio, long-form continuous um But with audio, long-form continuous um presence of the same voices or voice presence of the same voices or voice presence of the same voices or voice works. It's very soothing and we get works. It's very soothing and we get works. It's very soothing and we get into a groove with that. And I actually into a groove with that. And I actually into a groove with that. And I actually played this game. I um decided to just played this game. I um decided to just played this game. I um decided to just listen to the audio coming through on listen to the audio coming through on listen to the audio coming through on Instagram reels and just flipped them. Instagram reels and just flipped them. Instagram reels and just flipped them. I wanted to And by the fifth one it I wanted to And by the fifth one it I wanted to And by the fifth one it was incredibly jarring. It's really was incredibly jarring. It's really was incredibly jarring. It's really disruptive. It's like, "Who are these disruptive. It's like, "Who are these disruptive. It's like, "Who are these voices and I know these voices." But the voices and I know these voices." But the voices and I know these voices." But the visuals are very easy to track. visuals are very easy to track. visuals are very easy to track. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And so I think that it's correct that we &gt;&gt; And so I think that it's correct that we &gt;&gt; And so I think that it's correct that we can really update and we like the can really update and we like the can really update and we like the novelty of new visual information. novelty of new visual information. novelty of new visual information. But that audio content needs to spool But that audio content needs to spool But that audio content needs to spool out over long periods of time or else it out over long periods of time or else it out over long periods of time or else it actually is quite aversive to us. actually is quite aversive to us. actually is quite aversive to us. Yeah, I heard somebody once say that the Yeah, I heard somebody once say that the Yeah, I heard somebody once say that the difference of all the senses difference of all the senses difference of all the senses our auditory sense requires us to slow our auditory sense requires us to slow our auditory sense requires us to slow down more than anything else to down more than anything else to down more than anything else to actually pay attention. And I think actually pay attention. And I think actually pay attention. And I think there's something about that slowing there's something about that slowing there's something about that slowing down that makes us more engaged with down that makes us more engaged with down that makes us more engaged with audio. Uh and I think you're right. audio. Uh and I think you're right. audio. Uh and I think you're right. I mean, when you I mean, when you I mean, when you my teaching has I'm curious if your my teaching has I'm curious if your my teaching has I'm curious if your teaching has had to change. As I teach teaching has had to change. As I teach teaching has had to change. As I teach younger generations of students, I have younger generations of students, I have younger generations of students, I have to change things up so much more to change things up so much more to change things up so much more frequently. Somebody who took my class frequently. Somebody who took my class frequently. Somebody who took my class 15 years ago would be oh my goodness, 15 years ago would be oh my goodness, 15 years ago would be oh my goodness, what are you doing? But in a in a 2-hour what are you doing? But in a in a 2-hour what are you doing? But in a in a 2-hour class, I change things up like seven class, I change things up like seven class, I change things up like seven times. So we go from a mini lecture to times. So we go from a mini lecture to times. So we go from a mini lecture to watching a video to partnering with watching a video to partnering with watching a video to partnering with somebody just to keep the students somebody just to keep the students somebody just to keep the students engaged because that's where they're at. engaged because that's where they're at. engaged because that's where they're at. They they need that They they need that They they need that switching to help engage. I teach switching to help engage. I teach switching to help engage. I teach medical students neural development and medical students neural development and medical students neural development and a few other things. Yeah. And I use a few other things. Yeah. And I use a few other things. Yeah. And I use slides heavily there. But what I've slides heavily there. But what I've slides heavily there. But what I've realized over the years is that if realized over the years is that if realized over the years is that if there's too much information on a slide, there's too much information on a slide, there's too much information on a slide, Yeah. they're not going to hear anything Yeah. they're not going to hear anything Yeah. they're not going to hear anything I say. And then if you switch a slide, I say. And then if you switch a slide, I say. And then if you switch a slide, Yeah. people as somebody who studied Yeah. people as somebody who studied Yeah. people as somebody who studied vision, this makes perfect sense. People vision, this makes perfect sense. People vision, this makes perfect sense. People will orient towards the new visual will orient towards the new visual will orient towards the new visual information and they won't hear what information and they won't hear what information and they won't hear what you're saying in the transition. you're saying in the transition. you're saying in the transition. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The other thing that I'm really obsessed The other thing that I'm really obsessed The other thing that I'm really obsessed by because I got my start teaching by because I got my start teaching by because I got my start teaching online on Instagram by doing drawings of on Instagram by doing drawings of on Instagram by doing drawings of different aspects of the nervous system different aspects of the nervous system different aspects of the nervous system and talking about them is that there's and talking about them is that there's and talking about them is that there's this sweet spot when you're going to this sweet spot when you're going to this sweet spot when you're going to teach something with a visual, I've teach something with a visual, I've teach something with a visual, I've realized. That for instance, if I were realized. That for instance, if I were realized. That for instance, if I were to draw um to draw um to draw um an area of the brain or a brain circuit an area of the brain or a brain circuit an area of the brain or a brain circuit accurately with a lot of detailed accurately with a lot of detailed accurately with a lot of detailed information, it's too much. Right. It information, it's too much. Right. It information, it's too much. Right. It they there's less learning in that case they there's less learning in that case they there's less learning in that case as opposed to sparser representation of as opposed to sparser representation of as opposed to sparser representation of the key elements. the key elements. the key elements. But if I go to ball and stick model and But if I go to ball and stick model and But if I go to ball and stick model and just triangles and circles, it just triangles and circles, it just triangles and circles, it doesn't work as well. So there's this doesn't work as well. So there's this doesn't work as well. So there's this sweet spot where there's just enough sweet spot where there's just enough sweet spot where there's just enough detail but not too much where people can hear but not too much where people can hear but not too much where people can hear what you're saying, see the labels, see what you're saying, see the labels, see what you're saying, see the labels, see the stuff in it and it gets imprinted in the stuff in it and it gets imprinted in the stuff in it and it gets imprinted in their brain. And when you look back their brain. And when you look back their brain. And when you look back historically, I'm obsessed with the historically, I'm obsessed with the historically, I'm obsessed with the history of medicine and the history of history of medicine and the history of history of medicine and the history of teaching medicine, teaching medicine, teaching medicine, when you look at the diagrams that were when you look at the diagrams that were when you look at the diagrams that were really that have really propagated really that have really propagated really that have really propagated through time in the field of medicine, through time in the field of medicine, through time in the field of medicine, they're extremely sparse. they're extremely sparse. they're extremely sparse. They accurately represent just a few They accurately represent just a few They accurately represent just a few elements of say the immune system and elements of say the immune system and elements of say the immune system and they're not the little bubble diagrams they're not the little bubble diagrams they're not the little bubble diagrams like, "I'm a macrophage. I'm a glial like, "I'm a macrophage. I'm a glial like, "I'm a macrophage. I'm a glial cell." Like uh-uh. They like those cell." Like uh-uh. They like those cell." Like uh-uh. They like those little cartoons don't work Right. little cartoons don't work Right. little cartoons don't work Right. &gt;&gt; in at least in the long run. Nor does &gt;&gt; in at least in the long run. Nor does &gt;&gt; in at least in the long run. Nor does showing all the detail that's there. And showing all the detail that's there. And showing all the detail that's there. And he's like, "Whoa, that's just he's like, "Whoa, that's just he's like, "Whoa, that's just like drinking from a fire hose." And so like drinking from a fire hose." And so like drinking from a fire hose." And so the really good teachers and anatomists the really good teachers and anatomists the really good teachers and anatomists were able to just give were able to just give were able to just give the appropriate dose of information the appropriate dose of information the appropriate dose of information and not any more. Kind of like a great and not any more. Kind of like a great and not any more. Kind of like a great chef would just have like not over spice chef would just have like not over spice chef would just have like not over spice something. And it And it's not easy. No. something. And it And it's not easy. No. something. And it And it's not easy. No. Um is And you sort of have to be the Um is And you sort of have to be the Um is And you sort of have to be the teacher and the student at the same time teacher and the student at the same time teacher and the student at the same time to be able to do this. Well, I think to be able to do this. Well, I think to be able to do this. Well, I think you're hitting on what's a essential you're hitting on what's a essential you're hitting on what's a essential element of any effective communication, element of any effective communication, element of any effective communication, which is really understanding your which is really understanding your which is really understanding your audience and their needs. You know, so audience and their needs. You know, so audience and their needs. You know, so many of us define success in many of us define success in many of us define success in communication is just getting the communication is just getting the communication is just getting the information out. I'm successful because information out. I'm successful because information out. I'm successful because what I had in mind is now out. I've made what I had in mind is now out. I've made what I had in mind is now out. I've made that mistake many times. that mistake many times. that mistake many times. &gt;&gt; Yeah, right. It's more about what &gt;&gt; Yeah, right. It's more about what &gt;&gt; Yeah, right. It's more about what do I need to say so that my audience do I need to say so that my audience do I need to say so that my audience understands it better. It's not about understands it better. It's not about understands it better. It's not about what I want, it's about what you need. what I want, it's about what you need. what I want, it's about what you need. So I have to do reconnaissance, So I have to do reconnaissance, So I have to do reconnaissance, reflection, and research to really think reflection, and research to really think reflection, and research to really think about how best to craft my message, be about how best to craft my message, be about how best to craft my message, be it a drawing or an important point I'm it a drawing or an important point I'm it a drawing or an important point I'm trying to make through my words. You trying to make through my words. You trying to make through my words. You really have to think about your audience really have to think about your audience really have to think about your audience and most people don't. Most people are and most people don't. Most people are and most people don't. Most people are just so worried about getting the just so worried about getting the just so worried about getting the content out, they don't think about how content out, they don't think about how content out, they don't think about how it lands. Success is if your audience it lands. Success is if your audience it lands. Success is if your audience takes what you've said and they're takes what you've said and they're takes what you've said and they're able to do something with it and able to do something with it and able to do something with it and understand it. You know, the F word of understand it. You know, the F word of understand it. You know, the F word of all communication is fidelity. It's all communication is fidelity. It's all communication is fidelity. It's about accuracy and clarity of about accuracy and clarity of about accuracy and clarity of transmitting ideas. And if you're not in transmitting ideas. And if you're not in transmitting ideas. And if you're not in sync with what your audience needs, then sync with what your audience needs, then sync with what your audience needs, then you're in trouble. Most of us create one you're in trouble. Most of us create one you're in trouble. Most of us create one message and just deliver it to multiple message and just deliver it to multiple message and just deliver it to multiple audiences and think we've been audiences and think we've been audiences and think we've been successful because we got it out. That's successful because we got it out. That's successful because we got it out. That's the wrong way to think about it. So if the wrong way to think about it. So if the wrong way to think about it. So if you're willing, could we just take a you're willing, could we just take a you're willing, could we just take a couple of minutes and explore some of couple of minutes and explore some of couple of minutes and explore some of the tools and practices and then go back the tools and practices and then go back the tools and practices and then go back to some of the theory and then back in to some of the theory and then back in to some of the theory and then back in the tools and practices. Um the tools and practices. Um the tools and practices. Um I love this I love this I love this exercise you said of like I'll point to exercise you said of like I'll point to exercise you said of like I'll point to the mug and I'll just Yeah, shuffle the mug and I'll just Yeah, shuffle the mug and I'll just Yeah, shuffle around. &gt;&gt; to judge myself and I'll say bulldog &gt;&gt; to judge myself and I'll say bulldog &gt;&gt; to judge myself and I'll say bulldog [clears throat] cuz that just is kind of [clears throat] cuz that just is kind of [clears throat] cuz that just is kind of like where you know, I'm like Bart like where you know, I'm like Bart like where you know, I'm like Bart Simpson doing the Rorschach test. Simpson doing the Rorschach test. Simpson doing the Rorschach test. Butterfinger butter like bulldog Butterfinger butter like bulldog Butterfinger butter like bulldog bulldog. But um bulldog. But um bulldog. But um what is that exercise good for and when what is that exercise good for and when what is that exercise good for and when could and should somebody apply it on could and should somebody apply it on could and should somebody apply it on their own or with other people? That's their own or with other people? That's their own or with other people? That's an exercise that I use for two an exercise that I use for two an exercise that I use for two reasons. I use it to show that we have a reasons. I use it to show that we have a reasons. I use it to show that we have a tremendous amount of judgment that we tremendous amount of judgment that we tremendous amount of judgment that we make when we communicate. Because if you make when we communicate. Because if you make when we communicate. Because if you ask somebody, "Why is it so hard to call ask somebody, "Why is it so hard to call ask somebody, "Why is it so hard to call something something?" It's it's not. something something?" It's it's not. something something?" It's it's not. They'll say, "Well, that's not what I'm They'll say, "Well, that's not what I'm They'll say, "Well, that's not what I'm used to or I want it to be better than used to or I want it to be better than used to or I want it to be better than something else I was thinking." The than something else I was thinking." The than something else I was thinking." The other thing that I use it for is to help other thing that I use it for is to help other thing that I use it for is to help elucidate how we heuristically think in elucidate how we heuristically think in elucidate how we heuristically think in these challenging situations. So these challenging situations. So these challenging situations. So invariably when I do this in my class, invariably when I do this in my class, invariably when I do this in my class, I'll say, "Were you using any tools to I'll say, "Were you using any tools to I'll say, "Were you using any tools to help you figure out what to say?" And help you figure out what to say?" And help you figure out what to say?" And people say, "Yeah, I went in the people say, "Yeah, I went in the people say, "Yeah, I went in the category of colors." Or in your case, category of colors." Or in your case, category of colors." Or in your case, the category of species of dog. the category of species of dog. the category of species of dog. These are heuristics. Our brain is These are heuristics. Our brain is These are heuristics. Our brain is trying to help us. And heuristics are trying to help us. And heuristics are trying to help us. And heuristics are very important. If we didn't have them, very important. If we didn't have them, very important. If we didn't have them, we wouldn't be able to make decisions. we wouldn't be able to make decisions. we wouldn't be able to make decisions. But sometimes a heuristic locks you into But sometimes a heuristic locks you into But sometimes a heuristic locks you into a way of thinking. So let's imagine you a way of thinking. So let's imagine you a way of thinking. So let's imagine you and I come out of a meeting and you turn and I come out of a meeting and you turn and I come out of a meeting and you turn to me and you say, "Hey Matt, how do you to me and you say, "Hey Matt, how do you to me and you say, "Hey Matt, how do you think that meeting went?" I immediately think that meeting went?" I immediately think that meeting went?" I immediately say, "Andrew wants feedback." And I can say, "Andrew wants feedback." And I can say, "Andrew wants feedback." And I can itemize all the things that went wrong itemize all the things that went wrong itemize all the things that went wrong or all the things we could have done or all the things we could have done or all the things we could have done better. But had I been really listening, better. But had I been really listening, better. But had I been really listening, not locked into that heuristic of not locked into that heuristic of not locked into that heuristic of feedback, I might have noticed that you feedback, I might have noticed that you feedback, I might have noticed that you were looking down. You were speaking were looking down. You were speaking were looking down. You were speaking more slowly and softly than usual. Maybe more slowly and softly than usual. Maybe more slowly and softly than usual. Maybe what you wanted in that moment was not what you wanted in that moment was not what you wanted in that moment was not feedback, but what you wanted was feedback, but what you wanted was feedback, but what you wanted was support cuz you knew the meeting went support cuz you knew the meeting went support cuz you knew the meeting went bad. So if I lock into a heuristic too bad. So if I lock into a heuristic too bad. So if I lock into a heuristic too soon and not understand that I locked soon and not understand that I locked soon and not understand that I locked into that heuristic, I might take our into that heuristic, I might take our into that heuristic, I might take our communication in a direction that isn't communication in a direction that isn't communication in a direction that isn't productive or could be harmful. The productive or could be harmful. The productive or could be harmful. The situation I just described you actually situation I just described you actually situation I just described you actually happened to me with a colleague and I happened to me with a colleague and I happened to me with a colleague and I itemized all the things that we did itemized all the things that we did itemized all the things that we did wrong. It took me 6 months to repair wrong. It took me 6 months to repair wrong. It took me 6 months to repair that relationship because he didn't want that relationship because he didn't want that relationship because he didn't want to hear what went wrong. He knew. He to hear what went wrong. He knew. He to hear what went wrong. He knew. He wanted me to give some support in that wanted me to give some support in that wanted me to give some support in that moment. So that exercise is to help us moment. So that exercise is to help us moment. So that exercise is to help us understand that we do a lot of judging understand that we do a lot of judging understand that we do a lot of judging that we don't need to do and that we that we don't need to do and that we that we don't need to do and that we have these heuristics or patterns that have these heuristics or patterns that have these heuristics or patterns that we get into that don't allow us to be we get into that don't allow us to be we get into that don't allow us to be present and respond to what's needed. present and respond to what's needed. present and respond to what's needed. Could you define heuristic? I believe Could you define heuristic? I believe Could you define heuristic? I believe I know what it means, but So it sounds I know what it means, but So it sounds I know what it means, but So it sounds like you mentioned heuristic and pattern like you mentioned heuristic and pattern like you mentioned heuristic and pattern and as kind of synonymous, but and as kind of synonymous, but and as kind of synonymous, but maybe just define it for people. maybe just define it for people. maybe just define it for people. &gt;&gt; So to me, a heuristic is a tool that we &gt;&gt; So to me, a heuristic is a tool that we &gt;&gt; So to me, a heuristic is a tool that we use often unconsciously to help us use often unconsciously to help us use often unconsciously to help us reduce the uncertainty in a particular reduce the uncertainty in a particular reduce the uncertainty in a particular situation. So for example, imagine I'm situation. So for example, imagine I'm situation. So for example, imagine I'm in the grocery store and I'm trying to in the grocery store and I'm trying to in the grocery store and I'm trying to pick out pick out pick out the best tomato sauce or the best the best tomato sauce or the best the best tomato sauce or the best ketchup. I might use a heuristic of ketchup. I might use a heuristic of ketchup. I might use a heuristic of which is the cheapest. How many which is the cheapest. How many which is the cheapest. How many offerings from one brand are there? That offerings from one brand are there? That offerings from one brand are there? That must be the best brand to buy. So these must be the best brand to buy. So these must be the best brand to buy. So these are mental shortcuts that we use to help are mental shortcuts that we use to help are mental shortcuts that we use to help us in uncertain situations. us in uncertain situations. us in uncertain situations. I'm recalling a story where when I was a I'm recalling a story where when I was a I'm recalling a story where when I was a junior professor, meaning before I had junior professor, meaning before I had junior professor, meaning before I had tenure, my first graduate student who's tenure, my first graduate student who's tenure, my first graduate student who's now phenomenal professor in her own lab now phenomenal professor in her own lab now phenomenal professor in her own lab at the University of at the University at the University of at the University at the University of at the University of Utah, excuse me. Um of Utah, excuse me. Um of Utah, excuse me. Um We were in my office and we were talking We were in my office and we were talking We were in my office and we were talking about something related to her first about something related to her first about something related to her first manuscript and I went on this long manuscript and I went on this long manuscript and I went on this long description of what we would need to do description of what we would need to do description of what we would need to do with the analysis and this and that. And with the analysis and this and that. And with the analysis and this and that. And she sat very quietly and then she said she sat very quietly and then she said she sat very quietly and then she said to me, "Could you be more specific?" And I "Could you be more specific?" And I "Could you be more specific?" And I thought, "Oh my goodness, I just spoke thought, "Oh my goodness, I just spoke thought, "Oh my goodness, I just spoke for like 5 minutes." And I think what for like 5 minutes." And I think what for like 5 minutes." And I think what she's asking is, "What in the world are she's asking is, "What in the world are she's asking is, "What in the world are you saying?" Which is probably what she you saying?" Which is probably what she you saying?" Which is probably what she was asking. She's probably going to was asking. She's probably going to was asking. She's probably going to chuckle when she hears this. Right. chuckle when she hears this. Right. chuckle when she hears this. Right. And she had this amazing way of asking And she had this amazing way of asking And she had this amazing way of asking questions like that. Mhm. She would say, questions like that. Mhm. She would say, questions like that. Mhm. She would say, for instance, Um for instance, Um for instance, Um uh tell me more. Yeah. Or uh tell me more. Yeah. Or uh tell me more. Yeah. Or what exactly do you want me to do what exactly do you want me to do what exactly do you want me to do for these experiments in the next couple for these experiments in the next couple for these experiments in the next couple of weeks? Right. of weeks? Right. of weeks? Right. &gt;&gt; And then she'd usually tell me a better &gt;&gt; And then she'd usually tell me a better &gt;&gt; And then she'd usually tell me a better idea as all great graduate students do. idea as all great graduate students do. idea as all great graduate students do. Right. Um but Right. Um but Right. Um but I feel like that's a bit of this. It's I feel like that's a bit of this. It's I feel like that's a bit of this. It's that I was coming to it from the It's that I was coming to it from the It's that I was coming to it from the perspective of um kind of a fluency of perspective of um kind of a fluency of perspective of um kind of a fluency of uh of uh of uh this sort of expectation that we both this sort of expectation that we both this sort of expectation that we both were on the same page and we weren't. were on the same page and we weren't. were on the same page and we weren't. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Not because I was the professor and she &gt;&gt; Not because I was the professor and she &gt;&gt; Not because I was the professor and she was the student. Actually, she was the student. Actually, she was the student. Actually, she was closer to the data than I was because closer to the data than I was because closer to the data than I was because she collected the data. she collected the data. she collected the data. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; But um that's the sort of interaction &gt;&gt; But um that's the sort of interaction &gt;&gt; But um that's the sort of interaction that one-on-one you can catch and you that one-on-one you can catch and you that one-on-one you can catch and you can course correct. Right. can course correct. Right. can course correct. Right. &gt;&gt; But in public speaking, &gt;&gt; But in public speaking, &gt;&gt; But in public speaking, often times people just get off stage often times people just get off stage often times people just get off stage and they either realize it went poorly and they either realize it went poorly and they either realize it went poorly or they get the feedback that it went or they get the feedback that it went or they get the feedback that it went poorly. My post doc advisor once said, poorly. My post doc advisor once said, poorly. My post doc advisor once said, "If you get questions after a talk, it "If you get questions after a talk, it "If you get questions after a talk, it means you did well." Yeah, absolutely. means you did well." Yeah, absolutely. means you did well." Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; don't, it means they just want to get &gt;&gt; don't, it means they just want to get &gt;&gt; don't, it means they just want to get rid of you and have you go off stage." rid of you and have you go off stage." rid of you and have you go off stage." Right. &gt;&gt; So now when I get questions after a &gt;&gt; So now when I get questions after a &gt;&gt; So now when I get questions after a talk, I'm like, "Okay, excellent." Like talk, I'm like, "Okay, excellent." Like talk, I'm like, "Okay, excellent." Like that means you [clears throat] engaged that means you [clears throat] engaged that means you [clears throat] engaged people, they have questions. Um so take people, they have questions. Um so take people, they have questions. Um so take note of that. If people have questions, note of that. If people have questions, note of that. If people have questions, it's very likely you bull's-eyed it's very likely you bull's-eyed it's very likely you bull's-eyed it. Absolutely. And it. Absolutely. And it. Absolutely. And you're highlighting that if we get into you're highlighting that if we get into you're highlighting that if we get into our heads, we're not able to our heads, we're not able to our heads, we're not able to assess what's going on in the moment. A assess what's going on in the moment. A assess what's going on in the moment. A lot of communication is responding. And lot of communication is responding. And lot of communication is responding. And so I need to be present enough to see so I need to be present enough to see so I need to be present enough to see how my audience is responding. Are they how my audience is responding. Are they how my audience is responding. Are they looking confused? Do they look upset? looking confused? Do they look upset? looking confused? Do they look upset? Then I can adjust and adapt. So, we have Then I can adjust and adapt. So, we have Then I can adjust and adapt. So, we have to be in that moment enough to be to be in that moment enough to be to be in that moment enough to be present so we can respond. And the present so we can respond. And the present so we can respond. And the preparation work we do in advance helps preparation work we do in advance helps preparation work we do in advance helps us be better prepared. Now, I would us be better prepared. Now, I would us be better prepared. Now, I would argue that in the example you just gave argue that in the example you just gave argue that in the example you just gave with your former graduate student, part with your former graduate student, part with your former graduate student, part of the issue that I think she might have of the issue that I think she might have of the issue that I think she might have been having is when you relate the been having is when you relate the been having is when you relate the information, it was just a list or information, it was just a list or information, it was just a list or litany of things. And our brains aren't litany of things. And our brains aren't litany of things. And our brains aren't very good at remembering lists. I mean, very good at remembering lists. I mean, very good at remembering lists. I mean, I always will joke with my students, I always will joke with my students, I always will joke with my students, when you go to the grocery store, how when you go to the grocery store, how when you go to the grocery store, how many items do you need to buy before you many items do you need to buy before you many items do you need to buy before you have to write something down? For me, have to write something down? For me, have to write something down? For me, it's three. I just can't remember much it's three. I just can't remember much it's three. I just can't remember much in lists. in lists. in lists. If you provide a structure to the If you provide a structure to the If you provide a structure to the information, it makes it much easier. It information, it makes it much easier. It information, it makes it much easier. It increases processing ability. So, a increases processing ability. So, a increases processing ability. So, a structure is nothing more than a logical structure is nothing more than a logical structure is nothing more than a logical connection of ideas. Everybody listening connection of ideas. Everybody listening connection of ideas. Everybody listening has seen structure. If you've ever has seen structure. If you've ever has seen structure. If you've ever watched a television ad, most ads are in watched a television ad, most ads are in watched a television ad, most ads are in the structure of problem, solution, the structure of problem, solution, the structure of problem, solution, benefit. There's some issue or challenge benefit. There's some issue or challenge benefit. There's some issue or challenge in the world, the product or service in the world, the product or service in the world, the product or service makes it better, and you benefit in some makes it better, and you benefit in some makes it better, and you benefit in some way. That's a structure. There's a logical That's a structure. There's a logical That's a structure. There's a logical connection. It's like a story. It's a connection. It's like a story. It's a connection. It's like a story. It's a beginning, middle, and an end. And our beginning, middle, and an end. And our beginning, middle, and an end. And our brains are wired for that. We we brains are wired for that. We we brains are wired for that. We we understand story better than just a understand story better than just a understand story better than just a random list of things. I'll joke with my random list of things. I'll joke with my random list of things. I'll joke with my students, bullets kill. Don't put a lot students, bullets kill. Don't put a lot students, bullets kill. Don't put a lot of bullet points on a slide because of bullet points on a slide because of bullet points on a slide because you're not helping yourself. So, in that you're not helping yourself. So, in that you're not helping yourself. So, in that interaction you had with your graduate interaction you had with your graduate interaction you had with your graduate student, I wonder if she would have student, I wonder if she would have student, I wonder if she would have understood it better had you structured understood it better had you structured understood it better had you structured the information in a way that's logical. the information in a way that's logical. the information in a way that's logical. A great structure for that might have A great structure for that might have A great structure for that might have been three questions. What, so what, now been three questions. What, so what, now been three questions. What, so what, now what? Here's what I Here's what I want you to Here's what I Here's what I want you to Here's what I Here's what I want you to do. Here's why it's important. Here's do. Here's why it's important. Here's do. Here's why it's important. Here's the next steps to help you accomplish the next steps to help you accomplish the next steps to help you accomplish it. All of a sudden, it becomes easier it. All of a sudden, it becomes easier it. All of a sudden, it becomes easier for me to digest and understand. So, for me to digest and understand. So, for me to digest and understand. So, structure is critical to helping get structure is critical to helping get structure is critical to helping get messages across. messages across. messages across. Yeah, across those first five years of Yeah, across those first five years of Yeah, across those first five years of having my lab, I learned that the best having my lab, I learned that the best having my lab, I learned that the best way to interact with students and way to interact with students and way to interact with students and postdocs, the most effective way, postdocs, the most effective way, postdocs, the most effective way, was to have them stand at the white was to have them stand at the white was to have them stand at the white board in my office board in my office board in my office and write things down as we talked about and write things down as we talked about and write things down as we talked about a project. a project. a project. And the things they would write down, And the things they would write down, And the things they would write down, we would eventually cross some things we would eventually cross some things we would eventually cross some things out, maybe make some edits, but those out, maybe make some edits, but those out, maybe make some edits, but those were the as we call the do outs that were the as we call the do outs that were the as we call the do outs that they were going to take to the next they were going to take to the next they were going to take to the next phase of experiments. phase of experiments. phase of experiments. By putting them in control of what the By putting them in control of what the By putting them in control of what the critical information was, critical information was, critical information was, &gt;&gt; Right. they could also stop me and say, &gt;&gt; Right. they could also stop me and say, &gt;&gt; Right. they could also stop me and say, like, what would happen here? So, that's like, what would happen here? So, that's like, what would happen here? So, that's a very dynamic interaction. It's not a very dynamic interaction. It's not a very dynamic interaction. It's not a typical lecture-type interaction. But, typical lecture-type interaction. But, typical lecture-type interaction. But, I've found that works really well I've found that works really well I've found that works really well in other types of situations, too. Yeah. in other types of situations, too. Yeah. in other types of situations, too. Yeah. Where the person can take notes, can ask Where the person can take notes, can ask Where the person can take notes, can ask questions about things that were questions about things that were questions about things that were unclear, but where I where I where I get a strong sense of what their get a strong sense of what their get a strong sense of what their takeaway was, and also where I fell takeaway was, and also where I fell takeaway was, and also where I fell short or perhaps, in rare cases, short or perhaps, in rare cases, short or perhaps, in rare cases, succeeded in communicating what I'm succeeded in communicating what I'm succeeded in communicating what I'm trying to communicate. trying to communicate. trying to communicate. &gt;&gt; Right. Uh I love that you are taking the &gt;&gt; Right. Uh I love that you are taking the &gt;&gt; Right. Uh I love that you are taking the time to have those interactions where time to have those interactions where time to have those interactions where there's that you get feedback in real there's that you get feedback in real there's that you get feedback in real time. And there are things you can build time. And there are things you can build time. And there are things you can build into more formal or bigger types of into more formal or bigger types of into more formal or bigger types of communication situations. I can take communication situations. I can take communication situations. I can take polls. I can have people partner or pair polls. I can have people partner or pair polls. I can have people partner or pair with each other and share some with each other and share some with each other and share some information back. There information back. There information back. There virtual tools allow you to do lots of virtual tools allow you to do lots of virtual tools allow you to do lots of things. People can give you reactions as things. People can give you reactions as things. People can give you reactions as you're as you're communicating. There you're as you're communicating. There you're as you're communicating. There are ways to get feedback in real time are ways to get feedback in real time are ways to get feedback in real time that allow you to adjust and adapt. But, that allow you to adjust and adapt. But, that allow you to adjust and adapt. But, one, you have to build in those one, you have to build in those one, you have to build in those opportunities in the structure, and two, opportunities in the structure, and two, opportunities in the structure, and two, you have to be present enough to pay you have to be present enough to pay you have to be present enough to pay attention to what's going on. attention to what's going on. attention to what's going on. Do you recommend people tape themselves Do you recommend people tape themselves Do you recommend people tape themselves giving lectures and then review those giving lectures and then review those giving lectures and then review those videos? Absolutely. I make all of my videos? Absolutely. I make all of my videos? Absolutely. I make all of my students as part of the work that they students as part of the work that they students as part of the work that they do, they have anytime they do a public do, they have anytime they do a public do, they have anytime they do a public presentation, it could be a panel presentation, it could be a panel presentation, it could be a panel simulation, a meeting simulation, a simulation, a meeting simulation, a simulation, a meeting simulation, a speech, they digitally record themselves speech, they digitally record themselves speech, they digitally record themselves and they have to watch it three times. and they have to watch it three times. and they have to watch it three times. Once with sound only, no video. Once with sound only, no video. Once with sound only, no video. Once with video only, no sound. And then once with video only, no sound. And then once with video only, no sound. And then once both together. And anybody who does this both together. And anybody who does this both together. And anybody who does this will notice different things, both will notice different things, both will notice different things, both positive and negative. positive and negative. positive and negative. I tell everybody it's like going to the I tell everybody it's like going to the I tell everybody it's like going to the dentist. Nobody likes going, but dentist. Nobody likes going, but dentist. Nobody likes going, but everybody's really glad they've been everybody's really glad they've been everybody's really glad they've been because you see so much and you because you see so much and you because you see so much and you learn and learn and learn and I know many great communication I know many great communication I know many great communication teachers. The best teacher is watching teachers. The best teacher is watching teachers. The best teacher is watching yourself communicate. I assume you have yourself communicate. I assume you have yourself communicate. I assume you have watched yourself. Have you learned watched yourself. Have you learned watched yourself. Have you learned things when you watch what you see? things when you watch what you see? things when you watch what you see? Yeah, I Yeah, I Yeah, I will listen to podcasts with guests, I will listen to podcasts with guests, I will listen to podcasts with guests, and I do listen to solos to try and see and I do listen to solos to try and see and I do listen to solos to try and see where I can improve. Right. Uh I have where I can improve. Right. Uh I have where I can improve. Right. Uh I have one or two people who one or two people who one or two people who I seek feedback from, Mhm. and I seek feedback from, Mhm. and I seek feedback from, Mhm. and I have always done my best to implement have always done my best to implement have always done my best to implement that feedback. that feedback. that feedback. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I mean, I'm not going to share &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I mean, I'm not going to share &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I mean, I'm not going to share what some of the things were because what some of the things were because what some of the things were because some of it some of it was subtle, but some of it some of it was subtle, but some of it some of it was subtle, but um but um but um and I never would have observed in and I never would have observed in and I never would have observed in myself and then turned out to be very myself and then turned out to be very myself and then turned out to be very useful. I mean, what When I think of useful. I mean, what When I think of useful. I mean, what When I think of effective communication on stage or in a effective communication on stage or in a effective communication on stage or in a podcast or in any form, really, I feel podcast or in any form, really, I feel podcast or in any form, really, I feel like it's really about getting outside like it's really about getting outside like it's really about getting outside the self-judgment. Right. And at the self-judgment. Right. And at the self-judgment. Right. And at the same time, you have to be connected to same time, you have to be connected to same time, you have to be connected to your audience. I mean, your audience. I mean, your audience. I mean, and this is especially difficult on and this is especially difficult on and this is especially difficult on podcasts where it's a solo podcast. I'm podcasts where it's a solo podcast. I'm podcasts where it's a solo podcast. I'm talking to a camera, but I just imagine talking to a camera, but I just imagine talking to a camera, but I just imagine it's a an audience like a classroom. it's a an audience like a classroom. it's a an audience like a classroom. That's right. And yet, hands aren't That's right. And yet, hands aren't That's right. And yet, hands aren't going up, at least not then. They go up going up, at least not then. They go up going up, at least not then. They go up when we post it and you see the comments when we post it and you see the comments when we post it and you see the comments and critiques from time to time as well. And critiques from time to time as well. And critiques from time to time as well. And those are very useful. I mean, And those are very useful. I mean, And those are very useful. I mean, coming from the landscape of teaching in coming from the landscape of teaching in coming from the landscape of teaching in the classroom, large lectures, small the classroom, large lectures, small the classroom, large lectures, small lectures, and doing peer-reviewed lectures, and doing peer-reviewed lectures, and doing peer-reviewed science, you get a very thick skin. Yes. science, you get a very thick skin. Yes. science, you get a very thick skin. Yes. And yet, nothing quite prepares you for And yet, nothing quite prepares you for And yet, nothing quite prepares you for being public-facing. And now, being public-facing. And now, being public-facing. And now, everybody's public-facing unless they everybody's public-facing unless they everybody's public-facing unless they block their comments section. I mean, block their comments section. I mean, block their comments section. I mean, most everybody out there, the you most everybody out there, the you most everybody out there, the you know, the mom posting the cake she made know, the mom posting the cake she made know, the mom posting the cake she made for her kids and uh the kid posting the for her kids and uh the kid posting the for her kids and uh the kid posting the birthday party photo. They're the birthday party photo. They're the birthday party photo. They're Everybody's public-facing now. Right. Everybody's public-facing now. Right. Everybody's public-facing now. Right. And so, I think it gives people a And so, I think it gives people a And so, I think it gives people a thicker skin, but it I think for a lot thicker skin, but it I think for a lot thicker skin, but it I think for a lot of people it can be um it can be of people it can be um it can be of people it can be um it can be damaging for them. I like though that damaging for them. I like though that damaging for them. I like though that you are taking the time to reflect and you are taking the time to reflect and you are taking the time to reflect and seek feedback. I often say the only way seek feedback. I often say the only way seek feedback. I often say the only way you get better at communication is three you get better at communication is three you get better at communication is three things, repetition, reflection, and things, repetition, reflection, and things, repetition, reflection, and feedback. You got to practice. Nobody feedback. You got to practice. Nobody feedback. You got to practice. Nobody has ever thought their way to better has ever thought their way to better has ever thought their way to better communication. You have to do it. You communication. You have to do it. You communication. You have to do it. You have to reflect. You know, that have to reflect. You know, that have to reflect. You know, that definition of insanity, doing the same definition of insanity, doing the same definition of insanity, doing the same thing over and over again expecting thing over and over again expecting thing over and over again expecting different results. That's how many different results. That's how many different results. That's how many people communicate. Every night before I people communicate. Every night before I people communicate. Every night before I go to bed, I spend 1 minute writing down go to bed, I spend 1 minute writing down go to bed, I spend 1 minute writing down what went well and what didn't go well what went well and what didn't go well what went well and what didn't go well in my communication that day. And every in my communication that day. And every in my communication that day. And every Sunday, I spend 5 minutes going back Sunday, I spend 5 minutes going back Sunday, I spend 5 minutes going back over the previous week and I make a plan over the previous week and I make a plan over the previous week and I make a plan for the following week. I am not saying for the following week. I am not saying for the following week. I am not saying I'm a great communicator, but I I'm a great communicator, but I I'm a great communicator, but I certainly believe I'm a better certainly believe I'm a better certainly believe I'm a better communicator because I've been doing communicator because I've been doing communicator because I've been doing that practice for years. You do that practice for years. You do that practice for years. You do that every week? Every day. Every day. Every every week? Every day. Every day. Every every week? Every day. Every day. Every day. I have a journal. I write down one day. I have a journal. I write down one day. I have a journal. I write down one or two things that I thought went well or two things that I thought went well or two things that I thought went well and one or two things I did thought and one or two things I did thought and one or two things I did thought didn't go well. And then I pick one on didn't go well. And then I pick one on didn't go well. And then I pick one on the Sunday, I review them. And it has the Sunday, I review them. And it has the Sunday, I review them. And it has helped me. And then the final step in helped me. And then the final step in helped me. And then the final step in that is feedback. You have to have that is feedback. You have to have that is feedback. You have to have trusted others who can give you honest trusted others who can give you honest trusted others who can give you honest feedback. But, yeah, that reflection feedback. But, yeah, that reflection feedback. But, yeah, that reflection practice I've been doing for a long practice I've been doing for a long practice I've been doing for a long time. How long? Probably time. How long? Probably time. How long? Probably I think it was after my kids were So, I think it was after my kids were So, I think it was after my kids were So, probably at least 15, 16 years. Awesome. probably at least 15, 16 years. Awesome. probably at least 15, 16 years. Awesome. Well, this is why you're a Stanford Well, this is why you're a Stanford Well, this is why you're a Stanford professor. This is one of the great professor. This is one of the great professor. This is one of the great pleasures of being at Stanford. I mean, pleasures of being at Stanford. I mean, pleasures of being at Stanford. I mean, we're not at Stanford at this moment, we're not at Stanford at this moment, we're not at Stanford at this moment, but I have to say, I mean, there are but I have to say, I mean, there are but I have to say, I mean, there are other great universities on the planet, other great universities on the planet, other great universities on the planet, but I love it because but I love it because but I love it because &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; everybody who's on the faculty there and &gt;&gt; everybody who's on the faculty there and &gt;&gt; everybody who's on the faculty there and the students. I mean, the students the students. I mean, the students the students. I mean, the students are really the phenoms of the place. are really the phenoms of the place. are really the phenoms of the place. Let's let's be honest, but Let's let's be honest, but Let's let's be honest, but is so committed to their craft. Yeah. is so committed to their craft. Yeah. is so committed to their craft. Yeah. Also true elsewhere, but since Also true elsewhere, but since Also true elsewhere, but since Stanford's the experience I know, it's Stanford's the experience I know, it's Stanford's the experience I know, it's just so awesome. You teach it's just so awesome. You teach it's just so awesome. You teach communication and you're taking notes on communication and you're taking notes on communication and you're taking notes on your own communication every day and your own communication every day and your own communication every day and reviewing at the end of the week. reviewing at the end of the week. reviewing at the end of the week. Correct. Fantastic. Um Correct. Fantastic. Um Correct. Fantastic. Um Yeah, I think feedback is great. I think Yeah, I think feedback is great. I think Yeah, I think feedback is great. I think that um being a selective filter for that um being a selective filter for that um being a selective filter for feedback Mhm. Yes. is great. I do like feedback Mhm. Yes. is great. I do like feedback Mhm. Yes. is great. I do like to listen to other lectures. I listen to listen to other lectures. I listen to listen to other lectures. I listen to a lot of Yeah. lectures that perhaps a lot of Yeah. lectures that perhaps a lot of Yeah. lectures that perhaps other people would find boring based on other people would find boring based on other people would find boring based on content or delivery. Um content or delivery. Um content or delivery. Um and I learn a lot from and I learn a lot from and I learn a lot from people's styles. Yeah. Um you know, it's people's styles. Yeah. Um you know, it's people's styles. Yeah. Um you know, it's also interesting to pull from also interesting to pull from also interesting to pull from the communication styles of people in the communication styles of people in the communication styles of people in really distant genres. really distant genres. really distant genres. Um I won't mention some of these, but um Um I won't mention some of these, but um Um I won't mention some of these, but um you know, if you look at different you know, if you look at different you know, if you look at different fields of entertainment and fields of entertainment and fields of entertainment and communication, some people use more communication, some people use more communication, some people use more physicality. Some people are more physicality. Some people are more physicality. Some people are more rigid. Um I think there's a lot to be rigid. Um I think there's a lot to be rigid. Um I think there's a lot to be learned from exploring these other learned from exploring these other learned from exploring these other landscapes. I 100% agree. I'm very landscapes. I 100% agree. I'm very landscapes. I 100% agree. I'm very fortunate that the podcast I host, I get fortunate that the podcast I host, I get fortunate that the podcast I host, I get to interview some of the world's best to interview some of the world's best to interview some of the world's best communicators, and it is such a treat to communicators, and it is such a treat to communicators, and it is such a treat to not only engage them in thinking through not only engage them in thinking through not only engage them in thinking through their craft, their craft, their craft, but seeing them do it and observing the but seeing them do it and observing the but seeing them do it and observing the different ways people do things. I And different ways people do things. I And different ways people do things. I And it doesn't have to be somebody who's it doesn't have to be somebody who's it doesn't have to be somebody who's famous or has a whole bunch of famous or has a whole bunch of famous or has a whole bunch of notoriety. One of my son's kindergarten notoriety. One of my son's kindergarten notoriety. One of my son's kindergarten teachers taught me so much about how to teachers taught me so much about how to teachers taught me so much about how to stay calm under pressure, how to monitor stay calm under pressure, how to monitor stay calm under pressure, how to monitor and manage and facilitate interaction. and manage and facilitate interaction. and manage and facilitate interaction. We just have to pay attention to it and We just have to pay attention to it and We just have to pay attention to it and be open to it. Not so that we copy, but be open to it. Not so that we copy, but be open to it. Not so that we copy, but so that we get ideas and we see how so that we get ideas and we see how so that we get ideas and we see how people do things. The way you break down people do things. The way you break down people do things. The way you break down complex biological processes, I find complex biological processes, I find complex biological processes, I find amazing in terms of the accessibility amazing in terms of the accessibility amazing in terms of the accessibility that you bring to it. That's a skill that you bring to it. That's a skill that you bring to it. That's a skill that somebody who is programming, you that somebody who is programming, you that somebody who is programming, you know, some programmer somewhere could know, some programmer somewhere could know, some programmer somewhere could use to explain to their end users how use to explain to their end users how use to explain to their end users how this works. We need to borrow and this works. We need to borrow and this works. We need to borrow and understand what people do. understand what people do. understand what people do. We get caught up in our own way of doing We get caught up in our own way of doing We get caught up in our own way of doing it. And watching others, I think is it. And watching others, I think is it. And watching others, I think is a best way to do it. is a best way to do it. is a best way to do it. Long ago, I realized that when there's a Long ago, I realized that when there's a Long ago, I realized that when there's a certain amount of energy in the body, certain amount of energy in the body, certain amount of energy in the body, what we call autonomic arousal, what we call autonomic arousal, what we call autonomic arousal, sympathetic tone, whatever, you know, sympathetic tone, whatever, you know, sympathetic tone, whatever, you know, people say fight or flight. But, when people say fight or flight. But, when people say fight or flight. But, when there's a lot of energy in the body, there's a lot of energy in the body, there's a lot of energy in the body, which is often the case when we're going which is often the case when we're going which is often the case when we're going to give a talk or we're in a novel to give a talk or we're in a novel to give a talk or we're in a novel situation, doesn't have to be on stage, situation, doesn't have to be on stage, situation, doesn't have to be on stage, that allowing oneself to physically that allowing oneself to physically that allowing oneself to physically move, to walk, to pace, to gesticulate, move, to walk, to pace, to gesticulate, move, to walk, to pace, to gesticulate, helps dispel some of that energy um and helps dispel some of that energy um and helps dispel some of that energy um and makes it a lot easier to deliver the makes it a lot easier to deliver the makes it a lot easier to deliver the information than were one to just sit information than were one to just sit information than were one to just sit really still and try and, you know, really still and try and, you know, really still and try and, you know, funnel all that through the words mouth. funnel all that through the words mouth. funnel all that through the words mouth. Right? When we're calm you know, and Right? When we're calm you know, and Right? When we're calm you know, and relaxed we can sit back and just move relaxed we can sit back and just move relaxed we can sit back and just move our mouth and our eyes a little bit and our mouth and our eyes a little bit and our mouth and our eyes a little bit and our head a little bit. So, I've seen our head a little bit. So, I've seen our head a little bit. So, I've seen that some of the best public speakers that some of the best public speakers that some of the best public speakers know when to pace, know when to pace, know when to pace, know when to stand rigid, and know when to stand rigid, and know when to stand rigid, and it may be rehearsed, I don't know, but it may be rehearsed, I don't know, but it may be rehearsed, I don't know, but they're not um they're not um they're not um running against their natural tendency running against their natural tendency running against their natural tendency in those moments. in those moments. in those moments. Um and like there's a there's one Um and like there's a there's one Um and like there's a there's one neuroscientist, he's actually been a neuroscientist, he's actually been a neuroscientist, he's actually been a guest on this podcast before. I won't guest on this podcast before. I won't guest on this podcast before. I won't embarrass him by saying who it is. And embarrass him by saying who it is. And embarrass him by saying who it is. And he has so much mental vigor and energy. he has so much mental vigor and energy. he has so much mental vigor and energy. And the first time I saw him give a talk And the first time I saw him give a talk And the first time I saw him give a talk was actually at Harvard Medical School was actually at Harvard Medical School was actually at Harvard Medical School for the 50th anniversary of a for the 50th anniversary of a for the 50th anniversary of a foundation. And he got up there and he foundation. And he got up there and he foundation. And he got up there and he grabbed the microphone and he gave the grabbed the microphone and he gave the grabbed the microphone and he gave the talk like this. And I thought to myself, talk like this. And I thought to myself, talk like this. And I thought to myself, he's going to eat the microphone. he's going to eat the microphone. he's going to eat the microphone. He's going to eat the microphone. And he He's going to eat the microphone. And he He's going to eat the microphone. And he gave the most spectacular talk. And he gave the most spectacular talk. And he gave the most spectacular talk. And he was funneling all his energy into that was funneling all his energy into that was funneling all his energy into that microphone. Right. And I realized this microphone. Right. And I realized this microphone. Right. And I realized this guy isn't moving at all, but I thought guy isn't moving at all, but I thought guy isn't moving at all, but I thought it was totally reasonable at some point it was totally reasonable at some point it was totally reasonable at some point he was just going to take a huge chunk he was just going to take a huge chunk he was just going to take a huge chunk out of the thing. And of course he out of the thing. And of course he out of the thing. And of course he didn't. I thought wow, he brought us all didn't. I thought wow, he brought us all didn't. I thought wow, he brought us all to that one location. Now, clearly he's to that one location. Now, clearly he's to that one location. Now, clearly he's a very experienced and skilled a very experienced and skilled a very experienced and skilled communicator. But he's also an expert in that topic. But he's also an expert in that topic. But he's also an expert in that topic. And this is the thing that I always And this is the thing that I always And this is the thing that I always would remind my students and postdocs would remind my students and postdocs would remind my students and postdocs who had some understandable stage who had some understandable stage who had some understandable stage fright. Which is fright. Which is fright. Which is there's no way that you aren't among at there's no way that you aren't among at there's no way that you aren't among at least the top three people least the top three people least the top three people in the room in terms of the knowledge of in the room in terms of the knowledge of in the room in terms of the knowledge of what you're talking about. Yes. Right? what you're talking about. Yes. Right? what you're talking about. Yes. Right? Like probably have the most knowledge. But maybe have the most knowledge. But maybe have the most knowledge. But maybe someone else is an expert there, which someone else is an expert there, which someone else is an expert there, which can be a little scary. But at least can be a little scary. But at least can be a little scary. But at least you're then you're kind of their peer. you're then you're kind of their peer. you're then you're kind of their peer. So, to remind oneself that in most So, to remind oneself that in most So, to remind oneself that in most situations where we're public speaking, situations where we're public speaking, situations where we're public speaking, you're among the top experts in that. you're among the top experts in that. you're among the top experts in that. You spent the most time with the You spent the most time with the You spent the most time with the material at least compared to the material at least compared to the material at least compared to the audience. Well, and I would add to that audience. Well, and I would add to that audience. Well, and I would add to that often when we're in those that often when we're in those that often when we're in those situations, the audience actually wants situations, the audience actually wants situations, the audience actually wants to learn from us. They're there because to learn from us. They're there because to learn from us. They're there because they want to take value from us. They're they want to take value from us. They're they want to take value from us. They're not there to critique and judge and not there to critique and judge and not there to critique and judge and evaluate. Although that can happen. evaluate. Although that can happen. evaluate. Although that can happen. People don't like watching people fail People don't like watching people fail People don't like watching people fail and flail. We we want to get some value. and flail. We we want to get some value. and flail. We we want to get some value. And if you remind yourself that I have And if you remind yourself that I have And if you remind yourself that I have value to bring value to bring value to bring and the audience wants that value, that and the audience wants that value, that and the audience wants that value, that can reduce some of the temperature of can reduce some of the temperature of can reduce some of the temperature of that. With regard to movement, I think that. With regard to movement, I think that. With regard to movement, I think movement is great. You just don't want movement is great. You just don't want movement is great. You just don't want it to be distracting. So, there's some it to be distracting. So, there's some it to be distracting. So, there's some rules or ideas around movement. So, move rules or ideas around movement. So, move rules or ideas around movement. So, move when appropriate during transitions. You when appropriate during transitions. You when appropriate during transitions. You know, stand-up comedians have a know, stand-up comedians have a know, stand-up comedians have a rule that they try to follow is you rule that they try to follow is you rule that they try to follow is you never want to walk during the punchline. never want to walk during the punchline. never want to walk during the punchline. You want to land the punchline. All of You want to land the punchline. All of You want to land the punchline. All of us when we communicate, we have us when we communicate, we have us when we communicate, we have punchlines. We have things that punchlines. We have things that punchlines. We have things that really we want to have land. Stand still really we want to have land. Stand still really we want to have land. Stand still during that. But as you're doing the during that. But as you're doing the during that. But as you're doing the setup, move. So, decide when you start, setup, move. So, decide when you start, setup, move. So, decide when you start, come in, move forward. So, movement can come in, move forward. So, movement can come in, move forward. So, movement can help you with that anxiety, but it can help you with that anxiety, but it can help you with that anxiety, but it also can help your audience understand also can help your audience understand also can help your audience understand what's important and what's not what's important and what's not what's important and what's not important. So, if I'm transitioning from important. So, if I'm transitioning from important. So, if I'm transitioning from one point to the next and I physically one point to the next and I physically one point to the next and I physically move or I turn my body at the table if move or I turn my body at the table if move or I turn my body at the table if I'm seated, that signals information to I'm seated, that signals information to I'm seated, that signals information to you that's helpful for you to know. you that's helpful for you to know. you that's helpful for you to know. We're moving from one place to the next. We're moving from one place to the next. We're moving from one place to the next. So, use this need to move in a So, use this need to move in a So, use this need to move in a purposeful way. I didn't realize that purposeful way. I didn't realize that purposeful way. I didn't realize that comedians don't deliver the punchline comedians don't deliver the punchline comedians don't deliver the punchline while moving, but now that makes perfect while moving, but now that makes perfect while moving, but now that makes perfect sense. Right, cuz you're distracting sense. Right, cuz you're distracting sense. Right, cuz you're distracting your audience. your audience. your audience. Even Chris Rock who moves a lot will Even Chris Rock who moves a lot will Even Chris Rock who moves a lot will sometimes stop during the punchline. sometimes stop during the punchline. sometimes stop during the punchline. We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium threonate, theanine, chamomile extract, threonate, theanine, chamomile extract, threonate, theanine, chamomile extract, and glycine. Along with lesser-known and glycine. Along with lesser-known and glycine. Along with lesser-known things like saffron and valerian root. things like saffron and valerian root. things like saffron and valerian root. These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our long-time sponsor AG1 just that our long-time sponsor AG1 just that our long-time sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ. A created a new product called AGZ. A created a new product called AGZ. A nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy-to-drink mix. This removes all one easy-to-drink mix. This removes all one easy-to-drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forage the complexity of trying to forage the complexity of trying to forage the vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is and which ones to take for you. AGZ is and which ones to take for you. AGZ is to my knowledge the most comprehensive to my knowledge the most comprehensive to my knowledge the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way. And it delicious, by the way. And it delicious, by the way. And it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be I My favorite of the three has to be I My favorite of the three has to be I think chocolate mint, but I really like think chocolate mint, but I really like think chocolate mint, but I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Juve. Juve makes medical-grade red light Juve. Juve makes medical-grade red light Juve. Juve makes medical-grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I've consistently emphasized thing that I've consistently emphasized thing that I've consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible on this podcast, it is the incredible on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light can have on our impact that light can have on our impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near-infrared light red light and near-infrared light red light and near-infrared light sources have been shown to have positive sources have been shown to have positive sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of effects on improving numerous aspects of effects on improving numerous aspects of cellular and organ health, including cellular and organ health, including cellular and organ health, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin faster muscle recovery, improved skin faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements health and wound healing, improvements health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and even mitochondrial function, and even mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. What sets Juve improving vision itself. What sets Juve improving vision itself. What sets Juve lights apart and why they're my lights apart and why they're my lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is preferred red light therapy device is preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and wavelengths of red light and wavelengths of red light and near-infrared light in combination to near-infrared light in combination to near-infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellular trigger the optimal cellular trigger the optimal cellular adaptations. Personally, I use the Juve adaptations. Personally, I use the Juve adaptations. Personally, I use the Juve full-body panel about three to four full-body panel about three to four full-body panel about three to four times a week. And I use the Juve times a week. And I use the Juve times a week. And I use the Juve handheld light both at home and when I handheld light both at home and when I handheld light both at home and when I travel. Right now, Juve is having their travel. Right now, Juve is having their travel. Right now, Juve is having their biggest sale of the year. From now biggest sale of the year. From now biggest sale of the year. From now through December 1st, 2025, you can save through December 1st, 2025, you can save through December 1st, 2025, you can save up to $1,000 on select Juve devices up to $1,000 on select Juve devices up to $1,000 on select Juve devices during their Black Friday sale. Just go during their Black Friday sale. Just go during their Black Friday sale. Just go to juve.com/huberman. to juve.com/huberman. to juve.com/huberman. That's j o v v.com/huberman. That's j o v v.com/huberman. That's j o v v.com/huberman. Some exclusions apply. Some exclusions apply. Some exclusions apply. I wonder if you've observed in the I wonder if you've observed in the I wonder if you've observed in the classroom that classroom that classroom that social media and other social media and other social media and other newer forms of content are changing newer forms of content are changing newer forms of content are changing people's expectation of how engaging people's expectation of how engaging people's expectation of how engaging something should be. Because the on-ramp something should be. Because the on-ramp something should be. Because the on-ramp to social media is a very fast one. I've to social media is a very fast one. I've to social media is a very fast one. I've never observed anything that brings never observed anything that brings never observed anything that brings people to focus so quickly unless it's people to focus so quickly unless it's people to focus so quickly unless it's um seeing something really disturbing, um seeing something really disturbing, um seeing something really disturbing, which nobody wants to see. But you know, which nobody wants to see. But you know, which nobody wants to see. But you know, if you if you suddenly see two cars if you if you suddenly see two cars if you if you suddenly see two cars crashing, you're completely focused on crashing, you're completely focused on crashing, you're completely focused on that. You're not going to go back to that. You're not going to go back to that. You're not going to go back to what you were doing. Right. But setting what you were doing. Right. But setting what you were doing. Right. But setting aside bad events, traumatic events, bad events, traumatic events, bad events, traumatic events, social media has an incredibly smooth social media has an incredibly smooth social media has an incredibly smooth and fast on-ramp to a focal point, which and fast on-ramp to a focal point, which and fast on-ramp to a focal point, which has got you in the box. Yeah. Yeah, a has got you in the box. Yeah. Yeah, a has got you in the box. Yeah. Yeah, a book doesn't typically do that for book doesn't typically do that for book doesn't typically do that for people. Right. Uh so, what's happening people. Right. Uh so, what's happening people. Right. Uh so, what's happening now um now um now um in terms of what you observe with in terms of what you observe with in terms of what you observe with people's expect audiences' expectation people's expect audiences' expectation people's expect audiences' expectation of how engaging something needs to be? of how engaging something needs to be? of how engaging something needs to be? &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I see this play out in a &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I see this play out in a &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I see this play out in a couple ways. One, when you when you couple ways. One, when you when you couple ways. One, when you when you think about a multi-generational think about a multi-generational think about a multi-generational workforce or a place where workforce or a place where workforce or a place where multi-generations are together. You multi-generations are together. You multi-generations are together. You know, people of our vintage, although know, people of our vintage, although know, people of our vintage, although I'm older than you are, uh I'm older than you are, uh I'm older than you are, uh expect relationships and communication expect relationships and communication expect relationships and communication to unfold in a certain way. And I think to unfold in a certain way. And I think to unfold in a certain way. And I think younger generations expect things to be younger generations expect things to be younger generations expect things to be quicker and more transactional. quicker and more transactional. quicker and more transactional. And when we come together, that can And when we come together, that can And when we come together, that can breed misunderstanding and sometimes breed misunderstanding and sometimes breed misunderstanding and sometimes conflict. So, I see it play out there conflict. So, I see it play out there conflict. So, I see it play out there and I find it really interesting. And I and I find it really interesting. And I and I find it really interesting. And I try to coach the students I have try to coach the students I have try to coach the students I have that they have to be appreciative of the that they have to be appreciative of the that they have to be appreciative of the ways in which people connect in the ways in which people connect in the ways in which people connect in the ways in which people expect information to in which people expect information to in which people expect information to come in. come in. come in. You know, if you're just going to You know, if you're just going to You know, if you're just going to keep texting me things and I actually keep texting me things and I actually keep texting me things and I actually want you to pick up the phone so I can want you to pick up the phone so I can want you to pick up the phone so I can hear it in your own voice, that's going hear it in your own voice, that's going hear it in your own voice, that's going to cause some issues. So, we have to cause some issues. So, we have to cause some issues. So, we have to appreciate that others have different to appreciate that others have different to appreciate that others have different ways of taking in information. ways of taking in information. ways of taking in information. I find that many of the younger students I find that many of the younger students I find that many of the younger students that I communicate with, it's hard for that I communicate with, it's hard for that I communicate with, it's hard for them to do some of the initial work that them to do some of the initial work that them to do some of the initial work that we have to do in relationship building, we have to do in relationship building, we have to do in relationship building, trust building. Uh it just because they trust building. Uh it just because they trust building. Uh it just because they expect things are used to things expect things are used to things expect things are used to things happening really fast. And a lot of happening really fast. And a lot of happening really fast. And a lot of communication, a lot of connection at communication, a lot of connection at communication, a lot of connection at least at first takes time. least at first takes time. least at first takes time. So, it's helping people appreciate the So, it's helping people appreciate the So, it's helping people appreciate the time spent up front can lead to the time spent up front can lead to the time spent up front can lead to the exciting and in-depth connection that exciting and in-depth connection that exciting and in-depth connection that comes later. So, it is it is changing comes later. So, it is it is changing comes later. So, it is it is changing for sure. for sure. for sure. I was trying to think before our I was trying to think before our I was trying to think before our conversation what would be the conversation what would be the conversation what would be the one piece of advice the one piece of advice the one piece of advice to give people so that they are um to give people so that they are um to give people so that they are um more at ease with communicating in novel more at ease with communicating in novel more at ease with communicating in novel environments, on stage or off stage. And environments, on stage or off stage. And environments, on stage or off stage. And what popped to mind for me was what popped to mind for me was what popped to mind for me was um be friendly with people. I'm um be friendly with people. I'm um be friendly with people. I'm naturally pretty friendly. Like if I'm naturally pretty friendly. Like if I'm naturally pretty friendly. Like if I'm getting a coffee, I'll be like, how's getting a coffee, I'll be like, how's getting a coffee, I'll be like, how's your day going? Or like I will ask your day going? Or like I will ask your day going? Or like I will ask that and I'm genuinely curious. How's that and I'm genuinely curious. How's that and I'm genuinely curious. How's your day going? Now, it's rare that your day going? Now, it's rare that your day going? Now, it's rare that somebody says like today sucks. somebody says like today sucks. somebody says like today sucks. Occasionally they do. Um Occasionally they do. Um Occasionally they do. Um uh usually they say, oh, it's pretty uh usually they say, oh, it's pretty uh usually they say, oh, it's pretty good. Like how are you doing? But in an good. Like how are you doing? But in an good. Like how are you doing? But in an Uber for instance, I often find myself Uber for instance, I often find myself Uber for instance, I often find myself in conversation with people. Like in conversation with people. Like in conversation with people. Like conversation is pretty fluid for me. I conversation is pretty fluid for me. I conversation is pretty fluid for me. I realize for other people it's not. realize for other people it's not. realize for other people it's not. &gt;&gt; Right. People won't believe this, but &gt;&gt; Right. People won't believe this, but &gt;&gt; Right. People won't believe this, but I'm actually very introverted. I spend a I'm actually very introverted. I spend a I'm actually very introverted. I spend a lot of time by myself, but I like people lot of time by myself, but I like people lot of time by myself, but I like people and I'm reasonably friendly and they're and I'm reasonably friendly and they're and I'm reasonably friendly and they're friendly with me. So, I think being friendly with me. So, I think being friendly with me. So, I think being friendly helps friendly helps friendly helps you get good at communication. Yeah. Uh you get good at communication. Yeah. Uh you get good at communication. Yeah. Uh wouldn't you say? Yeah, absolutely. I wouldn't you say? Yeah, absolutely. I wouldn't you say? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, my answer to that question would mean, my answer to that question would mean, my answer to that question would be curiosity. I lead with curiosity. Ask be curiosity. I lead with curiosity. Ask be curiosity. I lead with curiosity. Ask questions, observe things, point them questions, observe things, point them questions, observe things, point them out. You know, a lot of people hate out. You know, a lot of people hate out. You know, a lot of people hate small talk because they don't know how small talk because they don't know how small talk because they don't know how to do it. But if you lead with to do it. But if you lead with to do it. But if you lead with curiosity, if you ask a question and you curiosity, if you ask a question and you curiosity, if you ask a question and you observe, that's where I think we can observe, that's where I think we can observe, that's where I think we can one make it move forward in a way that's one make it move forward in a way that's one make it move forward in a way that's more fluid and more comfortable for more fluid and more comfortable for more fluid and more comfortable for people. And quite frankly, people are people. And quite frankly, people are people. And quite frankly, people are most at ease talking about themselves. most at ease talking about themselves. most at ease talking about themselves. And so, if you can get people talking And so, if you can get people talking And so, if you can get people talking about something that's important to about something that's important to about something that's important to them. And then, you know, there's a them. And then, you know, there's a them. And then, you know, there's a whole science behind conversation. And whole science behind conversation. And whole science behind conversation. And uh people who study conversation look at uh people who study conversation look at uh people who study conversation look at turn-taking. Cuz if you think about it, turn-taking. Cuz if you think about it, turn-taking. Cuz if you think about it, conversation is just taking turns. There conversation is just taking turns. There conversation is just taking turns. There are turns that are supportive where you are turns that are supportive where you are turns that are supportive where you say something and I support what you say something and I support what you say something and I support what you say. So, you might say, "Hey Matt, I say. So, you might say, "Hey Matt, I say. So, you might say, "Hey Matt, I just got back from Maui." And I could just got back from Maui." And I could just got back from Maui." And I could say, "Oh, that's great. Uh where'd you say, "Oh, that's great. Uh where'd you say, "Oh, that's great. Uh where'd you stay? What did you do?" Or I could say, stay? What did you do?" Or I could say, stay? What did you do?" Or I could say, which is the other type of turn, which is the other type of turn, which is the other type of turn, which is switching. I could say, "Oh, I just is switching. I could say, "Oh, I just is switching. I could say, "Oh, I just got back from Costa Rica." And a good got back from Costa Rica." And a good got back from Costa Rica." And a good conversation does both. conversation does both. conversation does both. So being curious and then managing the So being curious and then managing the So being curious and then managing the switching and supporting turns allow for switching and supporting turns allow for switching and supporting turns allow for that conversation not only to develop, that conversation not only to develop, that conversation not only to develop, but it allows you to get closer and more but it allows you to get closer and more but it allows you to get closer and more intimate if you will. That is closer in intimate if you will. That is closer in intimate if you will. That is closer in terms of trust building in the terms of trust building in the terms of trust building in the relationship you have. relationship you have. relationship you have. Yeah, almost always in Los Angeles uh Yeah, almost always in Los Angeles uh Yeah, almost always in Los Angeles uh I ask my Uber driver where they're from I ask my Uber driver where they're from I ask my Uber driver where they're from Mhm. because often times it seems that Mhm. because often times it seems that Mhm. because often times it seems that they have accents and I can't place the they have accents and I can't place the they have accents and I can't place the accent Right. and almost always I learn accent Right. and almost always I learn accent Right. and almost always I learn about a great restaurant based on Yeah. about a great restaurant based on Yeah. about a great restaurant based on Yeah. their ethnicity, right? their ethnicity, right? their ethnicity, right? &gt;&gt; I found what I think is the best &gt;&gt; I found what I think is the best &gt;&gt; I found what I think is the best Armenian restaurant in Los Angeles as a Armenian restaurant in Los Angeles as a Armenian restaurant in Los Angeles as a consequence of a great Uber ride. So consequence of a great Uber ride. So consequence of a great Uber ride. So yeah, leading with curiosity. I don't yeah, leading with curiosity. I don't yeah, leading with curiosity. I don't say where's the best say where's the best say where's the best restaurant. Right. I think it inevitably leads to Right. I think it inevitably leads to Right. I think it inevitably leads to food, it seems. Dogs are food. food, it seems. Dogs are food. food, it seems. Dogs are food. I'm curious about linearity versus I'm curious about linearity versus I'm curious about linearity versus non-linearities in storytelling. Yeah. non-linearities in storytelling. Yeah. non-linearities in storytelling. Yeah. You know, some people You know, some people You know, some people have a style where have a style where have a style where they can spin a lot of plates they can spin a lot of plates they can spin a lot of plates simultaneously. Mhm. I imagine it. You simultaneously. Mhm. I imagine it. You simultaneously. Mhm. I imagine it. You know, they can start one thread, know, they can start one thread, know, they can start one thread, maybe open up a couple other threads. maybe open up a couple other threads. maybe open up a couple other threads. Some people have a very linear style. Some people have a very linear style. Some people have a very linear style. Some people won't reference things they Some people won't reference things they Some people won't reference things they said earlier. Some people will said earlier. Some people will said earlier. Some people will constantly reference things they said constantly reference things they said constantly reference things they said earlier. I suppose it earlier. I suppose it earlier. I suppose it depends. But in general, if one is depends. But in general, if one is depends. But in general, if one is trying to communicate information trying to communicate information trying to communicate information what's best from the standpoint of what's best from the standpoint of what's best from the standpoint of people learning the information? So people learning the information? So people learning the information? So as a teacher, as somebody who's trying as a teacher, as somebody who's trying as a teacher, as somebody who's trying to convey information that's important to convey information that's important to convey information that's important to people, I believe a linear approach to people, I believe a linear approach to people, I believe a linear approach that clearly lays out the foundations that clearly lays out the foundations that clearly lays out the foundations and builds is probably best to help and builds is probably best to help and builds is probably best to help people really understand. Often in people really understand. Often in people really understand. Often in educating you're layering, you're educating you're layering, you're educating you're layering, you're scaffolding, and that leads to a linear scaffolding, and that leads to a linear scaffolding, and that leads to a linear approach. That said approach. That said approach. That said the more the more the more spurious approach, the approach that has lots approach, the approach that has lots approach, the approach that has lots of different avenues can be much more of different avenues can be much more of different avenues can be much more engaging. And can also be successful. And it And can also be successful. And it And can also be successful. And it really doesn't have to be either or. I really doesn't have to be either or. I really doesn't have to be either or. I think you can have a high-level linear think you can have a high-level linear think you can have a high-level linear view that you're taking your audience on that you're taking your audience on that you're taking your audience on that journey, but at different points you can journey, but at different points you can journey, but at different points you can branch off and share some branch off and share some branch off and share some interesting information. interesting information. interesting information. You know, I see being a good speaker as You know, I see being a good speaker as You know, I see being a good speaker as like being a good tour guide. And I like being a good tour guide. And I like being a good tour guide. And I actually was a tour guide at one point actually was a tour guide at one point actually was a tour guide at one point in my life. A good tour guide does a in my life. A good tour guide does a in my life. A good tour guide does a really nice job of setting expectations really nice job of setting expectations really nice job of setting expectations of where you're going. Most people won't of where you're going. Most people won't of where you're going. Most people won't go on a tour if they don't know where go on a tour if they don't know where go on a tour if they don't know where they're going. If I showed up and said, they're going. If I showed up and said, they're going. If I showed up and said, "I'm your tour guide, let's go." You "I'm your tour guide, let's go." You "I'm your tour guide, let's go." You might say, "Yeah, I don't know where might say, "Yeah, I don't know where might say, "Yeah, I don't know where we're going." But if I say, "Hey, we're going." But if I say, "Hey, we're going." But if I say, "Hey, we're going to do this and this and we're not going to do this and this and we're not going to do this and this and we're not going to do that." Then you can relax going to do that." Then you can relax going to do that." Then you can relax and feel comfortable and come with me. and feel comfortable and come with me. and feel comfortable and come with me. And I let you know at each point where And I let you know at each point where And I let you know at each point where we're moving to the next place. we're moving to the next place. we're moving to the next place. But along the way, we can meander, we But along the way, we can meander, we But along the way, we can meander, we can wander, we can go check out some can wander, we can go check out some can wander, we can go check out some things and come back. So as long as things and come back. So as long as things and come back. So as long as people have directionality people have directionality people have directionality and everything fits as a larger and everything fits as a larger and everything fits as a larger narrative, I think you can play with narrative, I think you can play with narrative, I think you can play with either of these. But when it comes to either of these. But when it comes to either of these. But when it comes to strict education, I think we've got good strict education, I think we've got good strict education, I think we've got good evidence that a linear approach that evidence that a linear approach that evidence that a linear approach that scaffolds is really what's most helpful. scaffolds is really what's most helpful. scaffolds is really what's most helpful. Do you think that if people want to get Do you think that if people want to get Do you think that if people want to get better at communication, they should better at communication, they should better at communication, they should practice being a tour guide? I think practice being a tour guide? I think practice being a tour guide? I think adopting that mindset that adopting that mindset that adopting that mindset that hey, taking you through my material, I'm hey, taking you through my material, I'm hey, taking you through my material, I'm like a tour guide. How would a tour like a tour guide. How would a tour like a tour guide. How would a tour guide explain this? They would introduce guide explain this? They would introduce guide explain this? They would introduce at the beginning, set expectations. at the beginning, set expectations. at the beginning, set expectations. They'd make sure that you understand why They'd make sure that you understand why They'd make sure that you understand why we're moving from one place to the next. we're moving from one place to the next. we're moving from one place to the next. And when you're done, they really want And when you're done, they really want And when you're done, they really want you to take something away of value. I you to take something away of value. I you to take something away of value. I mean, most tour tours end up in the gift mean, most tour tours end up in the gift mean, most tour tours end up in the gift shop, right? Your gift to your audience shop, right? Your gift to your audience shop, right? Your gift to your audience is something they can take away and do is something they can take away and do is something they can take away and do something with. So I think using that something with. So I think using that something with. So I think using that analogy, seeing what your job is through analogy, seeing what your job is through analogy, seeing what your job is through those that lens can be really helpful. those that lens can be really helpful. those that lens can be really helpful. I'm remembering back to grade school I'm remembering back to grade school I'm remembering back to grade school where we were asked to bring an object where we were asked to bring an object where we were asked to bring an object that was really important to us and then that was really important to us and then that was really important to us and then &gt;&gt; kids would get up in front of the &gt;&gt; kids would get up in front of the &gt;&gt; kids would get up in front of the classroom and classroom and classroom and &gt;&gt; Yeah. And of course it what a what a &gt;&gt; Yeah. And of course it what a what a &gt;&gt; Yeah. And of course it what a what a beautiful exercise for kids to Yeah. beautiful exercise for kids to Yeah. beautiful exercise for kids to Yeah. partake in because of course they know partake in because of course they know partake in because of course they know more about that object than anybody. more about that object than anybody. more about that object than anybody. But I remember seeing or hearing But I remember seeing or hearing But I remember seeing or hearing different um styles. Yeah. Some people different um styles. Yeah. Some people different um styles. Yeah. Some people get in there and they'll be like, "This get in there and they'll be like, "This get in there and they'll be like, "This is my whatever." Yeah. Like transformer is my whatever." Yeah. Like transformer is my whatever." Yeah. Like transformer and they're really out there with their and they're really out there with their and they're really out there with their "This is my uh you know, my goldfish." I "This is my uh you know, my goldfish." I "This is my uh you know, my goldfish." I had some goldfish. Um had some goldfish. Um had some goldfish. Um and then occasionally and then occasionally and then occasionally not so occasionally you get this kid not so occasionally you get this kid not so occasionally you get this kid that would say, "Well, this is my pen." that would say, "Well, this is my pen." that would say, "Well, this is my pen." And then and then you're like and you're And then and then you're like and you're And then and then you're like and you're like to speak up and then and like to speak up and then and like to speak up and then and they're just not comfortable they're just not comfortable they're just not comfortable &gt;&gt; Right. sharing their Right. they're &gt;&gt; Right. sharing their Right. they're &gt;&gt; Right. sharing their Right. they're clearly intimate knowledge about this object and intimate knowledge about this object and intimate knowledge about this object and why it's important. They I mean, you why it's important. They I mean, you why it's important. They I mean, you could just tell like they're could just tell like they're could just tell like they're closed up. Right. closed up. Right. closed up. Right. &gt;&gt; And so you tell them to speak louder and &gt;&gt; And so you tell them to speak louder and &gt;&gt; And so you tell them to speak louder and then they'd speak louder, but I think then they'd speak louder, but I think then they'd speak louder, but I think that's a lot of people. Right. that's a lot of people. Right. that's a lot of people. Right. &gt;&gt; They're just not comfortable &gt;&gt; They're just not comfortable &gt;&gt; They're just not comfortable projecting their thoughts out into the projecting their thoughts out into the projecting their thoughts out into the room. Right. What is the room. Right. What is the room. Right. What is the quote unquote solution or how do we quote unquote solution or how do we quote unquote solution or how do we make space for these people? I'm not make space for these people? I'm not make space for these people? I'm not saying this for like politically correct saying this for like politically correct saying this for like politically correct reasons, but I wholeheartedly believe reasons, but I wholeheartedly believe reasons, but I wholeheartedly believe that these people harbor tons of useful that these people harbor tons of useful that these people harbor tons of useful knowledge. Maybe they want to get that knowledge Maybe they want to get that knowledge Maybe they want to get that knowledge out, but maybe that's just not the out, but maybe that's just not the out, but maybe that's just not the medium for them. Maybe they write or medium for them. Maybe they write or medium for them. Maybe they write or maybe they just maybe they just maybe they just don't want to share their favorite don't want to share their favorite don't want to share their favorite object. Yeah. So I'm sure you object. Yeah. So I'm sure you object. Yeah. So I'm sure you encounter people like this, but by encounter people like this, but by encounter people like this, but by virtue of the fact that they're going virtue of the fact that they're going virtue of the fact that they're going into a particular job or line of work into a particular job or line of work into a particular job or line of work that they they're told they have to get that they they're told they have to get that they they're told they have to get good at speaking to a whole room. good at speaking to a whole room. good at speaking to a whole room. Yeah, and I think that's unfortunate Yeah, and I think that's unfortunate Yeah, and I think that's unfortunate when people say you must be better at when people say you must be better at when people say you must be better at this. There are lots of ways to this. There are lots of ways to this. There are lots of ways to communicate and everybody should find a communicate and everybody should find a communicate and everybody should find a vehicle in a way that's helpful for vehicle in a way that's helpful for vehicle in a way that's helpful for them. There are some roles that require them. There are some roles that require them. There are some roles that require certain types of communication and if certain types of communication and if certain types of communication and if that isn't something you're comfortable that isn't something you're comfortable that isn't something you're comfortable with, maybe you look at a different with, maybe you look at a different with, maybe you look at a different role, but I believe we can all learn our role, but I believe we can all learn our role, but I believe we can all learn our communicate and develop our communicate and develop our communicate and develop our communication skills. communication skills. communication skills. I've spent much of my career helping I've spent much of my career helping I've spent much of my career helping people feel more comfortable and people feel more comfortable and people feel more comfortable and confident speaking in front of others, confident speaking in front of others, confident speaking in front of others, working on anxiety that goes around it. working on anxiety that goes around it. working on anxiety that goes around it. Helping people to see that there are Helping people to see that there are Helping people to see that there are lots of ways to communicate. Maybe I lots of ways to communicate. Maybe I lots of ways to communicate. Maybe I don't have to hold this object up and don't have to hold this object up and don't have to hold this object up and make it about me and my object. Maybe I make it about me and my object. Maybe I make it about me and my object. Maybe I tell a story about the object or I tell a story about the object or I tell a story about the object or I tell a story about how I came to have the a story about how I came to have the a story about how I came to have the object. So it's less about me and it's object. So it's less about me and it's object. So it's less about me and it's more about the story. If we can get more about the story. If we can get more about the story. If we can get people to distance themselves sometimes people to distance themselves sometimes people to distance themselves sometimes from the fear itself and get others from the fear itself and get others from the fear itself and get others engaged, it can work really well. I engaged, it can work really well. I engaged, it can work really well. I coached a very senior leader at a at a coached a very senior leader at a at a coached a very senior leader at a at a very big company everybody's familiar very big company everybody's familiar very big company everybody's familiar with and he was really nervous. with and he was really nervous. with and he was really nervous. And as he got promoted, he had larger And as he got promoted, he had larger And as he got promoted, he had larger and larger audiences. And what he would and larger audiences. And what he would and larger audiences. And what he would do, what we worked on doing is in do, what we worked on doing is in do, what we worked on doing is in essence distracting the audience right essence distracting the audience right essence distracting the audience right at the beginning. He would start by at the beginning. He would start by at the beginning. He would start by saying, "Let's watch this 30-second saying, "Let's watch this 30-second saying, "Let's watch this 30-second video." And then when the video was video." And then when the video was video." And then when the video was over, he became a facilitator of what over, he became a facilitator of what over, he became a facilitator of what just happened. So what did you think? just happened. So what did you think? just happened. So what did you think? What does this mean? And he was much What does this mean? And he was much What does this mean? And he was much more comfortable facilitating more comfortable facilitating more comfortable facilitating interaction than actually being the interaction than actually being the interaction than actually being the center of attention. So there are a lot center of attention. So there are a lot center of attention. So there are a lot of things we can do that accomplish of things we can do that accomplish of things we can do that accomplish the goal of communicating the goal of communicating the goal of communicating the information that's not about the information that's not about the information that's not about the spotlight being on me communicating it. spotlight being on me communicating it. spotlight being on me communicating it. And I want to share one example of or And I want to share one example of or And I want to share one example of or take the story about the kids doing take the story about the kids doing take the story about the kids doing show and tell. I used to do that in my show and tell. I used to do that in my show and tell. I used to do that in my undergraduate classes But I would I had undergraduate classes But I would I had undergraduate classes But I would I had a wrinkle on it. I'd have people bring a wrinkle on it. I'd have people bring a wrinkle on it. I'd have people bring in an object and they'd have to share in an object and they'd have to share in an object and they'd have to share it. I had them use that what so what now it. I had them use that what so what now it. I had them use that what so what now what structure. And then I had them tell what structure. And then I had them tell what structure. And then I had them tell about an object that they thought about an object that they thought about an object that they thought about bringing in, but they didn't. So then bringing in, but they didn't. So then bringing in, but they didn't. So then they had to say what that object was and they had to say what that object was and they had to say what that object was and why they chose not to bring it in. And why they chose not to bring it in. And why they chose not to bring it in. And that was far more illuminating about the that was far more illuminating about the that was far more illuminating about the person and we talk about authenticity. person and we talk about authenticity. person and we talk about authenticity. People just emoted in a way that they People just emoted in a way that they People just emoted in a way that they didn't when they had this thing that didn't when they had this thing that didn't when they had this thing that I've made sure to think about this I've made sure to think about this I've made sure to think about this and it's going to make me look good and it's going to make me look good and it's going to make me look good and I've architected my conversation I've architected my conversation I've architected my conversation about this one object. But when they about this one object. But when they about this one object. But when they talked about the other object, their talked about the other object, their talked about the other object, their passion came out, their conversational passion came out, their conversational passion came out, their conversational nature came out. It was really nature came out. It was really nature came out. It was really illuminating to do that. My graduate illuminating to do that. My graduate illuminating to do that. My graduate advisor told me that she'd much rather advisor told me that she'd much rather advisor told me that she'd much rather give a talk to an entire room full of give a talk to an entire room full of give a talk to an entire room full of people or an empty room than one person. people or an empty room than one person. people or an empty room than one person. Yeah. It's hard to do it for one person. Yeah. It's hard to do it for one person. Yeah. It's hard to do it for one person. Yeah. I think she's unique in that Yeah. I think she's unique in that Yeah. I think she's unique in that sense. I think most people are terrified sense. I think most people are terrified sense. I think most people are terrified of giving a talk to a room full of giving a talk to a room full of giving a talk to a room full of people. I still don't know why Right. but that's I still don't know why Right. but that's I still don't know why Right. but that's not because it's easy for me. I just I'm not because it's easy for me. I just I'm not because it's easy for me. I just I'm just I wonder what it is. I mean, you just I wonder what it is. I mean, you just I wonder what it is. I mean, you said there's this evolutionary basis said there's this evolutionary basis said there's this evolutionary basis &gt;&gt; I think it's that. I think the &gt;&gt; I think it's that. I think the &gt;&gt; I think it's that. I think the consequences seem more real when you're consequences seem more real when you're consequences seem more real when you're in front of more people. in front of more people. in front of more people. For me personally, the group For me personally, the group For me personally, the group size that's most anxiety provoking is size that's most anxiety provoking is size that's most anxiety provoking is between like 10 or 12. Once you get between like 10 or 12. Once you get between like 10 or 12. Once you get above 12, 20, 100, 1,000 people, it above 12, 20, 100, 1,000 people, it above 12, 20, 100, 1,000 people, it becomes to me more anonymous. becomes to me more anonymous. becomes to me more anonymous. But it's that 10 to 12 range that's most But it's that 10 to 12 range that's most But it's that 10 to 12 range that's most difficult. So in terms of how you difficult. So in terms of how you difficult. So in terms of how you can best practice, I do you know, can best practice, I do you know, can best practice, I do you know, vocalizing it is the most important vocalizing it is the most important vocalizing it is the most important part. &gt;&gt; Say it out loud. &gt;&gt; Say it out loud. &gt;&gt; Say it out loud. &gt;&gt; Say it out loud. You know, I'm amazingly &gt;&gt; Say it out loud. You know, I'm amazingly &gt;&gt; Say it out loud. You know, I'm amazingly eloquent in my mind. I'm not always as eloquent in my mind. I'm not always as eloquent in my mind. I'm not always as lucky when I open up my mouth. So you lucky when I open up my mouth. So you lucky when I open up my mouth. So you have to actually say it out loud. We have to actually say it out loud. We have to actually say it out loud. We make so many assumptions in our mind, make so many assumptions in our mind, make so many assumptions in our mind, connect dots that when we actually speak connect dots that when we actually speak connect dots that when we actually speak it, we realize they don't do that. it, we realize they don't do that. it, we realize they don't do that. Recording yourself obviously and Recording yourself obviously and Recording yourself obviously and listening, getting trusted others. getting trusted others. getting trusted others. You just have to get it out. And this You just have to get it out. And this You just have to get it out. And this isn't just for a big public speaking. I isn't just for a big public speaking. I isn't just for a big public speaking. I mean, this is in a high-stakes mean, this is in a high-stakes mean, this is in a high-stakes interpersonal communication. Maybe I interpersonal communication. Maybe I interpersonal communication. Maybe I want to ask my boss for a raise. Maybe I want to ask my boss for a raise. Maybe I want to ask my boss for a raise. Maybe I have to give some feedback to a have to give some feedback to a have to give some feedback to a colleague that's not great. colleague that's not great. colleague that's not great. I have to practice this stuff and I have I have to practice this stuff and I have I have to practice this stuff and I have to think about not only what am I going to think about not only what am I going to think about not only what am I going to say, but I also have to anticipate to say, but I also have to anticipate to say, but I also have to anticipate the responses and maybe role-play some the responses and maybe role-play some the responses and maybe role-play some of that as well. You know, athletes do of that as well. You know, athletes do of that as well. You know, athletes do lots of drills. So when they're in the lots of drills. So when they're in the lots of drills. So when they're in the game, they can play it well. We need to game, they can play it well. We need to game, they can play it well. We need to do the same thing. It it amazes me when do the same thing. It it amazes me when do the same thing. It it amazes me when I work with senior leaders of I work with senior leaders of I work with senior leaders of companies and they'll say, "Oh, I companies and they'll say, "Oh, I companies and they'll say, "Oh, I practiced the presentation once or twice practiced the presentation once or twice practiced the presentation once or twice and I'm ready to go." And I think and I'm ready to go." And I think and I'm ready to go." And I think about a stand-up comedian. How many about a stand-up comedian. How many about a stand-up comedian. How many times they practice their routine over times they practice their routine over times they practice their routine over and over again? How can in just one or and over again? How can in just one or and over again? How can in just one or two times flipping through the slides two times flipping through the slides two times flipping through the slides you have that content? So getting it you have that content? So getting it you have that content? So getting it out, practicing it, getting the reps, out, practicing it, getting the reps, out, practicing it, getting the reps, absolutely important. One person, 10 absolutely important. One person, 10 absolutely important. One person, 10 people, nobody, it needs to be people, nobody, it needs to be people, nobody, it needs to be practiced. We do think we know practiced. We do think we know practiced. We do think we know how to say something until reality hits how to say something until reality hits how to say something until reality hits us square in the face. Yeah. It's almost us square in the face. Yeah. It's almost us square in the face. Yeah. It's almost like if we read a word many times like if we read a word many times like if we read a word many times and we think we know how to pronounce it and we think we know how to pronounce it and we think we know how to pronounce it &gt;&gt; and then at some point we're required to &gt;&gt; and then at some point we're required to &gt;&gt; and then at some point we're required to pronounce it or we pronounce it pronounce it or we pronounce it pronounce it or we pronounce it incorrectly and then we realize we've incorrectly and then we realize we've incorrectly and then we realize we've been It's actually pronouncing it in our been It's actually pronouncing it in our been It's actually pronouncing it in our head incorrectly for a very, very long head incorrectly for a very, very long head incorrectly for a very, very long time. &gt;&gt; You and I talked prior and I shared &gt;&gt; You and I talked prior and I shared &gt;&gt; You and I talked prior and I shared with you I've done martial arts for a with you I've done martial arts for a with you I've done martial arts for a long time. And when you learn a new long time. And when you learn a new long time. And when you learn a new move, you learn it in the air and you move, you learn it in the air and you move, you learn it in the air and you can become a really great You can do can become a really great You can do can become a really great You can do that move really well, but then when you that move really well, but then when you that move really well, but then when you meet another person and have to practice meet another person and have to practice meet another person and have to practice that move, that's where reality sets in. that move, that's where reality sets in. that move, that's where reality sets in. And that's exactly what you're And that's exactly what you're And that's exactly what you're talking about. You have to You have to talking about. You have to You have to talking about. You have to You have to experience it in reality, in the real experience it in reality, in the real experience it in reality, in the real world, and then you see where you're world, and then you see where you're world, and then you see where you're really at. really at. really at. Yeah, I'm not a martial artist, but Yeah, I'm not a martial artist, but Yeah, I'm not a martial artist, but years ago years ago years ago like spent a little time in a boxing gym and spent a little time in a boxing gym and spent a little time in a boxing gym and I have to tell you shadow boxing is not I have to tell you shadow boxing is not I have to tell you shadow boxing is not the same as getting hit and the heavy the same as getting hit and the heavy the same as getting hit and the heavy bag doesn't hit back. I mean, it has bag doesn't hit back. I mean, it has bag doesn't hit back. I mean, it has some, you know, physical weight to it some, you know, physical weight to it some, you know, physical weight to it that's different than shadow boxing, but that's different than shadow boxing, but that's different than shadow boxing, but it's a whole other experience. Exactly. it's a whole other experience. Exactly. it's a whole other experience. Exactly. Like anything. It's that feedback. Yeah, Like anything. It's that feedback. Yeah, Like anything. It's that feedback. Yeah, I've been um really intrigued by the uh I've been um really intrigued by the uh I've been um really intrigued by the uh famous choreographer Twyla Tharp. She's famous choreographer Twyla Tharp. She's famous choreographer Twyla Tharp. She's now in her 80s. She's incredible. now in her 80s. She's incredible. now in her 80s. She's incredible. Said and written incredible things about Said and written incredible things about Said and written incredible things about choreography and choreography and choreography and um she said that she has this practice um she said that she has this practice um she said that she has this practice where she'll um sort of develop a dance where she'll um sort of develop a dance where she'll um sort of develop a dance routine, then go through it in her head, routine, then go through it in her head, routine, then go through it in her head, then because she was a dancer, she can then because she was a dancer, she can then because she was a dancer, she can try it and then she has people try it and then she has people try it and then she has people do it and then imagine it and then they do it and then imagine it and then they do it and then imagine it and then they iterate thousands and thousands and iterate thousands and thousands and iterate thousands and thousands and thousands of times before they actually thousands of times before they actually thousands of times before they actually even perform it once in front of a small even perform it once in front of a small even perform it once in front of a small audience and not publicly. So, it's audience and not publicly. So, it's audience and not publicly. So, it's an incredible thing that we would it's an incredible thing that we would it's an incredible thing that we would expect ourselves to be able to like get expect ourselves to be able to like get expect ourselves to be able to like get up and communicate information really up and communicate information really up and communicate information really well without having done that. One new well without having done that. One new well without having done that. One new world that I think is really interesting world that I think is really interesting world that I think is really interesting with regard to this rehearsal is there's with regard to this rehearsal is there's with regard to this rehearsal is there's some VR tools now that you can there's some VR tools now that you can there's some VR tools now that you can actually don and practice the actually don and practice the actually don and practice the presentation and you can see a simulated presentation and you can see a simulated presentation and you can see a simulated audience. And you And some of these audience. And you And some of these audience. And you And some of these tools you can actually program the tools you can actually program the tools you can actually program the audience's responses. You can say audience's responses. You can say audience's responses. You can say they're favorable or they're ignoring they're favorable or they're ignoring they're favorable or they're ignoring you. So, you can desensitize yourself. you. So, you can desensitize yourself. you. So, you can desensitize yourself. And I think that's a really interesting And I think that's a really interesting And I think that's a really interesting vehicle for people, especially people vehicle for people, especially people vehicle for people, especially people who are phobic, to desensitize, to who are phobic, to desensitize, to who are phobic, to desensitize, to get in the in the goggles and practice get in the in the goggles and practice get in the in the goggles and practice the presentation. And some of them you the presentation. And some of them you the presentation. And some of them you can actually, if you have slides, you can actually, if you have slides, you can actually, if you have slides, you can upload the slides and you can upload the slides and you can upload the slides and you can practice referring to them. So, I practice referring to them. So, I practice referring to them. So, I think it's not only in reality, but in think it's not only in reality, but in think it's not only in reality, but in virtual reality we can practice and virtual reality we can practice and virtual reality we can practice and prepare, too. prepare, too. prepare, too. Do you think that if somebody wants to Do you think that if somebody wants to Do you think that if somebody wants to get more fluid at uh presenting get more fluid at uh presenting get more fluid at uh presenting information that they could uh information that they could uh information that they could uh find a friend who would select an find a friend who would select an find a friend who would select an object in the room for them at random object in the room for them at random object in the room for them at random and then they'd have to give a and then they'd have to give a and then they'd have to give a brief improv talk about it or something brief improv talk about it or something brief improv talk about it or something like that, just to get comfortable like that, just to get comfortable like that, just to get comfortable taking on topics with some level of taking on topics with some level of taking on topics with some level of fluidity? Yeah, I think improvisation is fluidity? Yeah, I think improvisation is fluidity? Yeah, I think improvisation is a wonderful way to get better at is a wonderful way to get better at is a wonderful way to get better at communicating. Because improv isn't communicating. Because improv isn't communicating. Because improv isn't about being funny. Improv is about being about being funny. Improv is about being about being funny. Improv is about being in the moment and responding to what's in the moment and responding to what's in the moment and responding to what's needed. And so, yeah, doing anything needed. And so, yeah, doing anything needed. And so, yeah, doing anything like that. You don't even need a friend. like that. You don't even need a friend. like that. You don't even need a friend. You can just look at an object and start You can just look at an object and start You can just look at an object and start talking about it. Describe it. Share a talking about it. Describe it. Share a talking about it. Describe it. Share a story about it. All of that could be So, story about it. All of that could be So, story about it. All of that could be So, you could flip open a book and pick a you could flip open a book and pick a you could flip open a book and pick a word and then just talk about what that word and then just talk about what that word and then just talk about what that word means. Those are some of those word means. Those are some of those word means. Those are some of those agility drills that can help you be agility drills that can help you be agility drills that can help you be better when you're put on the spot. And better when you're put on the spot. And better when you're put on the spot. And it builds a confidence, too. It's And it builds a confidence, too. It's And it builds a confidence, too. It's like, I can do that. If I can do this like, I can do that. If I can do this like, I can do that. If I can do this when I pick a random word, I can do this when I pick a random word, I can do this when I pick a random word, I can do this when somebody asks me a question that I when somebody asks me a question that I when somebody asks me a question that I know a lot about the topic on. So, it's know a lot about the topic on. So, it's know a lot about the topic on. So, it's a way of building confidence and helping a way of building confidence and helping a way of building confidence and helping with that in the moment processing. with that in the moment processing. with that in the moment processing. I feel like people over the age of 15 I feel like people over the age of 15 I feel like people over the age of 15 are not are not are not terribly comfortable terribly comfortable terribly comfortable embracing these theater-like games embracing these theater-like games embracing these theater-like games because it seems childlike. But it's because it seems childlike. But it's because it seems childlike. But it's actually that childlike level of actually that childlike level of actually that childlike level of curiosity and communication that you're curiosity and communication that you're curiosity and communication that you're seeking when you seeking when you seeking when you to be an effective communicator. Yeah, a to be an effective communicator. Yeah, a to be an effective communicator. Yeah, a class I co-teach at Stanford through class I co-teach at Stanford through class I co-teach at Stanford through their continuing studies program is their continuing studies program is their continuing studies program is called Improvisationally Speaking. I called Improvisationally Speaking. I called Improvisationally Speaking. I partner with a gentleman named Adam partner with a gentleman named Adam partner with a gentleman named Adam Tobin, who's an excellent improviser, Tobin, who's an excellent improviser, Tobin, who's an excellent improviser, and together I bring the communication and together I bring the communication and together I bring the communication piece. And it's a way of giving people piece. And it's a way of giving people piece. And it's a way of giving people baby steps and permission to do some of baby steps and permission to do some of baby steps and permission to do some of these improv games because we directly these improv games because we directly these improv games because we directly link a particular improv activity to a link a particular improv activity to a link a particular improv activity to a specific communication need. And when specific communication need. And when specific communication need. And when people see that, they open up. Uh at people see that, they open up. Uh at people see that, they open up. Uh at Stanford's Graduate School of Business, Stanford's Graduate School of Business, Stanford's Graduate School of Business, there are several courses that bring in there are several courses that bring in there are several courses that bring in improvisational ideas into very serious things that How ideas into very serious things that How ideas into very serious things that How to be a manager and adapt to How to be a manager and adapt to How to be a manager and adapt to management skills through improv. How to management skills through improv. How to management skills through improv. How to demonstrate your status and power demonstrate your status and power demonstrate your status and power through some of the things that through some of the things that through some of the things that improv teaches. So, taking improv or at improv teaches. So, taking improv or at improv teaches. So, taking improv or at least understanding some of those least understanding some of those least understanding some of those principles certainly can help. principles certainly can help. principles certainly can help. When I think about the truly archival When I think about the truly archival When I think about the truly archival important information on the internet, important information on the internet, important information on the internet, very few things break through. I very few things break through. I very few things break through. I sometimes play this game. I think like sometimes play this game. I think like sometimes play this game. I think like What is like true legacy content on the What is like true legacy content on the What is like true legacy content on the internet? And one of the things that internet? And one of the things that internet? And one of the things that breaks through is Steve Jobs' breaks through is Steve Jobs' breaks through is Steve Jobs' 2015, I think it was, 2015, I think it was, 2015, I think it was, commencement speech at Stanford. commencement speech at Stanford. commencement speech at Stanford. The I Have a Dream speech, obviously The I Have a Dream speech, obviously The I Have a Dream speech, obviously Martin Luther King, JFK said some Martin Luther King, JFK said some Martin Luther King, JFK said some pretty important things. some pretty important things. some pretty important things. Those were written speeches. Those were written speeches. Those were written speeches. And they're reading from a script. And they're reading from a script. And they're reading from a script. And they include story in many cases. And they include story in many cases. And they include story in many cases. So, it fits and yet it fits and yet it fits and yet the Jobs speech, which I've listened to the Jobs speech, which I've listened to the Jobs speech, which I've listened to many times, many times, many times, um he's reading from a piece of paper. So, he's reading from a piece of paper. So, he's reading from a piece of paper. So, it runs counter to a lot of what we're it runs counter to a lot of what we're it runs counter to a lot of what we're talking about and yet it's extremely talking about and yet it's extremely talking about and yet it's extremely effective communication. Why do you effective communication. Why do you effective communication. Why do you think those examples, let's just say think those examples, let's just say think those examples, let's just say JFK, Martin Luther King, Steve Jobs, I JFK, Martin Luther King, Steve Jobs, I JFK, Martin Luther King, Steve Jobs, I should probably include a few others, should probably include a few others, should probably include a few others, but those are the ones that come to but those are the ones that come to but those are the ones that come to mind. Why do you think those are at mind. Why do you think those are at mind. Why do you think those are at least among the most effective least among the most effective least among the most effective um incidents of incidents of incidents of great communication that linger in great communication that linger in great communication that linger in people's mind? people's mind? people's mind? Well, there's several factors. One, I Well, there's several factors. One, I Well, there's several factors. One, I think is that they're incredibly well think is that they're incredibly well think is that they're incredibly well written. They are they are poetic. They written. They are they are poetic. They written. They are they are poetic. They are aspirational. They use rhetorical are aspirational. They use rhetorical are aspirational. They use rhetorical flourishes that make them flourishes that make them flourishes that make them memorable. Repetition, alliteration, memorable. Repetition, alliteration, memorable. Repetition, alliteration, things like that. things like that. things like that. They also are in a context in a time They also are in a context in a time They also are in a context in a time when those messages were really when those messages were really when those messages were really important and needed. And though they important and needed. And though they important and needed. And though they echo, they connect at a level of what's echo, they connect at a level of what's echo, they connect at a level of what's going on in the zeitgeist of the moment. going on in the zeitgeist of the moment. going on in the zeitgeist of the moment. JFK's moonshot speech, Martin Luther JFK's moonshot speech, Martin Luther JFK's moonshot speech, Martin Luther King's civil rights speech, King's civil rights speech, King's civil rights speech, Steve Jobs, I would argue what was going Steve Jobs, I would argue what was going Steve Jobs, I would argue what was going on in the economy and the environment at on in the economy and the environment at on in the economy and the environment at that time, that message really that time, that message really that time, that message really resonated. So, I think it's a match of resonated. So, I think it's a match of resonated. So, I think it's a match of context and timing. It's a match of context and timing. It's a match of context and timing. It's a match of really important ideas presented in a really important ideas presented in a really important ideas presented in a really important way with specific really important way with specific really important way with specific retorical flourishes that really make retorical flourishes that really make retorical flourishes that really make them memorable. And them memorable. And them memorable. And I think also the character that I think also the character that I think also the character that those people brought to it also makes a those people brought to it also makes a those people brought to it also makes a difference as well. I think other people difference as well. I think other people difference as well. I think other people could say those words and not have the could say those words and not have the could say those words and not have the same impact. same impact. same impact. I'm having a hard time coming up with I'm having a hard time coming up with I'm having a hard time coming up with a memory from the last 5 to 10 years a memory from the last 5 to 10 years a memory from the last 5 to 10 years of really important public communication of really important public communication of really important public communication moments. I can remember certain things happening I can remember certain things happening I can remember certain things happening that were televised and online, that were televised and online, that were televised and online, um but those were more um but those were more um but those were more things that happened. things that happened. things that happened. I think we're getting noisier. I think we're getting noisier. I think we're getting noisier. No, I think I know we're getting No, I think I know we're getting No, I think I know we're getting noisier. There are more messages out noisier. There are more messages out noisier. There are more messages out there. Uh even in the case of Steve Jobs, Uh even in the case of Steve Jobs, Uh even in the case of Steve Jobs, which was the most recent in the example which was the most recent in the example which was the most recent in the example you gave, things weren't as noisy. It you gave, things weren't as noisy. It you gave, things weren't as noisy. It wasn't as crowded, right? And so, I wasn't as crowded, right? And so, I wasn't as crowded, right? And so, I think it's hard to hear those phrases or think it's hard to hear those phrases or think it's hard to hear those phrases or those speeches in these environments those speeches in these environments those speeches in these environments where there's so much noise going on. where there's so much noise going on. where there's so much noise going on. Certainly when we observe traumatic Certainly when we observe traumatic Certainly when we observe traumatic events, Yes. those are flashbulb events, Yes. those are flashbulb events, Yes. those are flashbulb memories. I remember the shuttle memories. I remember the shuttle memories. I remember the shuttle disaster, certainly 9/11. I think the disaster, certainly 9/11. I think the disaster, certainly 9/11. I think the most salient recent one would be the most salient recent one would be the most salient recent one would be the assassination assassination, excuse me, assassination assassination, excuse me, assassination assassination, excuse me, of Charlie Kirk. of Charlie Kirk. of Charlie Kirk. Um you know, everyone knew about that. Um you know, everyone knew about that. Um you know, everyone knew about that. It was And it was It was And it was It was And it was And it was on video. Right. And it was on video. Right. And it was on video. Right. That's so it's such a different thing That's so it's such a different thing That's so it's such a different thing for people to see a grainy video versus for people to see a grainy video versus for people to see a grainy video versus a high-definition video, Right. um a high-definition video, Right. um a high-definition video, Right. um which is what we see now. which is what we see now. which is what we see now. Um So, that in some sense, Um So, that in some sense, Um So, that in some sense, you know, it creates this different you know, it creates this different you know, it creates this different threshold for what what's memorable. threshold for what what's memorable. threshold for what what's memorable. Right. And those are all tragic Right. And those are all tragic Right. And those are all tragic events. JFK's assassination, you know, we it's JFK's assassination, you know, we it's JFK's assassination, you know, we it's this grainy video and sort of shot this grainy video and sort of shot this grainy video and sort of shot at a distance and very few things get in at a distance and very few things get in at a distance and very few things get in the in the domain of the in the domain of the in the domain of not tragic, not traumatic, of not tragic, not traumatic, of not tragic, not traumatic, uh get big signal to noise that really uh get big signal to noise that really uh get big signal to noise that really lasts long. lasts long. lasts long. I think that's true and I think people I think that's true and I think people I think that's true and I think people that we don't have the people aren't that we don't have the people aren't that we don't have the people aren't referring to the same channels. So, referring to the same channels. So, referring to the same channels. So, people are getting the information people are getting the information people are getting the information differently as well. And that's also differently as well. And that's also differently as well. And that's also dividing our attention. So, we're not dividing our attention. So, we're not dividing our attention. So, we're not seeing these things really bubble up. seeing these things really bubble up. seeing these things really bubble up. But I do think it's also a commentary on But I do think it's also a commentary on But I do think it's also a commentary on where we're at as a society as well. I where we're at as a society as well. I where we're at as a society as well. I think it would be lovely if we heard think it would be lovely if we heard think it would be lovely if we heard more and more positive more and more positive more and more positive speeches that resonate with people that speeches that resonate with people that speeches that resonate with people that we're citing and quoting years from now. we're citing and quoting years from now. we're citing and quoting years from now. Yeah, I think about this a lot. Um you Yeah, I think about this a lot. Um you Yeah, I think about this a lot. Um you know, I think about know, I think about know, I think about um the non-bad events that um the non-bad events that um the non-bad events that get big signal to noise. that get big signal to noise. that get big signal to noise. And there And there And there I can't None come to mind right now. I can't None come to mind right now. I can't None come to mind right now. Forgive me, folks, if I'm missing some Forgive me, folks, if I'm missing some Forgive me, folks, if I'm missing some recent thing where some puppy did a recent thing where some puppy did a recent thing where some puppy did a super cute thing, but there's so many super cute thing, but there's so many super cute thing, but there's so many millions of those videos that I think millions of those videos that I think millions of those videos that I think we've become saturated. It's like the uh we've become saturated. It's like the uh we've become saturated. It's like the uh information equivalent of highly uh information equivalent of highly uh information equivalent of highly processed food. Like our senses have processed food. Like our senses have processed food. Like our senses have been dulled. I think there's some truth been dulled. I think there's some truth been dulled. I think there's some truth in that. And I also think we're in that. And I also think we're in that. And I also think we're moving away from traditional oration as moving away from traditional oration as moving away from traditional oration as the way it used to be done. Right? There the way it used to be done. Right? There the way it used to be done. Right? There just aren't forms for that. just aren't forms for that. just aren't forms for that. Uh you can watch some TED Talks. There Uh you can watch some TED Talks. There Uh you can watch some TED Talks. There there I mean, some amazing TED Talks out there I mean, some amazing TED Talks out there I mean, some amazing TED Talks out there and other talks of that caliber. there and other talks of that caliber. there and other talks of that caliber. Um but I don't know that any have risen Um but I don't know that any have risen Um but I don't know that any have risen to the level that you're referring to. to the level that you're referring to. to the level that you're referring to. Yeah, I think Brené Brown's talk TED Yeah, I think Brené Brown's talk TED Yeah, I think Brené Brown's talk TED Talk on vulnerability is one of the ones Talk on vulnerability is one of the ones Talk on vulnerability is one of the ones that I think is really legacy. Most that I think is really legacy. Most that I think is really legacy. Most people younger than 18 probably haven't people younger than 18 probably haven't people younger than 18 probably haven't heard it, but anyway, we'll put a heard it, but anyway, we'll put a heard it, but anyway, we'll put a link to it. And then there are a bunch link to it. And then there are a bunch link to it. And then there are a bunch of other really great TED Talks as well. of other really great TED Talks as well. of other really great TED Talks as well. You have an amazing TED Talk. I saw one You have an amazing TED Talk. I saw one You have an amazing TED Talk. I saw one a talk online with 24 million views is a talk online with 24 million views is a talk online with 24 million views is not a trivial number of views. That's not a trivial number of views. That's not a trivial number of views. That's And it was an hour-long conversation And it was an hour-long conversation And it was an hour-long conversation about effective communication. So about effective communication. So about effective communication. So clearly people care about effective clearly people care about effective clearly people care about effective communication. Um do you think that do you think that do you think that people being good at one-on-one people being good at one-on-one people being good at one-on-one conversation makes them better at conversation makes them better at conversation makes them better at on-stage conversation or do you think on-stage conversation or do you think on-stage conversation or do you think these are two completely different these are two completely different these are two completely different skills? I get this question a lot. I skills? I get this question a lot. I skills? I get this question a lot. I think I think there's a Venn diagram. think I think there's a Venn diagram. think I think there's a Venn diagram. There are people who are able to connect There are people who are able to connect There are people who are able to connect one-on-one in a way that's hard to do on one-on-one in a way that's hard to do on one-on-one in a way that's hard to do on a stage. A lot of it has to do with what a stage. A lot of it has to do with what a stage. A lot of it has to do with what academics call immediacy. I'm present academics call immediacy. I'm present academics call immediacy. I'm present with you. I'm focused. We're we're with you. I'm focused. We're we're with you. I'm focused. We're we're engaged in that way and that doesn't engaged in that way and that doesn't engaged in that way and that doesn't necessarily translate on a big stage or necessarily translate on a big stage or necessarily translate on a big stage or in a meeting. in a meeting. in a meeting. But some of the skills do translate. But some of the skills do translate. But some of the skills do translate. It's having structure, having focus in It's having structure, having focus in It's having structure, having focus in terms of a goal for what you're saying, terms of a goal for what you're saying, terms of a goal for what you're saying, being able to start in a way that's being able to start in a way that's being able to start in a way that's compelling. So it's a Venn diagram and compelling. So it's a Venn diagram and compelling. So it's a Venn diagram and there are people who can command a there are people who can command a there are people who can command a presence on a stage and you put them in presence on a stage and you put them in presence on a stage and you put them in front of one person and they don't know front of one person and they don't know front of one person and they don't know how to respond. So in terms of how to respond. So in terms of how to respond. So in terms of messaging, I think there's a lot of messaging, I think there's a lot of messaging, I think there's a lot of overlap. In terms of presence, I think overlap. In terms of presence, I think overlap. In terms of presence, I think it really varies a lot and that but I it really varies a lot and that but I it really varies a lot and that but I believe everybody can learn to be better believe everybody can learn to be better believe everybody can learn to be better at communication. I wouldn't do what I at communication. I wouldn't do what I at communication. I wouldn't do what I do if I didn't believe that. So if you do if I didn't believe that. So if you do if I didn't believe that. So if you are good interpersonally but not so good are good interpersonally but not so good are good interpersonally but not so good in front of a large group, use the in front of a large group, use the in front of a large group, use the skills you have, find a path to hone and skills you have, find a path to hone and skills you have, find a path to hone and develop the skills in a different develop the skills in a different develop the skills in a different environment. And similarly, if you're environment. And similarly, if you're environment. And similarly, if you're good on a big stage, let's take what you good on a big stage, let's take what you good on a big stage, let's take what you do there and find avenues to help you do there and find avenues to help you do there and find avenues to help you interpersonal. But they're not interpersonal. But they're not interpersonal. But they're not always the same and there are some always the same and there are some always the same and there are some people who are good at both. people who are good at both. people who are good at both. I'm excited to share that Mateena, the I'm excited to share that Mateena, the I'm excited to share that Mateena, the yerba mate drink I helped create, is now yerba mate drink I helped create, is now yerba mate drink I helped create, is now available at Whole Foods stores available at Whole Foods stores available at Whole Foods stores nationwide. Longtime listeners of this nationwide. Longtime listeners of this nationwide. Longtime listeners of this podcast know that yerba mate is my podcast know that yerba mate is my podcast know that yerba mate is my preferred caffeine source. It provides preferred caffeine source. It provides preferred caffeine source. It provides smooth energy without giving you the smooth energy without giving you the smooth energy without giving you the jitters and it has a lot of other jitters and it has a lot of other jitters and it has a lot of other potential benefits including helping to potential benefits including helping to potential benefits including helping to regulate your blood sugar, improving regulate your blood sugar, improving regulate your blood sugar, improving digestion, mild appetite suppression and digestion, mild appetite suppression and digestion, mild appetite suppression and much more. Mateena is my absolute much more. Mateena is my absolute much more. Mateena is my absolute favorite of all the yerba mate brands favorite of all the yerba mate brands favorite of all the yerba mate brands out there and I've tried them all. Given out there and I've tried them all. Given out there and I've tried them all. Given my love for Mateena, I decided to become my love for Mateena, I decided to become my love for Mateena, I decided to become a part owner in the business and I a part owner in the business and I a part owner in the business and I helped them create their new line of helped them create their new line of helped them create their new line of products which are all entirely zero products which are all entirely zero products which are all entirely zero sugar. These zero sugar cold brew sugar. These zero sugar cold brew sugar. These zero sugar cold brew Mateena flavors are fantastic. I drink Mateena flavors are fantastic. I drink Mateena flavors are fantastic. I drink at least three cans of them every single at least three cans of them every single at least three cans of them every single day. You'll often see them on the table day. You'll often see them on the table day. You'll often see them on the table during my podcast recordings. I during my podcast recordings. I during my podcast recordings. I absolutely love the product and I'm absolutely love the product and I'm absolutely love the product and I'm proud to now have it sold at Whole proud to now have it sold at Whole proud to now have it sold at Whole Foods. So check out Mateena at Whole Foods. So check out Mateena at Whole Foods. So check out Mateena at Whole Foods stores nationwide. It's cold Foods stores nationwide. It's cold Foods stores nationwide. It's cold brewed with the absolute best brewed with the absolute best brewed with the absolute best ingredients. It has zero sugar and it ingredients. It has zero sugar and it ingredients. It has zero sugar and it tastes amazing. And if you don't have a tastes amazing. And if you don't have a tastes amazing. And if you don't have a Whole Foods near you, you can also buy Whole Foods near you, you can also buy Whole Foods near you, you can also buy it online at drinkmateena.com. it online at drinkmateena.com. it online at drinkmateena.com. These days we hear quite often about These days we hear quite often about These days we hear quite often about neurotypical and neuroatypical. neurotypical and neuroatypical. neurotypical and neuroatypical. And I do think there's a distinct And I do think there's a distinct And I do think there's a distinct difference in the conversational style, difference in the conversational style, difference in the conversational style, the amount of prosody. the amount of prosody. the amount of prosody. I don't want to say affect because I don't want to say affect because I don't want to say affect because I have some close friends who are I have some close friends who are I have some close friends who are neuroatypical and they tell me and I neuroatypical and they tell me and I neuroatypical and they tell me and I believe them that they have every bit as believe them that they have every bit as believe them that they have every bit as much emotion underneath their voice as much emotion underneath their voice as much emotion underneath their voice as somebody who's like you know really um somebody who's like you know really um somebody who's like you know really um you know sharing that emotion in you know sharing that emotion in you know sharing that emotion in these inflections of voice and their these inflections of voice and their these inflections of voice and their bodily movements. Do you think that we bodily movements. Do you think that we bodily movements. Do you think that we need to adjust our kind of concept of need to adjust our kind of concept of need to adjust our kind of concept of what effective communication is based on what effective communication is based on what effective communication is based on this what seems to be an expansion of at this what seems to be an expansion of at this what seems to be an expansion of at least the understanding of neurotypical least the understanding of neurotypical least the understanding of neurotypical neuroatypical? Yeah, I certainly neuroatypical? Yeah, I certainly neuroatypical? Yeah, I certainly don't mean to conflate neurodiversity don't mean to conflate neurodiversity don't mean to conflate neurodiversity and introversion and extroversion. But and introversion and extroversion. But and introversion and extroversion. But the question you're asking to me is I the question you're asking to me is I the question you're asking to me is I hear it as a similar way. Is is there hear it as a similar way. Is is there hear it as a similar way. Is is there one right way to communicate or one right way to communicate or one right way to communicate or one better way and people who don't better way and people who don't better way and people who don't communicate that way are they at a communicate that way are they at a communicate that way are they at a disadvantage? Uh I think there are disadvantage? Uh I think there are disadvantage? Uh I think there are expectations for what effective expectations for what effective expectations for what effective communication is but I think it is a we communication is but I think it is a we communication is but I think it is a we can expand it in and there is value for can expand it in and there is value for can expand it in and there is value for people regardless of if it's neurodiversity or regardless of if it's neurodiversity or regardless of if it's neurodiversity or introversion for example. Extroversion introversion for example. Extroversion introversion for example. Extroversion tends to get rewarded just because you tends to get rewarded just because you tends to get rewarded just because you get you hear it. You see it. But the I get you hear it. You see it. But the I get you hear it. You see it. But the I think there are things that we can learn think there are things that we can learn think there are things that we can learn from people who are neurodiverse that from people who are neurodiverse that from people who are neurodiverse that can help to really can help to really can help to really connect and be better communicators. connect and be better communicators. connect and be better communicators. So too in the way that folks who are So too in the way that folks who are So too in the way that folks who are highly introverted communicate can help. highly introverted communicate can help. highly introverted communicate can help. There is certainly no one right way to There is certainly no one right way to There is certainly no one right way to communicate. There are better ways and communicate. There are better ways and communicate. There are better ways and worse ways and regardless of where you worse ways and regardless of where you worse ways and regardless of where you are in terms of introversion, are in terms of introversion, are in terms of introversion, extroversion, neurodiversity, you can extroversion, neurodiversity, you can extroversion, neurodiversity, you can communicate effectively. Play to your communicate effectively. Play to your communicate effectively. Play to your strengths. There are things that strengths. There are things that strengths. There are things that introverts do that are amazing that introverts do that are amazing that introverts do that are amazing that really help move communication forward. really help move communication forward. really help move communication forward. People with certain types of People with certain types of People with certain types of neurodiversity in terms of the neurodiversity in terms of the neurodiversity in terms of the creativity or the level of detail with creativity or the level of detail with creativity or the level of detail with which they communicate can be really which they communicate can be really which they communicate can be really helpful. We just have to find those helpful. We just have to find those helpful. We just have to find those advantages and lean into them to advantages and lean into them to advantages and lean into them to help. I find that when it comes to podcast I find that when it comes to podcast I find that when it comes to podcast guests, Yeah. guests, Yeah. guests, Yeah. if somebody wrote a book at some point, if somebody wrote a book at some point, if somebody wrote a book at some point, they tend to be pretty comfortable they tend to be pretty comfortable they tend to be pretty comfortable podcasting. Independent of whether they've been on a Independent of whether they've been on a Independent of whether they've been on a lot of podcasts before. lot of podcasts before. lot of podcasts before. Which raises the question is Which raises the question is Which raises the question is the practice of writing out one's the practice of writing out one's the practice of writing out one's thoughts by hand or typing them out by hand or typing them out by hand or typing them out an effective way to prepare to speak or an effective way to prepare to speak or an effective way to prepare to speak or just get better at speaking generally. just get better at speaking generally. just get better at speaking generally. And I do understand that eventually you And I do understand that eventually you And I do understand that eventually you got to you know if you want to get got to you know if you want to get got to you know if you want to get better at push-ups, you got to do better at push-ups, you got to do better at push-ups, you got to do push-ups. If you want to get speaking, push-ups. If you want to get speaking, push-ups. If you want to get speaking, you have to speak. you have to speak. you have to speak. But do you think writing and But do you think writing and But do you think writing and transferring ideas onto paper helps transferring ideas onto paper helps transferring ideas onto paper helps people become better communicators? people become better communicators? people become better communicators? Short answer is yes but I think it's a Short answer is yes but I think it's a Short answer is yes but I think it's a two-part process. The first part is the two-part process. The first part is the two-part process. The first part is the thought process that goes into what thought process that goes into what thought process that goes into what you're going to write. Having written you're going to write. Having written you're going to write. Having written some books, I know you're writing some books, I know you're writing some books, I know you're writing a book, you think differently about a book, you think differently about a book, you think differently about your content. You have to think about your content. You have to think about your content. You have to think about the audience. You have to think about the audience. You have to think about the audience. You have to think about how do these pieces fit together? how do these pieces fit together? how do these pieces fit together? There's there's a scaffolding that's There's there's a scaffolding that's There's there's a scaffolding that's needed. So it's the thought process that needed. So it's the thought process that needed. So it's the thought process that helps. But then the actual putting pen to But then the actual putting pen to But then the actual putting pen to paper, fingers on keyboards, when you paper, fingers on keyboards, when you paper, fingers on keyboards, when you have to make word choice, when you have to make word choice, when you have to make word choice, when you have to think about the syntax, the grammar, to think about the syntax, the grammar, to think about the syntax, the grammar, you are more intimately involved with you are more intimately involved with you are more intimately involved with your content than you are when you're your content than you are when you're your content than you are when you're just thinking about the ideas. So so I just thinking about the ideas. So so I just thinking about the ideas. So so I think at both levels, it's helping you think at both levels, it's helping you think at both levels, it's helping you hone your message. I'm a very nervous hone your message. I'm a very nervous hone your message. I'm a very nervous writer. I'm not a very nervous speaker. writer. I'm not a very nervous speaker. writer. I'm not a very nervous speaker. I am very nervous about what I write. I am very nervous about what I write. I am very nervous about what I write. But I'm a better editor than I am writer But I'm a better editor than I am writer But I'm a better editor than I am writer and that editing process really trains and that editing process really trains and that editing process really trains your brain to be ready to respond to your brain to be ready to respond to your brain to be ready to respond to questions, to focus information. And so questions, to focus information. And so questions, to focus information. And so I think each of those steps, the I think each of those steps, the I think each of those steps, the ideation, the actual crafting and then ideation, the actual crafting and then ideation, the actual crafting and then the editing, prepare you to communicate the editing, prepare you to communicate the editing, prepare you to communicate better. And all of us can use different better. And all of us can use different better. And all of us can use different parts of this You don't have to write a parts of this You don't have to write a parts of this You don't have to write a book to be able to use those skills to book to be able to use those skills to book to be able to use those skills to speak better. speak better. speak better. I used to prepare my scientific talks by I used to prepare my scientific talks by I used to prepare my scientific talks by building the slides. Mhm. Yeah. building the slides. Mhm. Yeah. building the slides. Mhm. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I required that there be nothing &gt;&gt; And I required that there be nothing &gt;&gt; And I required that there be nothing else going on in the room because in my else going on in the room because in my else going on in the room because in my head I'm thinking about what I'm going head I'm thinking about what I'm going head I'm thinking about what I'm going to say as I build the slide. So the to say as I build the slide. So the to say as I build the slide. So the building of the slides oneself, Yeah. building of the slides oneself, Yeah. building of the slides oneself, Yeah. including sometimes the illustrations including sometimes the illustrations including sometimes the illustrations etc., was an important part of preparing etc., was an important part of preparing etc., was an important part of preparing the talk. Right. the talk. Right. the talk. Right. I find that if I can just cut and paste I find that if I can just cut and paste I find that if I can just cut and paste figures, it's much worse. Yeah, I call figures, it's much worse. Yeah, I call figures, it's much worse. Yeah, I call it a Franken deck. People like it a Franken deck. People like it a Franken deck. People like accumulate different slides and slam accumulate different slides and slam accumulate different slides and slam them all together like Frankenstein was them all together like Frankenstein was them all together like Frankenstein was an amalgamation. There's no story there. an amalgamation. There's no story there. an amalgamation. There's no story there. There's no thought process that ties it There's no thought process that ties it There's no thought process that ties it all together. So the slide was the all together. So the slide was the all together. So the slide was the manifestation of your thought process. manifestation of your thought process. manifestation of your thought process. And that's why I think it was so useful And that's why I think it was so useful And that's why I think it was so useful to you. to you. to you. Can I share a story? Sure. You're the Can I share a story? Sure. You're the Can I share a story? Sure. You're the guest but I really want your thoughts guest but I really want your thoughts guest but I really want your thoughts on this. on this. on this. We have a colleague at Stanford. I His We have a colleague at Stanford. I His We have a colleague at Stanford. I His name escapes me. Forgive me. But years name escapes me. Forgive me. But years name escapes me. Forgive me. But years ago we were ago we were ago we were um we were Pew fellows which was this um we were Pew fellows which was this um we were Pew fellows which was this group where you Yeah. You know group where you Yeah. You know group where you Yeah. You know congratulations. &gt;&gt; Thank you. I still don't know how it &gt;&gt; Thank you. I still don't know how it &gt;&gt; Thank you. I still don't know how it happened for me but it happened. happened for me but it happened. happened for me but it happened. Anyway, we had to give our talks the Anyway, we had to give our talks the Anyway, we had to give our talks the fourth year. And fourth year. And fourth year. And you know talk about being in a room full you know talk about being in a room full you know talk about being in a room full of people where you're like whoa. There of people where you're like whoa. There of people where you're like whoa. There was some serious It's people from all was some serious It's people from all was some serious It's people from all around the country and you know around the country and you know around the country and you know and it's not just neuroscience and so and it's not just neuroscience and so and it's not just neuroscience and so you know you're humbled to be there. I you know you're humbled to be there. I you know you're humbled to be there. I don't care how good you are. don't care how good you are. don't care how good you are. Many people in the room are going to be Many people in the room are going to be Many people in the room are going to be better than you. better than you. better than you. There's this one guy. He's now a faculty There's this one guy. He's now a faculty There's this one guy. He's now a faculty member at Stanford and for his talk he member at Stanford and for his talk he member at Stanford and for his talk he got up there got up there got up there and he said rather than show you a bunch and he said rather than show you a bunch and he said rather than show you a bunch of data, I'm going to play you a movie of data, I'm going to play you a movie of data, I'm going to play you a movie and a song. and a song. and a song. And he put up this video of these oil And he put up this video of these oil And he put up this video of these oil droplets bumping into one another. droplets bumping into one another. droplets bumping into one another. And the sound or the song corresponded And the sound or the song corresponded And the sound or the song corresponded to the oil droplets bumping into one to the oil droplets bumping into one to the oil droplets bumping into one another. And my first thought was this guy's And my first thought was this guy's And my first thought was this guy's crazy. Like he's legitimately crazy crazy. Like he's legitimately crazy crazy. Like he's legitimately crazy or he just kind of doesn't care. or he just kind of doesn't care. or he just kind of doesn't care. And this is pretty cool. And this is pretty cool. And this is pretty cool. Um but then he went on to give a talk about but then he went on to give a talk about but then he went on to give a talk about how he was using sound in order to how he was using sound in order to how he was using sound in order to develop novel molecules. He went on to develop novel molecules. He went on to develop novel molecules. He went on to win a MacArthur genius award. He's built win a MacArthur genius award. He's built win a MacArthur genius award. He's built $1 microscopes and centrifuges that $1 microscopes and centrifuges that $1 microscopes and centrifuges that they're using in Africa to diagnose they're using in Africa to diagnose they're using in Africa to diagnose diseases in areas that have very little diseases in areas that have very little diseases in areas that have very little funding. He's one of those. Yes. Yeah. funding. He's one of those. Yes. Yeah. funding. He's one of those. Yes. Yeah. And I remember thinking And I remember thinking And I remember thinking like wow. Like this guy is incredible. like wow. Like this guy is incredible. like wow. Like this guy is incredible. Yeah. Just spectacular levels of Yeah. Just spectacular levels of Yeah. Just spectacular levels of uh [snorts] uh [snorts] uh [snorts] communication ability. communication ability. communication ability. Yeah, I think he actually is a genius. Yeah, I think he actually is a genius. Yeah, I think he actually is a genius. You know the these genius awards is kind You know the these genius awards is kind You know the these genius awards is kind of a funny name, right? of a funny name, right? of a funny name, right? And and I realized And and I realized And and I realized &gt;&gt; I never got one. What's that? I never &gt;&gt; I never got one. What's that? I never &gt;&gt; I never got one. What's that? I never got one. I never got one. And I think got one. I never got one. And I think got one. I never got one. And I think some people that get them are geniuses some people that get them are geniuses some people that get them are geniuses and I think some are not frankly, you and I think some are not frankly, you and I think some are not frankly, you know. And and um know. And and um know. And and um but that talk was really but that talk was really but that talk was really it wasn't just humbling. It was really it wasn't just humbling. It was really it wasn't just humbling. It was really eye-opening for me because it made me eye-opening for me because it made me eye-opening for me because it made me realize that if somebody realize that if somebody realize that if somebody has true command of the material and they true command of the material and they true command of the material and they believe in their own unique vision believe in their own unique vision believe in their own unique vision enough that you really can use something as uh that you really can use something as uh that you really can use something as uh what seems as vague as a bunch of oil what seems as vague as a bunch of oil what seems as vague as a bunch of oil droplets bumping into one I mean it was droplets bumping into one I mean it was droplets bumping into one I mean it was pretty but it looked like a lava lamp pretty but it looked like a lava lamp pretty but it looked like a lava lamp frankly and some music. But it was the frankly and some music. But it was the frankly and some music. But it was the perfect bring around because it was perfect bring around because it was perfect bring around because it was such high signal to noise. such high signal to noise. such high signal to noise. Hats off to him. He's amazing. Hats off to him. He's amazing. Hats off to him. He's amazing. If people try to do that If people try to do that If people try to do that and it doesn't work, and it doesn't work, and it doesn't work, Yeah. it fails spectacularly. Yeah. it fails spectacularly. Yeah. it fails spectacularly. If it works, it succeeds spectacularly. If it works, it succeeds spectacularly. If it works, it succeeds spectacularly. So do you think you know So do you think you know So do you think you know there's something to you know, there's something to you know, there's something to you know, whether or not we should stay whether or not we should stay whether or not we should stay conventional or we should try hooks like conventional or we should try hooks like conventional or we should try hooks like that. I never once thought I should do that. I never once thought I should do that. I never once thought I should do something like that when giving a talk. something like that when giving a talk. something like that when giving a talk. But it was I mean you can probably tell But it was I mean you can probably tell But it was I mean you can probably tell by the way I'm relaying the story. It by the way I'm relaying the story. It by the way I'm relaying the story. It still sits in my body as one of the more still sits in my body as one of the more still sits in my body as one of the more fantastic experiences in my entire fantastic experiences in my entire fantastic experiences in my entire academic career. So I was like that was academic career. So I was like that was academic career. So I was like that was incredible and I'll never forget it. I incredible and I'll never forget it. I incredible and I'll never forget it. I think what that particular talk did is think what that particular talk did is think what that particular talk did is it violated expectations and in so doing it violated expectations and in so doing it violated expectations and in so doing it made it stand out. it made it stand out. it made it stand out. Should people test boundaries and push Should people test boundaries and push Should people test boundaries and push things in communication? I think they things in communication? I think they things in communication? I think they should. But I think we need to be a should. But I think we need to be a should. But I think we need to be a little thoughtful about that and perhaps AB thoughtful about that and perhaps AB thoughtful about that and perhaps AB test them, run them by some other test them, run them by some other test them, run them by some other people, say I'm thinking of doing this, people, say I'm thinking of doing this, people, say I'm thinking of doing this, what do you think? And make sure that what do you think? And make sure that what do you think? And make sure that the risk you're taking is calculated. I the risk you're taking is calculated. I the risk you're taking is calculated. I have this conversation all the time with have this conversation all the time with have this conversation all the time with my students and the people I coach my students and the people I coach my students and the people I coach around humor. Now I'm not saying telling around humor. Now I'm not saying telling around humor. Now I'm not saying telling a joke is similar to your experience, a joke is similar to your experience, a joke is similar to your experience, but it involves risk and if it works, but it involves risk and if it works, but it involves risk and if it works, humor is an amazing way to connect. But humor is an amazing way to connect. But humor is an amazing way to connect. But if it fails, it's a great way to if it fails, it's a great way to if it fails, it's a great way to disconnect. So you have to think it disconnect. So you have to think it disconnect. So you have to think it through, you have to understand the through, you have to understand the through, you have to understand the costs and the benefits and I think test costs and the benefits and I think test costs and the benefits and I think test it out on a few people and then see what it out on a few people and then see what it out on a few people and then see what happens. It sounds like this person It sounds like this person It sounds like this person did uh not only violated expectations, did uh not only violated expectations, did uh not only violated expectations, but they were able to give you a but they were able to give you a but they were able to give you a visceral experience of what it was that visceral experience of what it was that visceral experience of what it was that they were studying. So it wasn't just a they were studying. So it wasn't just a they were studying. So it wasn't just a concept which many of these you and I concept which many of these you and I concept which many of these you and I both attend lots of academic talks. I both attend lots of academic talks. I both attend lots of academic talks. I mean it can get very theoretical, very mean it can get very theoretical, very mean it can get very theoretical, very conceptual, but made it very tangible conceptual, but made it very tangible conceptual, but made it very tangible and because of that was helpful to and because of that was helpful to and because of that was helpful to the goal that they were trying to the goal that they were trying to the goal that they were trying to achieve. So I often challenge people, achieve. So I often challenge people, achieve. So I often challenge people, how could you communicate this how could you communicate this how could you communicate this information in a way information in a way information in a way that really gets people engaged and that really gets people engaged and that really gets people engaged and involved? Could you do something on a involved? Could you do something on a involved? Could you do something on a whiteboard? Could you use an analogy? Is whiteboard? Could you use an analogy? Is whiteboard? Could you use an analogy? Is there a story you could tell or a there a story you could tell or a there a story you could tell or a question you can ask rather than just question you can ask rather than just question you can ask rather than just detailing the information? So do detailing the information? So do detailing the information? So do something that violates an expectation something that violates an expectation something that violates an expectation but is in line with and supports the but is in line with and supports the but is in line with and supports the goal that you have. goal that you have. goal that you have. Do you think that some introspection Do you think that some introspection Do you think that some introspection about who one is helpful? about who one is helpful? about who one is helpful? You know, like I couldn't give that talk You know, like I couldn't give that talk You know, like I couldn't give that talk even if I had half the knowledge. I even if I had half the knowledge. I even if I had half the knowledge. I couldn't give that talk. Like I can give couldn't give that talk. Like I can give couldn't give that talk. Like I can give the talk that I give. the talk that I give. the talk that I give. Um and sometimes I wonder whether and sometimes I wonder whether and sometimes I wonder whether even if a talk is very dry, even if a talk is very dry, even if a talk is very dry, it works because the person is dry. it works because the person is dry. it works because the person is dry. Or somebody has more theatrical, it Or somebody has more theatrical, it Or somebody has more theatrical, it works because the person is theatrical works because the person is theatrical works because the person is theatrical outside of the talk. outside of the talk. outside of the talk. This kind of brings us back to This kind of brings us back to This kind of brings us back to authenticity. Sometimes I wonder if authenticity. Sometimes I wonder if authenticity. Sometimes I wonder if people just need to figure out who they are and just need to figure out who they are and just need to figure out who they are and how they process information in the world they process information in the world they process information in the world and just try and share that. The same and just try and share that. The same and just try and share that. The same way that a musician would way that a musician would way that a musician would share their share their share their song or um song or um song or um an artist would share their visual art an artist would share their visual art an artist would share their visual art or um or some other form of art because or um or some other form of art because or um or some other form of art because that's the filter that they experience that's the filter that they experience that's the filter that they experience the world through. I mean I think a the world through. I mean I think a the world through. I mean I think a lot of times we want to hear things lot of times we want to hear things lot of times we want to hear things because we want to access these other because we want to access these other because we want to access these other portals that we can't get to. portals that we can't get to. portals that we can't get to. I think understanding what works for you I think understanding what works for you I think understanding what works for you and where your strengths are is and where your strengths are is and where your strengths are is absolutely important, but at the same absolutely important, but at the same absolutely important, but at the same time you don't know where some of those time you don't know where some of those time you don't know where some of those strengths are if you don't try other strengths are if you don't try other strengths are if you don't try other things. And that's why I coming back to things. And that's why I coming back to things. And that's why I coming back to this notion of improv as a one example, this notion of improv as a one example, this notion of improv as a one example, you don't know until you do it where you don't know until you do it where you don't know until you do it where your comfort levels are and where those your comfort levels are and where those your comfort levels are and where those boundaries are and you might learn that boundaries are and you might learn that boundaries are and you might learn that there's some things you can do really there's some things you can do really there's some things you can do really well that would help you be a better well that would help you be a better well that would help you be a better communicator. So absolutely communicator. So absolutely communicator. So absolutely investigating what works for you and investigating what works for you and investigating what works for you and leveraging that is important, but also leveraging that is important, but also leveraging that is important, but also expand a little bit to see where you can expand a little bit to see where you can expand a little bit to see where you can grow. I think the work you do, the work I try I think the work you do, the work I try I think the work you do, the work I try to do in terms of podcasting and writing to do in terms of podcasting and writing to do in terms of podcasting and writing and teaching, we're trying to expose and teaching, we're trying to expose and teaching, we're trying to expose people to more information that they people to more information that they people to more information that they could then adapt and adopt so that they could then adapt and adopt so that they could then adapt and adopt so that they can perhaps expand the way they can perhaps expand the way they can perhaps expand the way they communicate, they research, whatever it communicate, they research, whatever it communicate, they research, whatever it is. So I think you do have to absolutely is. So I think you do have to absolutely is. So I think you do have to absolutely play to your strengths, but you have to play to your strengths, but you have to play to your strengths, but you have to explore what those strengths might be as explore what those strengths might be as explore what those strengths might be as well. I'd hate for everybody just to do well. I'd hate for everybody just to do well. I'd hate for everybody just to do only what they're good at. only what they're good at. only what they're good at. Can we talk about uh damage control? Can we talk about uh damage control? Can we talk about uh damage control? &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yes. You know, I do think having &gt;&gt; Yes. You know, I do think having &gt;&gt; Yes. You know, I do think having coached uh students and postdocs through coached uh students and postdocs through coached uh students and postdocs through public speaking and having seen one public speaking and having seen one public speaking and having seen one complete meltdown. I complete meltdown. I complete meltdown. I This person's now professor. He's doing This person's now professor. He's doing This person's now professor. He's doing incredible work. He's you know, he's incredible work. He's you know, he's incredible work. He's you know, he's went on to get a job and everything, but went on to get a job and everything, but went on to get a job and everything, but during a practice talk in front in front during a practice talk in front in front during a practice talk in front in front of a small number of people, it was like of a small number of people, it was like of a small number of people, it was like total meltdown. Total meltdown, no total meltdown. Total meltdown, no total meltdown. Total meltdown, no recovery. Just we had to just delay and recovery. Just we had to just delay and recovery. Just we had to just delay and do it another time. Despite do it another time. Despite do it another time. Despite &gt;&gt; So he literally just stopped talking &gt;&gt; So he literally just stopped talking &gt;&gt; So he literally just stopped talking and walked off the stage. and walked off the stage. and walked off the stage. &gt;&gt; He froze and he apologized and then &gt;&gt; He froze and he apologized and then &gt;&gt; He froze and he apologized and then we said, no, it's fine. I'm in a small we said, no, it's fine. I'm in a small we said, no, it's fine. I'm in a small venue and then we tried to you know, venue and then we tried to you know, venue and then we tried to you know, encourage him along and maybe he encourage him along and maybe he encourage him along and maybe he hadn't slept well. He had a lot going hadn't slept well. He had a lot going hadn't slept well. He had a lot going on. But it ended with him sitting on the on. But it ended with him sitting on the on. But it ended with him sitting on the side of the stage asking everyone to side of the stage asking everyone to side of the stage asking everyone to please leave. Oh, okay. please leave. Oh, okay. please leave. Oh, okay. &gt;&gt; It was So it was heavy. You know, it was &gt;&gt; It was So it was heavy. You know, it was &gt;&gt; It was So it was heavy. You know, it was heavy and it was very important for us heavy and it was very important for us heavy and it was very important for us to all get back in the room again and to all get back in the room again and to all get back in the room again and he did that and then he went on the and he did that and then he went on the and he did that and then he went on the job market and he got a position and job market and he got a position and job market and he got a position and he's tenure faculty member someplace he's tenure faculty member someplace he's tenure faculty member someplace now. So now. So now. So he recovered himself as you know, we all he recovered himself as you know, we all he recovered himself as you know, we all have bad days, but I think hearing that have bad days, but I think hearing that have bad days, but I think hearing that some people are probably like, oh my some people are probably like, oh my some people are probably like, oh my goodness. Right. Um goodness. Right. Um goodness. Right. Um what to do if one does forget what to do if one does forget what to do if one does forget what they're trying to say on stage or Right. they're trying to say on stage or Right. they're trying to say on stage or Right. um just choke. Yeah. You know, I um just choke. Yeah. You know, I um just choke. Yeah. You know, I recommend if people are nervous that recommend if people are nervous that recommend if people are nervous that they actually have some outlet for that they actually have some outlet for that they actually have some outlet for that movement as I talked about before. movement as I talked about before. movement as I talked about before. Pacing or even bouncing one's knee Pacing or even bouncing one's knee Pacing or even bouncing one's knee behind the podium very effective at behind the podium very effective at behind the podium very effective at dispelling energy and getting one to dispelling energy and getting one to dispelling energy and getting one to relax. It I just think it's relax. It I just think it's relax. It I just think it's use it's been a useful tool for me and use it's been a useful tool for me and use it's been a useful tool for me and I think for others I've suggested to and I think for others I've suggested to and I think for others I've suggested to do as well. But do as well. But do as well. But how bad do you think it is if somebody how bad do you think it is if somebody how bad do you think it is if somebody suddenly stops on stage and just says, suddenly stops on stage and just says, suddenly stops on stage and just says, sorry, I lost my train of thought and sorry, I lost my train of thought and sorry, I lost my train of thought and goes back to it. Do you think it goes back to it. Do you think it goes back to it. Do you think it humanizes them or do you think that it humanizes them or do you think that it humanizes them or do you think that it actually is deadly for the message? actually is deadly for the message? actually is deadly for the message? Like with my students I have to say it Like with my students I have to say it Like with my students I have to say it depends. It depends on the circumstance depends. It depends on the circumstance depends. It depends on the circumstance that you're in. I do believe that you're in. I do believe that you're in. I do believe that audiences are more forgiving. What I audiences are more forgiving. What I audiences are more forgiving. What I advise the people I teach and coach to advise the people I teach and coach to advise the people I teach and coach to do in those moments is instead of do in those moments is instead of do in those moments is instead of saying, oh, I forgot what I want to say, saying, oh, I forgot what I want to say, saying, oh, I forgot what I want to say, why not say, I get sometimes so why not say, I get sometimes so why not say, I get sometimes so passionate about what I say I get a passionate about what I say I get a passionate about what I say I get a little ahead of myself. little ahead of myself. little ahead of myself. Which is likely true and use that as a Which is likely true and use that as a Which is likely true and use that as a as a reason to reset. as a reason to reset. as a reason to reset. Let me share with you what I advise Let me share with you what I advise Let me share with you what I advise people to do to avoid blanking out and people to do to avoid blanking out and people to do to avoid blanking out and then what to do if you do blank out. then what to do if you do blank out. then what to do if you do blank out. First and foremost avoid memorizing. First and foremost avoid memorizing. First and foremost avoid memorizing. Memorizing invites blanking out. So Memorizing invites blanking out. So Memorizing invites blanking out. So let's not memorize. Let's have a clear let's not memorize. Let's have a clear let's not memorize. Let's have a clear structure, a road map, but we don't know structure, a road map, but we don't know structure, a road map, but we don't know every word that we're going to say. every word that we're going to say. every word that we're going to say. The fear of blanking out leads and The fear of blanking out leads and The fear of blanking out leads and increases the likelihood of blanking increases the likelihood of blanking increases the likelihood of blanking out. So let's not worry about blanking out as let's not worry about blanking out as let's not worry about blanking out as much as we do. How do we do that? We much as we do. How do we do that? We much as we do. How do we do that? We rationalize. I ask everybody to think rationalize. I ask everybody to think rationalize. I ask everybody to think about what is the likelihood in this about what is the likelihood in this about what is the likelihood in this upcoming communication, whatever it is, upcoming communication, whatever it is, upcoming communication, whatever it is, one-on-one, big presentation, that one-on-one, big presentation, that one-on-one, big presentation, that you'll blank out. Most people say maybe you'll blank out. Most people say maybe you'll blank out. Most people say maybe 20%. Well, that means 80% of the time 20%. Well, that means 80% of the time 20%. Well, that means 80% of the time you're not going to blank out. I'm not a you're not going to blank out. I'm not a you're not going to blank out. I'm not a betting person. I'd take those odds. betting person. I'd take those odds. betting person. I'd take those odds. So realizing it's not as likely to So realizing it's not as likely to So realizing it's not as likely to happen, that's step one. Step two, ask happen, that's step one. Step two, ask happen, that's step one. Step two, ask yourself if it were to happen, what's yourself if it were to happen, what's yourself if it were to happen, what's the worst thing that would happen for the worst thing that would happen for the worst thing that would happen for me? Well, it would be incredibly me? Well, it would be incredibly me? Well, it would be incredibly embarrassing, it would be awkward and it embarrassing, it would be awkward and it embarrassing, it would be awkward and it might have some short-term implications. might have some short-term implications. might have some short-term implications. But who in their life hasn't been But who in their life hasn't been But who in their life hasn't been embarrassed, been in situations that are embarrassed, been in situations that are embarrassed, been in situations that are awkward and had short-term implications? awkward and had short-term implications? awkward and had short-term implications? So when you put it in that context, all So when you put it in that context, all So when you put it in that context, all of a sudden blanking out isn't as likely of a sudden blanking out isn't as likely of a sudden blanking out isn't as likely as you think and it's not as bad as you as you think and it's not as bad as you as you think and it's not as bad as you think. That reduces the stress you have think. That reduces the stress you have think. That reduces the stress you have about doing it which reduces the about doing it which reduces the about doing it which reduces the likelihood. So by not memorizing and likelihood. So by not memorizing and likelihood. So by not memorizing and rationalizing, you can actually reduce rationalizing, you can actually reduce rationalizing, you can actually reduce the likelihood of blanking out. Now the likelihood of blanking out. Now the likelihood of blanking out. Now let's say the worst happens, you blank let's say the worst happens, you blank let's say the worst happens, you blank out. You you don't know what to say. out. You you don't know what to say. out. You you don't know what to say. First and best thing to do is just what First and best thing to do is just what First and best thing to do is just what you do if you lose your phone or lose you do if you lose your phone or lose you do if you lose your phone or lose your keys, retrace your steps. Repeat your keys, retrace your steps. Repeat your keys, retrace your steps. Repeat what you just said. Most of us can what you just said. Most of us can what you just said. Most of us can remember what we just said remember what we just said remember what we just said and then that gets us back on track. If and then that gets us back on track. If and then that gets us back on track. If that doesn't work, the final rip cord I that doesn't work, the final rip cord I that doesn't work, the final rip cord I think you can pull is to distract your think you can pull is to distract your think you can pull is to distract your audience. What does that mean? Ask a audience. What does that mean? Ask a audience. What does that mean? Ask a question. This will happen to me. question. This will happen to me. question. This will happen to me. There'll be I teach the same class a There'll be I teach the same class a There'll be I teach the same class a lot. Sometimes I can't remember, did I lot. Sometimes I can't remember, did I lot. Sometimes I can't remember, did I say this time? I just need a moment say this time? I just need a moment say this time? I just need a moment to think. I'll just pause and I'll ask to think. I'll just pause and I'll ask to think. I'll just pause and I'll ask my students a question. my students a question. my students a question. They don't they think that's logical. They don't they think that's logical. They don't they think that's logical. Anybody can come up with a question. If Anybody can come up with a question. If Anybody can come up with a question. If you ever hear me, anybody listening, if you ever hear me, anybody listening, if you ever hear me, anybody listening, if you ever hear me say, I want to pause you ever hear me say, I want to pause you ever hear me say, I want to pause for a moment and think have you think for a moment and think have you think for a moment and think have you think about how what we've just discussed can about how what we've just discussed can about how what we've just discussed can be applied to your life. That means I be applied to your life. That means I be applied to your life. That means I have forgotten what I want to say next. have forgotten what I want to say next. have forgotten what I want to say next. In my mind I'm what the heck do I say In my mind I'm what the heck do I say In my mind I'm what the heck do I say next? Most of the people in my audience are Most of the people in my audience are Most of the people in my audience are like, how would I apply that in my life? like, how would I apply that in my life? like, how would I apply that in my life? That's great. It gives me that fraction That's great. It gives me that fraction That's great. It gives me that fraction of a second, gives me that sense of a second, gives me that sense of a second, gives me that sense of control. Most of us can leverage a control. Most of us can leverage a control. Most of us can leverage a question to buy us that time. So let's question to buy us that time. So let's question to buy us that time. So let's not say, oh my goodness, I've forgotten, not say, oh my goodness, I've forgotten, not say, oh my goodness, I've forgotten, it's the worst thing ever. it's the worst thing ever. it's the worst thing ever. I get passionate. Sometimes I can't I get passionate. Sometimes I can't I get passionate. Sometimes I can't I get ahead of myself. Give me a moment. get ahead of myself. Give me a moment. get ahead of myself. Give me a moment. Or just ask a question. It's similar to Or just ask a question. It's similar to Or just ask a question. It's similar to I advise people who are nervous speakers I advise people who are nervous speakers I advise people who are nervous speakers never to say, oh, excuse me, I'm so never to say, oh, excuse me, I'm so never to say, oh, excuse me, I'm so nervous. A lot of people try to nervous. A lot of people try to nervous. A lot of people try to pre-apologize for their nervousness and pre-apologize for their nervousness and pre-apologize for their nervousness and all they do is prime us to pay attention all they do is prime us to pay attention all they do is prime us to pay attention to everything they do that's nervous. So to everything they do that's nervous. So to everything they do that's nervous. So let's not call attention to the mistakes let's not call attention to the mistakes let's not call attention to the mistakes we make. Let's just do what we can to we make. Let's just do what we can to we make. Let's just do what we can to get through them and that's going to get through them and that's going to get through them and that's going to help. Great advice that I'm sure will help a Great advice that I'm sure will help a Great advice that I'm sure will help a lot of people. I hope so. The most lot of people. I hope so. The most lot of people. I hope so. The most spectacular example of a recovery I've spectacular example of a recovery I've spectacular example of a recovery I've ever seen was actually a job talk at ever seen was actually a job talk at ever seen was actually a job talk at Stanford. Yeah. I don't know if I should Stanford. Yeah. I don't know if I should Stanford. Yeah. I don't know if I should include this person's name. He's now a include this person's name. He's now a include this person's name. He's now a professor at uh UNC Chapel Hill, but he professor at uh UNC Chapel Hill, but he professor at uh UNC Chapel Hill, but he could have been a faculty member at could have been a faculty member at could have been a faculty member at Stanford because Stanford because Stanford because &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; of I think the data, but also what &gt;&gt; of I think the data, but also what &gt;&gt; of I think the data, but also what happened was happened was happened was he spilled water into his laptop during he spilled water into his laptop during he spilled water into his laptop during the talk. You know, they have a podium the talk. You know, they have a podium the talk. You know, they have a podium where everyone's given water in case you where everyone's given water in case you where everyone's given water in case you get thirsty. Keep the water below, get thirsty. Keep the water below, get thirsty. Keep the water below, folks, and he spilled it. But the way folks, and he spilled it. But the way folks, and he spilled it. But the way he handled it was so cool. he handled it was so cool. he handled it was so cool. &gt;&gt; What he do? It spilled. &gt;&gt; What he do? It spilled. &gt;&gt; What he do? It spilled. He didn't say anything. He took the He didn't say anything. He took the He didn't say anything. He took the bottle, put the cap back on, put it bottle, put the cap back on, put it bottle, put the cap back on, put it underneath, reached underneath. There was no towel. reached underneath. There was no towel. reached underneath. There was no towel. He said, could somebody perhaps get me a He said, could somebody perhaps get me a He said, could somebody perhaps get me a paper towel or a towel? They brought him paper towel or a towel? They brought him paper towel or a towel? They brought him a towel. a towel. a towel. He sopped up whatever moisture was on his sopped up whatever moisture was on his sopped up whatever moisture was on his laptop. He said nothing the entire time. This is He said nothing the entire time. This is He said nothing the entire time. This is Mark Ziolkowski. He's a total badass. Mark Ziolkowski. He's a total badass. Mark Ziolkowski. He's a total badass. And then he went back and finished his And then he went back and finished his And then he went back and finished his talk. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It was like &gt;&gt; Yeah. It was like &gt;&gt; Yeah. It was like Yeah, it was Composed under pressure. Yeah, it was Composed under pressure. Yeah, it was Composed under pressure. That was awesome. You know, contingency That was awesome. You know, contingency That was awesome. You know, contingency planning is a really important part of planning is a really important part of planning is a really important part of all communication. It's thinking about all communication. It's thinking about all communication. It's thinking about what could happen that would lead what could happen that would lead what could happen that would lead this conversation or communication in this conversation or communication in this conversation or communication in one direction or the other, positive or one direction or the other, positive or one direction or the other, positive or negative. How would I respond? It makes negative. How would I respond? It makes negative. How would I respond? It makes sense, you know, when you plan a trip, a sense, you know, when you plan a trip, a sense, you know, when you plan a trip, a vacation, you think about what vacation, you think about what vacation, you think about what happens if the flight's delayed, what happens if the flight's delayed, what happens if the flight's delayed, what happens if the room isn't ready. We happens if the room isn't ready. We happens if the room isn't ready. We should do that in our communication as should do that in our communication as should do that in our communication as well. Not to script it out, but just to well. Not to script it out, but just to well. Not to script it out, but just to be ready. So, I think everybody be ready. So, I think everybody be ready. So, I think everybody listening now, what would you do if your listening now, what would you do if your listening now, what would you do if your technology didn't work in that moment? technology didn't work in that moment? technology didn't work in that moment? Think about it. And then when it Think about it. And then when it Think about it. And then when it happens, you you've got that recovery happens, you you've got that recovery happens, you you've got that recovery plan. And that you just build that plan. And that you just build that plan. And that you just build that confidence. Perhaps he had thought about confidence. Perhaps he had thought about confidence. Perhaps he had thought about what happens if I can't use my tech. what happens if I can't use my tech. what happens if I can't use my tech. And that's what helped him be calm. And that's what helped him be calm. And that's what helped him be calm. Incidentally, he works on pain. Okay. Incidentally, he works on pain. Okay. Incidentally, he works on pain. Okay. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I don't know what that's worth. &gt;&gt; I don't know what that's worth. &gt;&gt; I don't know what that's worth. But it was just an awesome display of But it was just an awesome display of But it was just an awesome display of calm under pressure. Or something under calm under pressure. Or something under calm under pressure. Or something under pressure. I think it was the fact pressure. I think it was the fact pressure. I think it was the fact that he just kept things moving forward. that he just kept things moving forward. that he just kept things moving forward. And stood in silence. The the ability to And stood in silence. The the ability to And stood in silence. The the ability to stand in silence in front of people stand in silence in front of people stand in silence in front of people demonstrates confidence in so many ways. demonstrates confidence in so many ways. demonstrates confidence in so many ways. And so the fact that he was able to take And so the fact that he was able to take And so the fact that he was able to take care of business in silence, I think care of business in silence, I think care of business in silence, I think added to that. added to that. added to that. I feel like I feel like I feel like when people get nervous, their um voice when people get nervous, their um voice when people get nervous, their um voice gets up into their heads. Yeah. They gets up into their heads. Yeah. They gets up into their heads. Yeah. They start going up on their tiptoes and they start going up on their tiptoes and they start going up on their tiptoes and they start asphyxiating themselves by start asphyxiating themselves by start asphyxiating themselves by speaking much higher than their natural speaking much higher than their natural speaking much higher than their natural tone of voice is. Yeah. Um so, sometimes tone of voice is. Yeah. Um so, sometimes tone of voice is. Yeah. Um so, sometimes I re encourage people to Um re encourage people to Um re encourage people to Um slow down. Yeah. And try and drop their slow down. Yeah. And try and drop their slow down. Yeah. And try and drop their voice down Right. further into their voice down Right. further into their voice down Right. further into their throat and chest a little bit. throat and chest a little bit. throat and chest a little bit. Right. Um It can be artificial. Like Right. Um It can be artificial. Like Right. Um It can be artificial. Like there's one very salient example of a there's one very salient example of a there's one very salient example of a former CEO Yeah. uh former CEO Yeah. uh former CEO Yeah. uh who perhaps didn't have the voice that who perhaps didn't have the voice that who perhaps didn't have the voice that they spoke with. Um but um they spoke with. Um but um they spoke with. Um but um but assuming it's still your voice, but assuming it's still your voice, but assuming it's still your voice, Yeah. Right. Oh, absolutely. Uh you taught me Right. Oh, absolutely. Uh you taught me Right. Oh, absolutely. Uh you taught me when you were a guest on my show uh a when you were a guest on my show uh a when you were a guest on my show uh a lot about breath and how breath can lot about breath and how breath can lot about breath and how breath can impact not only your confidence and the impact not only your confidence and the impact not only your confidence and the anxiety you feel, but how doing breath anxiety you feel, but how doing breath anxiety you feel, but how doing breath work can really help you still breath work can really help you still breath work can really help you still your whole body and allow your whole body and allow your whole body and allow your natural voice to come out because when natural voice to come out because when natural voice to come out because when we get anxious, we breathe shallow. Less we get anxious, we breathe shallow. Less we get anxious, we breathe shallow. Less air is being pushed out, it's being air is being pushed out, it's being air is being pushed out, it's being pushed out faster. Our voice starts pushed out faster. Our voice starts pushed out faster. Our voice starts sounding like this. And sometimes this sounding like this. And sometimes this sounding like this. And sometimes this is actually really it appropriate. If is actually really it appropriate. If is actually really it appropriate. If I'm really excited about something, I I'm really excited about something, I I'm really excited about something, I should sound like this. But I want it should sound like this. But I want it should sound like this. But I want it under my control. So, breath work and under my control. So, breath work and under my control. So, breath work and having an authentic natural voice is having an authentic natural voice is having an authentic natural voice is really important. really important. really important. Yeah, one thing you might find Yeah, one thing you might find Yeah, one thing you might find interesting that's come out in the interesting that's come out in the interesting that's come out in the literature since the last time we spoke literature since the last time we spoke literature since the last time we spoke is that while the physiological side, is that while the physiological side, is that while the physiological side, double inhale, long exhale still the double inhale, long exhale still the double inhale, long exhale still the best way to calm down quickly, turns out best way to calm down quickly, turns out best way to calm down quickly, turns out that all that all that all exhale emphasized breathing slows the exhale emphasized breathing slows the exhale emphasized breathing slows the heart down. Mm. Yeah. Just subtly, but heart down. Mm. Yeah. Just subtly, but heart down. Mm. Yeah. Just subtly, but significantly enough that it helps you significantly enough that it helps you significantly enough that it helps you calm down. So, if people can't remember calm down. So, if people can't remember calm down. So, if people can't remember like what breath work to do, like what breath work to do, like what breath work to do, physiological side, just emphasize an physiological side, just emphasize an physiological side, just emphasize an exhale. Extend it, make it a little bit exhale. Extend it, make it a little bit exhale. Extend it, make it a little bit more vigorous. If you need to be covert more vigorous. If you need to be covert more vigorous. If you need to be covert about it, maybe just extend it a little about it, maybe just extend it a little about it, maybe just extend it a little bit, maybe walk back to the podium or bit, maybe walk back to the podium or bit, maybe walk back to the podium or away and do that long exhale. That seems away and do that long exhale. That seems away and do that long exhale. That seems to really make a big difference because to really make a big difference because to really make a big difference because you're offloading carbon dioxide, but you're offloading carbon dioxide, but you're offloading carbon dioxide, but also there's this pathway through the also there's this pathway through the also there's this pathway through the vagus nerve that literally slows your vagus nerve that literally slows your vagus nerve that literally slows your heart rate down when you exhale. heart rate down when you exhale. heart rate down when you exhale. It's pretty spectacular that we have It's pretty spectacular that we have It's pretty spectacular that we have these mechanisms in us. Yeah. these mechanisms in us. Yeah. these mechanisms in us. Yeah. &gt;&gt; it's fantastic and I and I give credit &gt;&gt; it's fantastic and I and I give credit &gt;&gt; it's fantastic and I and I give credit to you every single lecture I give when to you every single lecture I give when to you every single lecture I give when I talk about anxiety, I talk about what I talk about anxiety, I talk about what I talk about anxiety, I talk about what you shared with me. It's all about the you shared with me. It's all about the you shared with me. It's all about the exhale. And I will always say the rule exhale. And I will always say the rule exhale. And I will always say the rule of thumb and then I'll joke, the rule of thumb and then I'll joke, the rule of thumb and then I'll joke, the rule of lung is you want your exhale to always lung is you want your exhale to always lung is you want your exhale to always be longer than your inhale to help you be longer than your inhale to help you be longer than your inhale to help you calm down. And people have found that calm down. And people have found that calm down. And people have found that liberating. So, I appreciate that you liberating. So, I appreciate that you liberating. So, I appreciate that you shared that with me and know that others shared that with me and know that others shared that with me and know that others are taking advantage of that. are taking advantage of that. are taking advantage of that. You're welcome and it came from a place You're welcome and it came from a place You're welcome and it came from a place of need that I came across those tools of need that I came across those tools of need that I came across those tools uh because I think that we can prepare uh because I think that we can prepare uh because I think that we can prepare prepare, Yeah. but it's the prepare prepare, Yeah. but it's the prepare prepare, Yeah. but it's the knowledge that things happen in the moment that we that things happen in the moment that we that things happen in the moment that we can't control. can't control. can't control. That's right. I mean, that's the really That's right. I mean, that's the really That's right. I mean, that's the really scary thing. That's right. And if you scary thing. That's right. And if you scary thing. That's right. And if you think about it, most of our think about it, most of our think about it, most of our communication is that it's spontaneous. communication is that it's spontaneous. communication is that it's spontaneous. We don't know what's going to happen. I We don't know what's going to happen. I We don't know what's going to happen. I mean, a lot of what you and I've been mean, a lot of what you and I've been mean, a lot of what you and I've been talking about is planned communication. talking about is planned communication. talking about is planned communication. It's the presentation, the pitch, the It's the presentation, the pitch, the It's the presentation, the pitch, the meeting with agenda. But most of our meeting with agenda. But most of our meeting with agenda. But most of our communication is spontaneous. We don't communication is spontaneous. We don't communication is spontaneous. We don't know how it's going to unfold. You ask know how it's going to unfold. You ask know how it's going to unfold. You ask me a question. I don't know what that me a question. I don't know what that me a question. I don't know what that question is. I don't even know if I know question is. I don't even know if I know question is. I don't even know if I know the answer. You ask me for feedback. I the answer. You ask me for feedback. I the answer. You ask me for feedback. I make a mistake. I have to fix it. Most make a mistake. I have to fix it. Most make a mistake. I have to fix it. Most of our communication is spontaneous. And of our communication is spontaneous. And of our communication is spontaneous. And getting comfortable with that discomfort getting comfortable with that discomfort getting comfortable with that discomfort of not knowing how this will transpire of not knowing how this will transpire of not knowing how this will transpire is a big part of the mindset shift that is a big part of the mindset shift that is a big part of the mindset shift that you have to have to do better in you have to have to do better in you have to have to do better in spontaneous speaking. spontaneous speaking. spontaneous speaking. Beta blockers, yes. Beta blockers, no. Beta blockers, yes. Beta blockers, no. Beta blockers, yes. Beta blockers, no. So, I have a heart condition and I take So, I have a heart condition and I take So, I have a heart condition and I take beta blockers regularly. And I see how beta blockers regularly. And I see how beta blockers regularly. And I see how it slows down your thinking and your it slows down your thinking and your it slows down your thinking and your body. I'm not a fan. I think cognitive body. I'm not a fan. I think cognitive body. I'm not a fan. I think cognitive behavioral ways of managing anxiety much behavioral ways of managing anxiety much behavioral ways of managing anxiety much better. Now, there are people I'm not a better. Now, there are people I'm not a better. Now, there are people I'm not a medical doctor, obviously. Uh there are medical doctor, obviously. Uh there are medical doctor, obviously. Uh there are some people for whom beta blockers might some people for whom beta blockers might some people for whom beta blockers might work, but I actively discourage people work, but I actively discourage people work, but I actively discourage people if they're just wanting to take it to if they're just wanting to take it to if they're just wanting to take it to manage anxiety. I think there's so many manage anxiety. I think there's so many manage anxiety. I think there's so many other things we can do first before you other things we can do first before you other things we can do first before you have to go there. But I my experience have to go there. But I my experience have to go there. But I my experience has been it makes me fuzzy and I'm not has been it makes me fuzzy and I'm not has been it makes me fuzzy and I'm not as quick. as quick. as quick. Which makes sense because you're not Which makes sense because you're not Which makes sense because you're not getting as much oxygenated blood to your getting as much oxygenated blood to your getting as much oxygenated blood to your brain. Yeah. Getting a great brain. Yeah. Getting a great brain. Yeah. Getting a great night's sleep the night before clearly night's sleep the night before clearly night's sleep the night before clearly helps. What do you do or recommend for people What do you do or recommend for people What do you do or recommend for people that get a lousy night's sleep the night that get a lousy night's sleep the night that get a lousy night's sleep the night before? Well, I wish I would like to before? Well, I wish I would like to before? Well, I wish I would like to ask you that question. I am an awful ask you that question. I am an awful ask you that question. I am an awful sleeper. I am a really sleeper. I am a really sleeper. I am a really &gt;&gt; that. Good. Well, let's fix that &gt;&gt; that. Good. Well, let's fix that &gt;&gt; that. Good. Well, let's fix that today because I am a lousy sleeper. Uh today because I am a lousy sleeper. Uh today because I am a lousy sleeper. Uh absolutely it is better to get a good absolutely it is better to get a good absolutely it is better to get a good night's sleep than it is to stay up all night's sleep than it is to stay up all night's sleep than it is to stay up all night cramming. night cramming. night cramming. I tell everybody to train for I tell everybody to train for I tell everybody to train for communication like you would train for a communication like you would train for a communication like you would train for a sporting event. You need to eat well. I sporting event. You need to eat well. I sporting event. You need to eat well. I call it communication hygiene. You need call it communication hygiene. You need call it communication hygiene. You need to eat well, sleep well, exercise. Um it to eat well, sleep well, exercise. Um it to eat well, sleep well, exercise. Um it is much better to stay on routine than is much better to stay on routine than is much better to stay on routine than to deviate from your routine. to deviate from your routine. to deviate from your routine. Uh there is some research around Uh there is some research around Uh there is some research around caffeine consumption. Caffeine caffeine consumption. Caffeine caffeine consumption. Caffeine consumption is actually really good when consumption is actually really good when consumption is actually really good when you're ideating for creativity. When you you're ideating for creativity. When you you're ideating for creativity. When you actually go to present, uh you shouldn't actually go to present, uh you shouldn't actually go to present, uh you shouldn't deviate from whatever standard protocol deviate from whatever standard protocol deviate from whatever standard protocol is for caffeine. You shouldn't all of a is for caffeine. You shouldn't all of a is for caffeine. You shouldn't all of a sudden go cold turkey, but taking sudden go cold turkey, but taking sudden go cold turkey, but taking additional caffeine because you didn't additional caffeine because you didn't additional caffeine because you didn't sleep well the night before can just sleep well the night before can just sleep well the night before can just agitate you during the presentation and agitate you during the presentation and agitate you during the presentation and communication. So, uh getting a good communication. So, uh getting a good communication. So, uh getting a good night's sleep is great. I am not the night's sleep is great. I am not the night's sleep is great. I am not the best person to give advice on how to do best person to give advice on how to do best person to give advice on how to do it. Well, we could have a long discussion Well, we could have a long discussion Well, we could have a long discussion about this. And [clears throat] I listen about this. And [clears throat] I listen about this. And [clears throat] I listen to some of it to some of it to some of it for afterwards. I would say the um for afterwards. I would say the um for afterwards. I would say the um couple of things that have helped me couple of things that have helped me couple of things that have helped me over the years traveling to give talks over the years traveling to give talks over the years traveling to give talks both for the podcast and academic uh both for the podcast and academic uh both for the podcast and academic uh stuff, etc. is stuff, etc. is stuff, etc. is If you're going to stay in a hotel, If you're going to stay in a hotel, If you're going to stay in a hotel, Yeah. pull the plug on the alarm clock in the pull the plug on the alarm clock in the pull the plug on the alarm clock in the hotel. Use your phone instead. Put on hotel. Use your phone instead. Put on hotel. Use your phone instead. Put on airplane mode, use that one. Why? airplane mode, use that one. Why? airplane mode, use that one. Why? Because I've woken up many times at 4:00 Because I've woken up many times at 4:00 Because I've woken up many times at 4:00 in the morning because someone prior to in the morning because someone prior to in the morning because someone prior to me had set the alarm clock. That just me had set the alarm clock. That just me had set the alarm clock. That just happened the other week with me. I happened the other week with me. I happened the other week with me. I always unplug that. I actually cover all always unplug that. I actually cover all always unplug that. I actually cover all the bright lights in the room. I put a the bright lights in the room. I put a the bright lights in the room. I put a towel by the by the door crack. You want towel by the by the door crack. You want towel by the by the door crack. You want to get I mean, an eye mask is ideal. to get I mean, an eye mask is ideal. to get I mean, an eye mask is ideal. Right. Um Right. Um Right. Um I try to I try to I try to ask for a room away from the elevator ask for a room away from the elevator ask for a room away from the elevator Yeah. cuz that'll keep you up all night. Yeah. cuz that'll keep you up all night. Yeah. cuz that'll keep you up all night. Yes. Um those are just some of the like Yes. Um those are just some of the like Yes. Um those are just some of the like zero cost things that are very helpful. zero cost things that are very helpful. zero cost things that are very helpful. But the number one thing to recover But the number one thing to recover But the number one thing to recover sleep that you didn't get sleep that you didn't get sleep that you didn't get is this non-sleep deep rest aka yoga is this non-sleep deep rest aka yoga is this non-sleep deep rest aka yoga nidra practice. Yoga nidra is the nidra practice. Yoga nidra is the nidra practice. Yoga nidra is the thousands of year old uh practice of thousands of year old uh practice of thousands of year old uh practice of doing long exhale breathing. Uh it's a doing long exhale breathing. Uh it's a doing long exhale breathing. Uh it's a 10-to-30-minute practice. I We can 10-to-30-minute practice. I We can 10-to-30-minute practice. I We can provide some links to scripts for these provide some links to scripts for these provide some links to scripts for these that are excellent. Uh where that are excellent. Uh where that are excellent. Uh where you're slowing your heart rate down. you're slowing your heart rate down. you're slowing your heart rate down. You're doing a body scan. But the goal You're doing a body scan. But the goal You're doing a body scan. But the goal during yoga nidra is to stay awake with during yoga nidra is to stay awake with during yoga nidra is to stay awake with your body relaxed. And it teaches you your body relaxed. And it teaches you your body relaxed. And it teaches you how to fall asleep more easily. Mm. I how to fall asleep more easily. Mm. I how to fall asleep more easily. Mm. I would argue based on experience that would argue based on experience that would argue based on experience that yoga nidra and NSDR which is essentially yoga nidra and NSDR which is essentially yoga nidra and NSDR which is essentially the same thing, but we've removed the same thing, but we've removed the same thing, but we've removed the intentions and I just call it non-sleep intentions and I just call it non-sleep intentions and I just call it non-sleep deep rest. These are zero cost scripts deep rest. These are zero cost scripts deep rest. These are zero cost scripts out there. My voice, other people's out there. My voice, other people's out there. My voice, other people's voice. Also teaches you how to be very alert Also teaches you how to be very alert Also teaches you how to be very alert and very relaxed in your body at the and very relaxed in your body at the and very relaxed in your body at the same time. Which is a very valuable same time. Which is a very valuable same time. Which is a very valuable skill for a lot of different venues, skill for a lot of different venues, skill for a lot of different venues, including public speaking. Um so, including public speaking. Um so, including public speaking. Um so, it will get you better at falling and it will get you better at falling and it will get you better at falling and falling back asleep. So, I can send some falling back asleep. So, I can send some falling back asleep. So, I can send some to &gt;&gt; Awesome. I I'm going to take partake &gt;&gt; Awesome. I I'm going to take partake &gt;&gt; Awesome. I I'm going to take partake as soon as we're done. Yeah. And of as soon as we're done. Yeah. And of as soon as we're done. Yeah. And of course, you're not drinking much course, you're not drinking much course, you're not drinking much caffeine, right? You said you have you I caffeine, right? You said you have you I caffeine, right? You said you have you I do one cup of tea a day. I do one cup of tea a day. I do one cup of tea a day. So, it can't be over consumption of So, it can't be over consumption of So, it can't be over consumption of caffeine. No, it's my I get in my head caffeine. No, it's my I get in my head caffeine. No, it's my I get in my head and I think too much. Your forebrain's and I think too much. Your forebrain's and I think too much. Your forebrain's working too much. working too much. working too much. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yoga nidra will help with &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yoga nidra will help with &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yoga nidra will help with that. Cuz the essence of yoga nidra and that. Cuz the essence of yoga nidra and that. Cuz the essence of yoga nidra and NSDR, forgive me, but is Mm. works so NSDR, forgive me, but is Mm. works so NSDR, forgive me, but is Mm. works so well and it's zero cost. So, it's one of well and it's zero cost. So, it's one of well and it's zero cost. So, it's one of these I'm not trying to pitch anything these I'm not trying to pitch anything these I'm not trying to pitch anything you know, where you have to go pay for you know, where you have to go pay for you know, where you have to go pay for something. I didn't develop it. It's something. I didn't develop it. It's something. I didn't develop it. It's been around for a long time. been around for a long time. been around for a long time. There's this There's this There's this instruction in yoga nidra that's also in instruction in yoga nidra that's also in instruction in yoga nidra that's also in these NSDRs where you teach yourself to these NSDRs where you teach yourself to these NSDRs where you teach yourself to move your move your move your brain from a state of thinking and doing brain from a state of thinking and doing brain from a state of thinking and doing to just being and feeling. to just being and feeling. to just being and feeling. To literally get out of thought. Right. To literally get out of thought. Right. To literally get out of thought. Right. &gt;&gt; And to do that is very difficult unless &gt;&gt; And to do that is very difficult unless &gt;&gt; And to do that is very difficult unless you give your brain enough to do. And you give your brain enough to do. And you give your brain enough to do. And this is why NSDR instructs you to do this is why NSDR instructs you to do this is why NSDR instructs you to do like a kind of focused body scan and like a kind of focused body scan and like a kind of focused body scan and relaxation because if you just try and relaxation because if you just try and relaxation because if you just try and not think, it doesn't work. Right. Um not think, it doesn't work. Right. Um not think, it doesn't work. Right. Um You think about not thinking. You think about not thinking. You think about not thinking. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's also some really &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's also some really &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's also some really interesting data on the vestibular interesting data on the vestibular interesting data on the vestibular system in falling asleep. I'll share system in falling asleep. I'll share system in falling asleep. I'll share this now. Just you can try it. I did this now. Just you can try it. I did this now. Just you can try it. I did this last night. I woke up at once in this last night. I woke up at once in this last night. I woke up at once in the middle of the night. Keep your eyes the middle of the night. Keep your eyes the middle of the night. Keep your eyes closed. If you have to get up and use the If you have to get up and use the If you have to get up and use the restroom, do that first, but keep your restroom, do that first, but keep your restroom, do that first, but keep your eyes closed and move your eyes slowly eyes closed and move your eyes slowly eyes closed and move your eyes slowly from side to side. This is not um uh from side to side. This is not um uh from side to side. This is not um uh EMDR, uh but move your from side to EMDR, uh but move your from side to EMDR, uh but move your from side to side. Then move them up with your side. Then move them up with your side. Then move them up with your eyelids still closed, down, eyelids still closed, down, eyelids still closed, down, roll them left roll them left roll them left or counterclockwise, roll them right or counterclockwise, roll them right or counterclockwise, roll them right clockwise. And then try and clockwise. And then try and clockwise. And then try and cross them a little bit, like stare at cross them a little bit, like stare at cross them a little bit, like stare at the bridge of your nose and exhale. Now, the bridge of your nose and exhale. Now, the bridge of your nose and exhale. Now, this might sound crazy. It sounds this might sound crazy. It sounds this might sound crazy. It sounds completely wacky, right? completely wacky, right? completely wacky, right? But what it does is it takes you your But what it does is it takes you your But what it does is it takes you your vestibular system into a state, we know vestibular system into a state, we know vestibular system into a state, we know this based on data, this based on data, this based on data, that mimics the state you're trying achieve, mimics the state you're trying achieve, mimics the state you're trying achieve, which is that you need to forget about which is that you need to forget about which is that you need to forget about your body's position. your body's position. your body's position. Oh. You can't fall asleep if you're Oh. You can't fall asleep if you're Oh. You can't fall asleep if you're thinking about your body position. In thinking about your body position. In thinking about your body position. In fact, one of the prerequisites to fact, one of the prerequisites to fact, one of the prerequisites to falling asleep is forgetting about that, falling asleep is forgetting about that, falling asleep is forgetting about that, which is why there are now also data which is why there are now also data which is why there are now also data showing that rocking back and forth showing that rocking back and forth showing that rocking back and forth the reason it's effective at making the reason it's effective at making the reason it's effective at making babies and adults fall asleep they have babies and adults fall asleep they have babies and adults fall asleep they have beds that actually rock from side to beds that actually rock from side to beds that actually rock from side to side is because you forget about your side is because you forget about your side is because you forget about your body position when your whole body is in body position when your whole body is in body position when your whole body is in motion. Huh. So, try this and I think motion. Huh. So, try this and I think motion. Huh. So, try this and I think you'll find that it will greatly you'll find that it will greatly you'll find that it will greatly facilitate falling or falling back facilitate falling or falling back facilitate falling or falling back asleep. Absolutely. Tonight tonight I'm asleep. Absolutely. Tonight tonight I'm asleep. Absolutely. Tonight tonight I'm putting in practice. This is this I get putting in practice. This is this I get putting in practice. This is this I get I get free consulting here. Thank I get free consulting here. Thank I get free consulting here. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah, cuz I think that &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah, cuz I think that &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah, cuz I think that decent night's sleep the night before is decent night's sleep the night before is decent night's sleep the night before is great. Otherwise, do NSDR in the morning great. Otherwise, do NSDR in the morning great. Otherwise, do NSDR in the morning or before a talk or before a talk or before a talk if you can. if you can. if you can. I think anything to bring your level of I think anything to bring your level of I think anything to bring your level of autonomic arousal down if you're if autonomic arousal down if you're if autonomic arousal down if you're if you're sleep deprived can help bring you're sleep deprived can help bring you're sleep deprived can help bring more ease to the public speaking. more ease to the public speaking. more ease to the public speaking. Something else that I really encourage Something else that I really encourage Something else that I really encourage people to do to help is to have people to do to help is to have people to do to help is to have conversation prior to whatever the big conversation prior to whatever the big conversation prior to whatever the big communication is. communication is. communication is. &gt;&gt; is huge. Right. &gt;&gt; is huge. Right. &gt;&gt; is huge. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. To to connect with people, have &gt;&gt; Yeah. To to connect with people, have &gt;&gt; Yeah. To to connect with people, have conversation. Whenever I do a keynote, conversation. Whenever I do a keynote, conversation. Whenever I do a keynote, whenever I'm doing a big presentation, I whenever I'm doing a big presentation, I whenever I'm doing a big presentation, I will always be talking to people. will always be talking to people. will always be talking to people. Sometimes I have to go find them cuz I'm Sometimes I have to go find them cuz I'm Sometimes I have to go find them cuz I'm behind stage and I got to wait to the behind stage and I got to wait to the behind stage and I got to wait to the big introduction. I'll go find somebody big introduction. I'll go find somebody big introduction. I'll go find somebody and just have a conversation. That focus and just have a conversation. That focus and just have a conversation. That focus and present orientation that it brings and present orientation that it brings and present orientation that it brings and just that act of speaking. I am so and just that act of speaking. I am so and just that act of speaking. I am so amazed at, you know, anybody who does amazed at, you know, anybody who does amazed at, you know, anybody who does any athletics or music, you know you any athletics or music, you know you any athletics or music, you know you should warm up first, but people don't should warm up first, but people don't should warm up first, but people don't warm up before they speak. They think warm up before they speak. They think warm up before they speak. They think they can go from silence to brilliance they can go from silence to brilliance they can go from silence to brilliance without it. Having a communication with without it. Having a communication with without it. Having a communication with somebody as mundane as you want it can somebody as mundane as you want it can somebody as mundane as you want it can really help. Do you use this technique? really help. Do you use this technique? really help. Do you use this technique? It looked like it resonated with you. It looked like it resonated with you. It looked like it resonated with you. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Because I've often and I still spend a Because I've often and I still spend a Because I've often and I still spend a lot of time preparing for podcasts and lot of time preparing for podcasts and lot of time preparing for podcasts and doing things in isolation. Right. And doing things in isolation. Right. And doing things in isolation. Right. And I've noticed that if I do that for too I've noticed that if I do that for too I've noticed that if I do that for too long and then I go to the corner cafe long and then I go to the corner cafe long and then I go to the corner cafe that the conversation with the barista that the conversation with the barista that the conversation with the barista feels like what is going on here. feels like what is going on here. feels like what is going on here. It really because you're in your head. It really because you're in your head. It really because you're in your head. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then it starts to feel like relief &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then it starts to feel like relief &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then it starts to feel like relief and then your brain shifts to a and then your brain shifts to a and then your brain shifts to a different state. A long time ago I different state. A long time ago I different state. A long time ago I realized that having some form of realized that having some form of realized that having some form of communication it en route to a talk or communication it en route to a talk or communication it en route to a talk or something can be very helpful. I've something can be very helpful. I've something can be very helpful. I've found and I'd be curious what you think found and I'd be curious what you think found and I'd be curious what you think that um part of that is the speaking, that um part of that is the speaking, that um part of that is the speaking, part of it is also the taking turns part of it is also the taking turns part of it is also the taking turns piece. Because we're going to be piece. Because we're going to be piece. Because we're going to be speaking it's generally just us speaking it's generally just us speaking it's generally just us speaking, but that really speaking, but that really speaking, but that really getting into a conversation where I getting into a conversation where I getting into a conversation where I listen to what's coming back forces me listen to what's coming back forces me listen to what's coming back forces me to also um practice withholding speech. to also um practice withholding speech. to also um practice withholding speech. Yes. &gt;&gt; Cuz I feel like a lot of bad talks are &gt;&gt; Cuz I feel like a lot of bad talks are &gt;&gt; Cuz I feel like a lot of bad talks are when people are just kind of fire hosing when people are just kind of fire hosing when people are just kind of fire hosing or they're adding little elements to the or they're adding little elements to the or they're adding little elements to the sentences where they don't need them. sentences where they don't need them. sentences where they don't need them. And it's just nervousness. It's And it's just nervousness. It's And it's just nervousness. It's just nervousness. just nervousness. just nervousness. &gt;&gt; Filling the space. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Filling the space. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Filling the space. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, there's some like you said you need &gt;&gt; So, there's some like you said you need &gt;&gt; So, there's some like you said you need to warm up. Right. And and that to warm up. Right. And and that to warm up. Right. And and that turn taking, that switching it is turn taking, that switching it is turn taking, that switching it is engaging for the brain. I would suggest engaging for the brain. I would suggest engaging for the brain. I would suggest though that when you are up on a stage though that when you are up on a stage though that when you are up on a stage giving a big presentation, leading a big giving a big presentation, leading a big giving a big presentation, leading a big meeting, you can actually engage in meeting, you can actually engage in meeting, you can actually engage in dialogue. It's not just calling on dialogue. It's not just calling on dialogue. It's not just calling on people, but you can ask them. You can people, but you can ask them. You can people, but you can ask them. You can say, "Imagine what it would be like if." say, "Imagine what it would be like if." say, "Imagine what it would be like if." And now you're imagining it. We are in a And now you're imagining it. We are in a And now you're imagining it. We are in a communicate You're you're responding communicate You're you're responding communicate You're you're responding even though I'm not hearing it. I can even though I'm not hearing it. I can even though I'm not hearing it. I can use an analogy or tell a story. We are use an analogy or tell a story. We are use an analogy or tell a story. We are communicating taking turns in essence, communicating taking turns in essence, communicating taking turns in essence, you're just not responding vocally to you're just not responding vocally to you're just not responding vocally to me. So, a big challenge is to be me. So, a big challenge is to be me. So, a big challenge is to be engaging and there there's several ways engaging and there there's several ways engaging and there there's several ways to do it. There's physical engagement, to do it. There's physical engagement, to do it. There's physical engagement, getting people doing something. There's getting people doing something. There's getting people doing something. There's mental engagement, using analogies, mental engagement, using analogies, mental engagement, using analogies, stories, questions. There's linguistic stories, questions. There's linguistic stories, questions. There's linguistic engagement, taking people into the engagement, taking people into the engagement, taking people into the future or the past by saying, "Picture future or the past by saying, "Picture future or the past by saying, "Picture this or imagine how it used to be." this or imagine how it used to be." this or imagine how it used to be." Those are ways of getting a dialogue Those are ways of getting a dialogue Those are ways of getting a dialogue going even though the other person isn't going even though the other person isn't going even though the other person isn't speaking back versus just me speaking back versus just me speaking back versus just me broadcasting information. broadcasting information. broadcasting information. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second Function test that taking a second Function test that taking a second Function test that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. I'd love your thoughts on an experience I'd love your thoughts on an experience I'd love your thoughts on an experience that I've had where that I've had where that I've had where that I think many people have. that I think many people have. that I think many people have. Um where one of the most terrifying things where one of the most terrifying things where one of the most terrifying things is when you are in a small room, maybe is when you are in a small room, maybe is when you are in a small room, maybe 10, 15, 20 people and they say, "We're 10, 15, 20 people and they say, "We're 10, 15, 20 people and they say, "We're going to go around the table, introduce going to go around the table, introduce going to go around the table, introduce yourself, who you are." Right. But I yourself, who you are." Right. But I yourself, who you are." Right. But I want to go first because if I have to want to go first because if I have to want to go first because if I have to hear people Right. go and then it's hear people Right. go and then it's hear people Right. go and then it's coming around. I don't know why, but coming around. I don't know why, but coming around. I don't know why, but some circuit must ramp up where as soon some circuit must ramp up where as soon some circuit must ramp up where as soon as I start speaking I'm like hearing my as I start speaking I'm like hearing my as I start speaking I'm like hearing my own voice and I don't have any problem own voice and I don't have any problem own voice and I don't have any problem public speaking and people haven't public speaking and people haven't public speaking and people haven't noticed, but there's something about noticed, but there's something about noticed, but there's something about that anticipation Right. that anticipation Right. that anticipation Right. &gt;&gt; without it being my turn to speak that &gt;&gt; without it being my turn to speak that &gt;&gt; without it being my turn to speak that makes it such like really awkward. And makes it such like really awkward. And makes it such like really awkward. And then I realized at some point if I just then I realized at some point if I just then I realized at some point if I just focus off myself and just really listen focus off myself and just really listen focus off myself and just really listen to what people are saying, when it comes to what people are saying, when it comes to what people are saying, when it comes around you just say, "I'm Andrew." or around you just say, "I'm Andrew." or around you just say, "I'm Andrew." or you're whoever and then you share you're whoever and then you share you're whoever and then you share the information that needs to be shared. the information that needs to be shared. the information that needs to be shared. But if I'm anticipating having to speak, But if I'm anticipating having to speak, But if I'm anticipating having to speak, it's like terrifying. it's like terrifying. it's like terrifying. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's that build up because it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's that build up because it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's that build up because it's getting closer and closer and closer and getting closer and closer and closer and getting closer and closer and closer and the anxiety that you're feeling is and the anxiety that you're feeling is and the anxiety that you're feeling is getting stronger and stronger. I don't getting stronger and stronger. I don't getting stronger and stronger. I don't like go around the room and introduce like go around the room and introduce like go around the room and introduce yourself. If there's a need for people yourself. If there's a need for people yourself. If there's a need for people to do that, I will always have people to do that, I will always have people to do that, I will always have people partner up or get in groups of three and partner up or get in groups of three and partner up or get in groups of three and then have somebody introduce somebody then have somebody introduce somebody then have somebody introduce somebody else. It's just much easier. else. It's just much easier. else. It's just much easier. I do exactly and I coach exactly what I do exactly and I coach exactly what I do exactly and I coach exactly what you are what you do. I tell people you are what you do. I tell people you are what you do. I tell people listen to everybody else and think to listen to everybody else and think to listen to everybody else and think to yourself a question you would ask them yourself a question you would ask them yourself a question you would ask them based on what they've said because that based on what they've said because that based on what they've said because that causes you really to focus on what causes you really to focus on what causes you really to focus on what they're saying. So, you're not getting they're saying. So, you're not getting they're saying. So, you're not getting into your head and you're not really into your head and you're not really into your head and you're not really living at the peak all the anxiety living at the peak all the anxiety living at the peak all the anxiety feelings you're having. Now, to help feelings you're having. Now, to help feelings you're having. Now, to help people introduce themselves, I have a people introduce themselves, I have a people introduce themselves, I have a way I like to teach people to introduce way I like to teach people to introduce way I like to teach people to introduce themselves. Don't start with your name. themselves. Don't start with your name. themselves. Don't start with your name. Start with something you care about, Start with something you care about, Start with something you care about, you're passionate about, something that you're passionate about, something that you're passionate about, something that interests you and then say who you are. interests you and then say who you are. interests you and then say who you are. For two reasons. There's actually a For two reasons. There's actually a For two reasons. There's actually a third. First is you're going to stand third. First is you're going to stand third. First is you're going to stand out cuz nobody does this. So, people are out cuz nobody does this. So, people are out cuz nobody does this. So, people are actually going to remember you. Second, actually going to remember you. Second, actually going to remember you. Second, if you start with something you're if you start with something you're if you start with something you're passionate about, you care about, you passionate about, you care about, you passionate about, you care about, you can use emotion and inflect your voice. can use emotion and inflect your voice. can use emotion and inflect your voice. It's very hard to inflect your voice It's very hard to inflect your voice It's very hard to inflect your voice when you say your name. And then when you say your name. And then when you say your name. And then finally, if you're a non-native speaker finally, if you're a non-native speaker finally, if you're a non-native speaker or you're speaking to non-native or you're speaking to non-native or you're speaking to non-native speakers who might have an accent speakers who might have an accent speakers who might have an accent hearing something in advance primes our hearing something in advance primes our hearing something in advance primes our brain to say, "Oh, that's how that brain to say, "Oh, that's how that brain to say, "Oh, that's how that person speaks." So, we'll actually pay person speaks." So, we'll actually pay person speaks." So, we'll actually pay attention and understand their name attention and understand their name attention and understand their name more. I don't know about you, but when more. I don't know about you, but when more. I don't know about you, but when people with accents introduce themselves people with accents introduce themselves people with accents introduce themselves to me, sometimes it's hard for me to me, sometimes it's hard for me to me, sometimes it's hard for me to remember their name because my brain's remember their name because my brain's remember their name because my brain's trying to get used to that's how they trying to get used to that's how they trying to get used to that's how they speak. So, you're helping everybody. So, speak. So, you're helping everybody. So, speak. So, you're helping everybody. So, when I introduce myself, I don't say I'm when I introduce myself, I don't say I'm when I introduce myself, I don't say I'm Matt Abrahams. I say, "I'm somebody Matt Abrahams. I say, "I'm somebody Matt Abrahams. I say, "I'm somebody who's passionate about communication. My who's passionate about communication. My who's passionate about communication. My name's Matt Abrahams." and then I'll say name's Matt Abrahams." and then I'll say name's Matt Abrahams." and then I'll say something else. something else. something else. &gt;&gt; You'll do this at a party? Uh Well, it's &gt;&gt; You'll do this at a party? Uh Well, it's &gt;&gt; You'll do this at a party? Uh Well, it's what it's a social set. So, I envision what it's a social set. So, I envision what it's a social set. So, I envision what you were saying is more like a what you were saying is more like a what you were saying is more like a meeting, not a party. meeting, not a party. meeting, not a party. &gt;&gt; Got you. But even at a party I &gt;&gt; Got you. But even at a party I &gt;&gt; Got you. But even at a party I might say I might talk about the might say I might talk about the might say I might talk about the environment first or connect myself to environment first or connect myself to environment first or connect myself to the environment before I say my name. the environment before I say my name. the environment before I say my name. Yeah, but I think leading with Yeah, but I think leading with Yeah, but I think leading with something that you care about or something that you care about or something that you care about or concerned about or something in the concerned about or something in the concerned about or something in the environment before you say your name is environment before you say your name is environment before you say your name is a much better way to introduce yourself. a much better way to introduce yourself. a much better way to introduce yourself. It can't be too long, but it can really It can't be too long, but it can really It can't be too long, but it can really help. Try it next time you introduce help. Try it next time you introduce help. Try it next time you introduce yourself. Yeah. yourself. Yeah. yourself. Yeah. Yeah, I know that's a it's an Yeah, I know that's a it's an Yeah, I know that's a it's an interesting one. I miss having a dog interesting one. I miss having a dog interesting one. I miss having a dog because the dog could absorb a lot of because the dog could absorb a lot of because the dog could absorb a lot of the awkwardness. Oh, yeah. the awkwardness. Oh, yeah. the awkwardness. Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; He was just so handsome. People had to &gt;&gt; He was just so handsome. People had to &gt;&gt; He was just so handsome. People had to look at him. Yeah. Well, having a look at him. Yeah. Well, having a look at him. Yeah. Well, having a young child does the same thing. young child does the same thing. young child does the same thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like kids are a wonderful &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like kids are a wonderful &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like kids are a wonderful bridge to all sorts of things. bridge to all sorts of things. bridge to all sorts of things. &gt;&gt; can find those bridges in lots of &gt;&gt; can find those bridges in lots of &gt;&gt; can find those bridges in lots of things. Yeah. things. Yeah. things. Yeah. Now, dear close friend of mine I met Now, dear close friend of mine I met Now, dear close friend of mine I met waiting in line I was at a conference, waiting in line I was at a conference, waiting in line I was at a conference, you know these academic conferences. We you know these academic conferences. We you know these academic conferences. We were at some buffet line and I didn't were at some buffet line and I didn't were at some buffet line and I didn't know anybody. I was sent by my know anybody. I was sent by my know anybody. I was sent by my department. And there's this guy department. And there's this guy department. And there's this guy standing next to me. It was we were standing next to me. It was we were standing next to me. It was we were standing too close where, you know, we standing too close where, you know, we standing too close where, you know, we kind of had to talk. And I just look kind of had to talk. And I just look kind of had to talk. And I just look around the room and I noticed that lots around the room and I noticed that lots around the room and I noticed that lots of people were wearing different shades of people were wearing different shades of people were wearing different shades of blue and I just said, "Did I miss the of blue and I just said, "Did I miss the of blue and I just said, "Did I miss the memo about wearing blue?" And he the memo about wearing blue?" And he the memo about wearing blue?" And he looks around and he said, "Yeah, that's looks around and he said, "Yeah, that's looks around and he said, "Yeah, that's weird." And we started a conversation weird." And we started a conversation weird." And we started a conversation there. I didn't need a dog. I didn't there. I didn't need a dog. I didn't there. I didn't need a dog. I didn't need a kid. I just made an observation need a kid. I just made an observation need a kid. I just made an observation and that broke the ice enough for us to and that broke the ice enough for us to and that broke the ice enough for us to talk and now we're good friends. talk and now we're good friends. talk and now we're good friends. Whenever I travel to where he is, I Whenever I travel to where he is, I Whenever I travel to where he is, I visit. Whenever he's out here, he visit. Whenever he's out here, he visit. Whenever he's out here, he visits. So, we put a lot of pressure on visits. So, we put a lot of pressure on visits. So, we put a lot of pressure on ourselves around this initiation of ourselves around this initiation of ourselves around this initiation of communication and just being inquisitive communication and just being inquisitive communication and just being inquisitive and commenting on something in the and commenting on something in the and commenting on something in the environment can help. Can we do the environment can help. Can we do the environment can help. Can we do the British wind up? British wind up? British wind up? &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; A lot of people won't know what that is. &gt;&gt; A lot of people won't know what that is. &gt;&gt; A lot of people won't know what that is. The There's this like There's this like There's this like much older lady that lives in my much older lady that lives in my much older lady that lives in my neighborhood and she has this little neighborhood and she has this little neighborhood and she has this little tiny dog. tiny dog. tiny dog. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I figure if I just walk over &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I figure if I just walk over &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I figure if I just walk over to her, she's going to like be a little to her, she's going to like be a little to her, she's going to like be a little scared. Well, I she I see her often and scared. Well, I she I see her often and scared. Well, I she I see her often and so I did do a windup. I walked over to so I did do a windup. I walked over to so I did do a windup. I walked over to her and I said, "Wait, is that the her and I said, "Wait, is that the her and I said, "Wait, is that the dog that mauled that kid over in dog that mauled that kid over in dog that mauled that kid over in Inglewood?" And she was like, Inglewood?" And she was like, Inglewood?" And she was like, "You're pulling my leg." And then, you "You're pulling my leg." And then, you "You're pulling my leg." And then, you know, we become friends, right? No, cuz know, we become friends, right? No, cuz know, we become friends, right? No, cuz I'm not going to just walk up to her and I'm not going to just walk up to her and I'm not going to just walk up to her and be like, "Hey, can you know, cuz it's be like, "Hey, can you know, cuz it's be like, "Hey, can you know, cuz it's kind of like someone looming on you, kind of like someone looming on you, kind of like someone looming on you, right? You know, it's like a little right? You know, it's like a little right? You know, it's like a little scary, right?" Um so I stole the wind scary, right?" Um so I stole the wind scary, right?" Um so I stole the wind I guess they call it in Britain I think I guess they call it in Britain I think I guess they call it in Britain I think they call it a windup, right? So I they call it a windup, right? So I they call it a windup, right? So I wasn't trying to be funny. I just I wasn't trying to be funny. I just I wasn't trying to be funny. I just I really like this lady and her dog is really like this lady and her dog is really like this lady and her dog is super cute and uh yeah. super cute and uh yeah. super cute and uh yeah. &gt;&gt; clearly need another dog. Um If one &gt;&gt; clearly need another dog. Um If one &gt;&gt; clearly need another dog. Um If one thing has come from this interview, it's thing has come from this interview, it's thing has come from this interview, it's that Andrew needs another dog. that Andrew needs another dog. that Andrew needs another dog. &gt;&gt; Thanks to you, many more things &gt;&gt; Thanks to you, many more things &gt;&gt; Thanks to you, many more things [clears throat] have come from this [clears throat] have come from this [clears throat] have come from this interview and far more utility as well. interview and far more utility as well. interview and far more utility as well. But I mean, I don't suggest anyone But I mean, I don't suggest anyone But I mean, I don't suggest anyone smoke, but I think um back in the day smoke, but I think um back in the day smoke, but I think um back in the day this was the whole thing. People like this was the whole thing. People like this was the whole thing. People like bumming a smoke, they'd uh take breaks. bumming a smoke, they'd uh take breaks. bumming a smoke, they'd uh take breaks. I you know, I worked a job where I you know, I worked a job where I you know, I worked a job where I You're right. did some packaging and You're right. did some packaging and You're right. did some packaging and building of uh like scooters and wagons building of uh like scooters and wagons building of uh like scooters and wagons at a toy store in downtown Palo Alto. at a toy store in downtown Palo Alto. at a toy store in downtown Palo Alto. And uh on breaks you go into the alley And uh on breaks you go into the alley And uh on breaks you go into the alley and like there were people working at and like there were people working at and like there were people working at the bakery next door and you'd the bakery next door and you'd the bakery next door and you'd Right. strike up a conversation. I Right. strike up a conversation. I Right. strike up a conversation. I didn't smoke, but you'd strike up a didn't smoke, but you'd strike up a didn't smoke, but you'd strike up a conversation and then you'd get to know conversation and then you'd get to know conversation and then you'd get to know somebody &gt;&gt; Right. uh by name. Right. Uh but &gt;&gt; Right. uh by name. Right. Uh but &gt;&gt; Right. uh by name. Right. Uh but nowadays people are often in their nowadays people are often in their nowadays people are often in their phones. We use the phone as a pacifier phones. We use the phone as a pacifier phones. We use the phone as a pacifier uh and as a way of not having to uh and as a way of not having to uh and as a way of not having to engage. Uh I have encouraged my two engage. Uh I have encouraged my two engage. Uh I have encouraged my two kids uh to help them get out of this kids uh to help them get out of this kids uh to help them get out of this cycle to show something that cycle to show something that cycle to show something that you're looking at the phone. Invite you're looking at the phone. Invite you're looking at the phone. Invite somebody "Hey, this is pretty cool. What somebody "Hey, this is pretty cool. What somebody "Hey, this is pretty cool. What do you think? Check out this meme." So do you think? Check out this meme." So do you think? Check out this meme." So it's a use the phone as you're saying it's a use the phone as you're saying it's a use the phone as you're saying that cigarettes used to serve as a way that cigarettes used to serve as a way that cigarettes used to serve as a way to initiate conversation as long as it's to initiate conversation as long as it's to initiate conversation as long as it's appropriate. And it's funny. I know appropriate. And it's funny. I know appropriate. And it's funny. I know exactly the toy store you're talking exactly the toy store you're talking exactly the toy store you're talking about because I know that bakery no about because I know that bakery no about because I know that bakery no longer exists, but I used to go there longer exists, but I used to go there longer exists, but I used to go there all the time. all the time. all the time. &gt;&gt; They closed Prolific Oven? &gt;&gt; They closed Prolific Oven? &gt;&gt; They closed Prolific Oven? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's gone. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's gone. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's gone. &gt;&gt; Oh. It's now a great restaurant, by the &gt;&gt; Oh. It's now a great restaurant, by the &gt;&gt; Oh. It's now a great restaurant, by the way. &gt;&gt; guess we can say cuz they both It &gt;&gt; guess we can say cuz they both It &gt;&gt; guess we can say cuz they both It was Palo Alto Toy and Sport World. It was Palo Alto Toy and Sport World. It was Palo Alto Toy and Sport World. It was one of the oldest businesses. They was one of the oldest businesses. They was one of the oldest businesses. They had a skateboard shop in the back. But had a skateboard shop in the back. But had a skateboard shop in the back. But prior to working in the skateboard shop, prior to working in the skateboard shop, prior to working in the skateboard shop, I worked I sold shoes and I uh used to I worked I sold shoes and I uh used to I worked I sold shoes and I uh used to build wagons build wagons build wagons &gt;&gt; Yeah. Radio Flyer wagons and &gt;&gt; Yeah. Radio Flyer wagons and &gt;&gt; Yeah. Radio Flyer wagons and tricycles and stuff. tricycles and stuff. tricycles and stuff. &gt;&gt; to go there as a kid because you we not &gt;&gt; to go there as a kid because you we not &gt;&gt; to go there as a kid because you we not only would get a toy, but we'd get to only would get a toy, but we'd get to only would get a toy, but we'd get to have a treat, too. Oh, yeah. have a treat, too. Oh, yeah. have a treat, too. Oh, yeah. Yeah, those were fun outings. Yeah, that Yeah, those were fun outings. Yeah, that Yeah, those were fun outings. Yeah, that place was cool. It was a family-owned. I place was cool. It was a family-owned. I place was cool. It was a family-owned. I Yeah, it's a Yeah, it's a Yeah, it's a um All right. Well, now we're taking um All right. Well, now we're taking um All right. Well, now we're taking people Yeah, yeah, yeah. people Yeah, yeah, yeah. people Yeah, yeah, yeah. &gt;&gt; if in downtown Palo Alto &gt;&gt; if in downtown Palo Alto &gt;&gt; if in downtown Palo Alto &gt;&gt; there, yeah. uh you can check it out. I &gt;&gt; there, yeah. uh you can check it out. I &gt;&gt; there, yeah. uh you can check it out. I think the I think the sign is still think the I think the sign is still think the I think the sign is still there. It might be. there. It might be. there. It might be. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that actually brings &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that actually brings &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that actually brings up something useful. I mean, I had jobs up something useful. I mean, I had jobs up something useful. I mean, I had jobs where Yeah. I was a where Yeah. I was a where Yeah. I was a they didn't call it a barista then, but they didn't call it a barista then, but they didn't call it a barista then, but I worked at a muffin shop around the I worked at a muffin shop around the I worked at a muffin shop around the corner, which then got me that job. I corner, which then got me that job. I corner, which then got me that job. I think from conversation across the think from conversation across the think from conversation across the counter. I think counter. I think counter. I think my niece worked a job selling frozen my niece worked a job selling frozen my niece worked a job selling frozen yogurt before she went off to college yogurt before she went off to college yogurt before she went off to college recently. So recently. So recently. So get a job. Yeah. No, I think As a kid, get a job. Yeah. No, I think As a kid, get a job. Yeah. No, I think As a kid, get a job where you interact with get a job where you interact with get a job where you interact with people. Having a job uh where you're in people. Having a job uh where you're in people. Having a job uh where you're in customer service as a kid is so customer service as a kid is so customer service as a kid is so educational for so many reasons. educational for so many reasons. educational for so many reasons. Communication being an important one. Communication being an important one. Communication being an important one. You learn how to communicate with a lot You learn how to communicate with a lot You learn how to communicate with a lot of different people. You learn how to be of different people. You learn how to be of different people. You learn how to be in service of other people's needs in service of other people's needs in service of other people's needs in that moment. I think it's that moment. I think it's that moment. I think it's wonderful. I uh my first job and a job I wonderful. I uh my first job and a job I wonderful. I uh my first job and a job I had a lot of during high school, I had a lot of during high school, I had a lot of during high school, I worked at an athletic club folding worked at an athletic club folding worked at an athletic club folding towels. And when people would come in, I towels. And when people would come in, I towels. And when people would come in, I would give them the towel and we'd have would give them the towel and we'd have would give them the towel and we'd have some small talk. It taught me to be very some small talk. It taught me to be very some small talk. It taught me to be very comfortable. I had to announce I mean, comfortable. I had to announce I mean, comfortable. I had to announce I mean, this sounds so silly, but I "The gym is this sounds so silly, but I "The gym is this sounds so silly, but I "The gym is closing in 30 minutes." But as a high closing in 30 minutes." But as a high closing in 30 minutes." But as a high school student, I had to say that with school student, I had to say that with school student, I had to say that with 100 people in the gym. That was 100 people in the gym. That was 100 people in the gym. That was nerve-wracking, but that was part of my nerve-wracking, but that was part of my nerve-wracking, but that was part of my desensitization. So cool. So cool. So cool. Yeah, I think that um Yeah, I think that um Yeah, I think that um I don't want to sound old because I don't want to sound old because I don't want to sound old because I am old. I'm 50 now. Uh but I feel good. am old. I'm 50 now. Uh but I feel good. am old. I'm 50 now. Uh but I feel good. I feel good. I'm going to go another 50 I feel good. I'm going to go another 50 I feel good. I'm going to go another 50 years. That's the goal. Hopefully years. That's the goal. Hopefully years. That's the goal. Hopefully healthy all along. But healthy all along. But healthy all along. But I think being a camp counselor Oh, yeah. I think being a camp counselor Oh, yeah. I think being a camp counselor Oh, yeah. is the perfect example of um is the perfect example of um is the perfect example of um doing something you barely understand doing something you barely understand doing something you barely understand how to do how to do how to do and having to project confidence doing and having to project confidence doing and having to project confidence doing it. I mean, they teach you a few things. it. I mean, they teach you a few things. it. I mean, they teach you a few things. At least when I did it, but like At least when I did it, but like At least when I did it, but like suddenly you're like in charge of all suddenly you're like in charge of all suddenly you're like in charge of all these lives. I mean, you think about it, these lives. I mean, you think about it, these lives. I mean, you think about it, it's pretty wild. But you know, by the it's pretty wild. But you know, by the it's pretty wild. But you know, by the second session you're in a second session you're in a second session you're in a groove. Like you're telling people what groove. Like you're telling people what groove. Like you're telling people what to do, when to listen, letting them, you to do, when to listen, letting them, you to do, when to listen, letting them, you know, do what they want when they want. know, do what they want when they want. know, do what they want when they want. You you can't use um you can't use um you can't use um you know, you know, you know, harsh forms of communication. You need harsh forms of communication. You need harsh forms of communication. You need to be you know, you need to be you know, you need to be you know, you need to But you need to keep them safe, so you But you need to keep them safe, so you But you need to keep them safe, so you need to like use your voice need to like use your voice need to like use your voice appropriately. Oh, yeah. appropriately. Oh, yeah. appropriately. Oh, yeah. You know, raise it when it's necessary You know, raise it when it's necessary You know, raise it when it's necessary if somebody's in danger, that kind of if somebody's in danger, that kind of if somebody's in danger, that kind of thing. So doing that sort of thing I thing. So doing that sort of thing I thing. So doing that sort of thing I think is how we learn how to think is how we learn how to think is how we learn how to communicate. &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. And and unfortunately, &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. And and unfortunately, &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. And and unfortunately, some of those opportunities and jobs are some of those opportunities and jobs are some of those opportunities and jobs are changing and we have to find other changing and we have to find other changing and we have to find other vehicles to help people. I vehicles to help people. I vehicles to help people. I when I left high-tech, I taught high when I left high-tech, I taught high when I left high-tech, I taught high school for 2 years before I graduated to school for 2 years before I graduated to school for 2 years before I graduated to do what I'm doing now. And I learned to do what I'm doing now. And I learned to do what I'm doing now. And I learned so much about communication teaching 14, so much about communication teaching 14, so much about communication teaching 14, 15-year-olds that I never learned 15-year-olds that I never learned 15-year-olds that I never learned working in adults running organizations working in adults running organizations working in adults running organizations like I did. So getting these like I did. So getting these like I did. So getting these opportunities is precious. opportunities is precious. opportunities is precious. Yet we don't have a lot of those Yet we don't have a lot of those Yet we don't have a lot of those opportunities. One thing I think we can opportunities. One thing I think we can opportunities. One thing I think we can all do with the younger generation and all do with the younger generation and all do with the younger generation and even colleagues we have is role model even colleagues we have is role model even colleagues we have is role model and talk through some of the things that and talk through some of the things that and talk through some of the things that we're thinking about in terms of our we're thinking about in terms of our we're thinking about in terms of our communication. So I with my children communication. So I with my children communication. So I with my children will often say, "I have to have a will often say, "I have to have a will often say, "I have to have a difficult conversation tomorrow with a difficult conversation tomorrow with a difficult conversation tomorrow with a colleague or with a boss and I'm really colleague or with a boss and I'm really colleague or with a boss and I'm really worried about this or I'm thinking about worried about this or I'm thinking about worried about this or I'm thinking about saying it this way." We don't often get saying it this way." We don't often get saying it this way." We don't often get meta about our communication and yet meta about our communication and yet meta about our communication and yet there're learnings that we can pass there're learnings that we can pass there're learnings that we can pass along. And you know, along. And you know, along. And you know, you saw it, I see it where you saw it, I see it where you saw it, I see it where we're both affiliated with our teaching. we're both affiliated with our teaching. we're both affiliated with our teaching. I mean, people are brilliant and they're I mean, people are brilliant and they're I mean, people are brilliant and they're really good communicators, but they really good communicators, but they really good communicators, but they don't learn always that way. They had to don't learn always that way. They had to don't learn always that way. They had to learn and they had to do it. And when learn and they had to do it. And when learn and they had to do it. And when you start talking to people, which I you start talking to people, which I you start talking to people, which I have the advantage of doing is asking have the advantage of doing is asking have the advantage of doing is asking them, "How did you get to do that? What them, "How did you get to do that? What them, "How did you get to do that? What do you do?" do you do?" do you do?" There's so much richness in that. And I There's so much richness in that. And I There's so much richness in that. And I think we just have to open up that think we just have to open up that think we just have to open up that conversation, role model it, but also conversation, role model it, but also conversation, role model it, but also talk about it with the younger people in talk about it with the younger people in talk about it with the younger people in your life, the people you're trying to your life, the people you're trying to your life, the people you're trying to uh build up. And that'll really help. build up. And that'll really help. build up. And that'll really help. Do you think by virtue of the pandemic Do you think by virtue of the pandemic Do you think by virtue of the pandemic and the lockdowns and social media that and the lockdowns and social media that and the lockdowns and social media that there is a swath of people right now who there is a swath of people right now who there is a swath of people right now who um really don't know how to engage the same really don't know how to engage the same really don't know how to engage the same way that um people even younger than way that um people even younger than way that um people even younger than them do. There So this isn't an ageist them do. There So this isn't an ageist them do. There So this isn't an ageist thing. It's really that they missed out thing. It's really that they missed out thing. It's really that they missed out on an opportunity uh to engage. There's on an opportunity uh to engage. There's on an opportunity uh to engage. There's a What is it? The Gen Z stare? Is that a What is it? The Gen Z stare? Is that a What is it? The Gen Z stare? Is that a real thing? I don't know about the Gen Z real thing? I don't know about the Gen Z real thing? I don't know about the Gen Z stare, but I do think there are stare, but I do think there are stare, but I do think there are critical periods in development uh not critical periods in development uh not critical periods in development uh not just in and I think we that just in and I think we that just in and I think we that generation of kids lost a critical generation of kids lost a critical generation of kids lost a critical development. One of my sons was in high development. One of my sons was in high development. One of my sons was in high school and high school is a is a great school and high school is a is a great school and high school is a is a great place to learn about yourself and about place to learn about yourself and about place to learn about yourself and about communication. And if you're doing it communication. And if you're doing it communication. And if you're doing it through a screen, that's a very through a screen, that's a very through a screen, that's a very different experience. Now, I think he's different experience. Now, I think he's different experience. Now, I think he's a very good communicator, but they a very good communicator, but they a very good communicator, but they missed on an opportunity. A lot of they missed on an opportunity. A lot of they missed on an opportunity. A lot of how you learn is by testing and trying how you learn is by testing and trying how you learn is by testing and trying things out. And if you lost a couple things out. And if you lost a couple things out. And if you lost a couple years of that testing, puts you to years of that testing, puts you to years of that testing, puts you to disadvantage. I know because of what I disadvantage. I know because of what I disadvantage. I know because of what I do, we can build that back and learn it. do, we can build that back and learn it. do, we can build that back and learn it. But there are there is a whole swath of But there are there is a whole swath of But there are there is a whole swath of people who had to struggle in a way most people who had to struggle in a way most people who had to struggle in a way most of us didn't. of us didn't. of us didn't. My graduated advisor, who I really My graduated advisor, who I really My graduated advisor, who I really admire very much she's passed away, but admire very much she's passed away, but admire very much she's passed away, but I I've always admired her was once I I've always admired her was once I I've always admired her was once described by somebody I think quite described by somebody I think quite described by somebody I think quite aptly as quiet, but not shy. aptly as quiet, but not shy. aptly as quiet, but not shy. And I realize it's a very powerful And I realize it's a very powerful And I realize it's a very powerful phenotype. And I mention it because phenotype. And I mention it because phenotype. And I mention it because some people listening to this some people listening to this some people listening to this conversation might think, you know, conversation might think, you know, conversation might think, you know, "I'm just not that chatty. Like I just "I'm just not that chatty. Like I just "I'm just not that chatty. Like I just I'm Right. But they're not necessarily I'm Right. But they're not necessarily I'm Right. But they're not necessarily shy. Like they're perfectly happy to be shy. Like they're perfectly happy to be shy. Like they're perfectly happy to be in conversation and be quiet until in conversation and be quiet until in conversation and be quiet until there's something that they want to say. there's something that they want to say. there's something that they want to say. And sometimes she wouldn't say anything And sometimes she wouldn't say anything And sometimes she wouldn't say anything and sometimes she would say things and sometimes she would say things and sometimes she would say things and indeed she was very smart, but indeed she was very smart, but indeed she was very smart, but she's also very at ease. So I came to she's also very at ease. So I came to she's also very at ease. So I came to learn that there are people who are learn that there are people who are learn that there are people who are quiet, but not shy. Yeah. And I think quiet, but not shy. Yeah. And I think quiet, but not shy. Yeah. And I think that's a phenotype we don't often that's a phenotype we don't often that's a phenotype we don't often acknowledge when we hear about acknowledge when we hear about acknowledge when we hear about introverted, extroverted. My father was introverted, extroverted. My father was introverted, extroverted. My father was exactly that way. My father uh exactly that way. My father uh exactly that way. My father uh most intelligent person I've ever known. most intelligent person I've ever known. most intelligent person I've ever known. He was very quiet, but he wasn't shy. He was very quiet, but he wasn't shy. He was very quiet, but he wasn't shy. And if he had something to say, he would And if he had something to say, he would And if he had something to say, he would say it and it would often be very say it and it would often be very say it and it would often be very profound. And it was the way he lived profound. And it was the way he lived profound. And it was the way he lived in the world. And people in the world. And people in the world. And people appreciated it and he leaned into appreciated it and he leaned into appreciated it and he leaned into it. He had opportunities to speak and it. He had opportunities to speak and it. He had opportunities to speak and would sit back. And I learned a lot from would sit back. And I learned a lot from would sit back. And I learned a lot from him that sometimes the most effective him that sometimes the most effective him that sometimes the most effective communication is to just listen and be communication is to just listen and be communication is to just listen and be present. Uh so I agree that there that present. Uh so I agree that there that present. Uh so I agree that there that there are people who have a lot of there are people who have a lot of there are people who have a lot of value to add and they just might value to add and they just might value to add and they just might be reticent be reticent be reticent in the moment. And I don't think there's in the moment. And I don't think there's in the moment. And I don't think there's anything wrong with that. We need lots anything wrong with that. We need lots anything wrong with that. We need lots of we need diversity not only of ideas of we need diversity not only of ideas of we need diversity not only of ideas and opinions, but diversity in the way and opinions, but diversity in the way and opinions, but diversity in the way we communicate. We hold in this in our we communicate. We hold in this in our we communicate. We hold in this in our culture this notion that the culture this notion that the culture this notion that the extroverted, confident person is the is extroverted, confident person is the is extroverted, confident person is the is the right way to communicate. And that's the right way to communicate. And that's the right way to communicate. And that's not always true. You can get into a lot not always true. You can get into a lot not always true. You can get into a lot of trouble, especially extroverts who of trouble, especially extroverts who of trouble, especially extroverts who speak first and think second. who speak first and think second. who speak first and think second. Especially nowadays where everything's Especially nowadays where everything's Especially nowadays where everything's recorded. &gt;&gt; Yeah. People will say stupid things that &gt;&gt; Yeah. People will say stupid things that &gt;&gt; Yeah. People will say stupid things that they wish they hadn't said. I mean, they wish they hadn't said. I mean, they wish they hadn't said. I mean, chairs of departments, fortunately not chairs of departments, fortunately not chairs of departments, fortunately not at Stanford, but chairs of major at Stanford, but chairs of major at Stanford, but chairs of major university departments have gotten university departments have gotten university departments have gotten themselves fired by doing by being too themselves fired by doing by being too themselves fired by doing by being too loose with their thumbs on what was loose with their thumbs on what was loose with their thumbs on what was formerly called Twitter. I know at least formerly called Twitter. I know at least formerly called Twitter. I know at least one prominent example. You just go like, one prominent example. You just go like, one prominent example. You just go like, "What were you thinking?" Right. And "What were you thinking?" Right. And "What were you thinking?" Right. And apparently Yeah. they weren't filtering well Yeah. they weren't filtering well Yeah. they weren't filtering well enough. Brilliant people. And and it enough. Brilliant people. And and it enough. Brilliant people. And and it wasn't even something that like it was wasn't even something that like it was wasn't even something that like it was clear they really believed. They just clear they really believed. They just clear they really believed. They just said something really offensive and said something really offensive and said something really offensive and really stupid. And really stupid. And really stupid. And Yeah. at least at that time it was Yeah. at least at that time it was Yeah. at least at that time it was sufficient for them to lose their sufficient for them to lose their sufficient for them to lose their position. Yeah. I wasn't into anything position. Yeah. I wasn't into anything position. Yeah. I wasn't into anything nefarious or bad. I was a good kid nefarious or bad. I was a good kid nefarious or bad. I was a good kid growing up, but I can't imagine growing up, but I can't imagine growing up, but I can't imagine growing up with everything being recorded. Yeah, up with everything being recorded. Yeah, up with everything being recorded. Yeah, it's probably a tense time for a it's probably a tense time for a it's probably a tense time for a lot of people, but people seem to be lot of people, but people seem to be lot of people, but people seem to be vocalizing and sharing more as opposed vocalizing and sharing more as opposed vocalizing and sharing more as opposed to less. Right. Although I suppose to less. Right. Although I suppose to less. Right. Although I suppose there's a sampling bias cuz we're not there's a sampling bias cuz we're not there's a sampling bias cuz we're not hearing from the from the quiet ones hearing from the from the quiet ones hearing from the from the quiet ones without social media accounts. I feel without social media accounts. I feel without social media accounts. I feel like almost everyone has a social media like almost everyone has a social media like almost everyone has a social media account now. What I do admire about all account now. What I do admire about all account now. What I do admire about all of this social media is how of this social media is how of this social media is how people who are younger than I am at people who are younger than I am at people who are younger than I am at least are able to manage their presence least are able to manage their presence least are able to manage their presence in so many different domains. I can in so many different domains. I can in so many different domains. I can barely show up, you know, dressed barely show up, you know, dressed barely show up, you know, dressed appropriately for a conversation. appropriately for a conversation. appropriately for a conversation. They're able to manage their presence on They're able to manage their presence on They're able to manage their presence on different platforms, some virtually, different platforms, some virtually, different platforms, some virtually, some in person. And that's an art, some in person. And that's an art, some in person. And that's an art, that's a skill to be able to be able that's a skill to be able to be able that's a skill to be able to be able to project yourself in different ways to project yourself in different ways to project yourself in different ways and different venues. And and again, I'm and different venues. And and again, I'm and different venues. And and again, I'm not saying be disingenuous or not saying be disingenuous or not saying be disingenuous or inauthentic, but there's a skill there. inauthentic, but there's a skill there. inauthentic, but there's a skill there. You know, I coach a lot of senior You know, I coach a lot of senior You know, I coach a lot of senior leaders who I would leaders who I would leaders who I would I I'm trying to coach to really be I I'm trying to coach to really be I I'm trying to coach to really be mindful of your presence, how you show mindful of your presence, how you show mindful of your presence, how you show up, what it means. And I see in my up, what it means. And I see in my up, what it means. And I see in my students who are generally in their mid students who are generally in their mid students who are generally in their mid to late 20s who to late 20s who to late 20s who this comes easy to them. This is just this comes easy to them. This is just this comes easy to them. This is just something they know how to do. So, they something they know how to do. So, they something they know how to do. So, they I'm not bashing social media ever, but I I'm not bashing social media ever, but I I'm not bashing social media ever, but I do think that there's some skills that do think that there's some skills that do think that there's some skills that come with it that others could come with it that others could come with it that others could benefit from. Maybe that's why the benefit from. Maybe that's why the benefit from. Maybe that's why the younger generation is so much better at younger generation is so much better at younger generation is so much better at it, cuz I see my peers from high school, it, cuz I see my peers from high school, it, cuz I see my peers from high school, I see I see people 10 years, 20 years I see I see people 10 years, 20 years I see I see people 10 years, 20 years older than I am that seem to have an older than I am that seem to have an older than I am that seem to have an immense need to be seen on social media. immense need to be seen on social media. immense need to be seen on social media. I mean, it's part of my job, which is I mean, it's part of my job, which is I mean, it's part of my job, which is why I do it, but prior to that, I didn't why I do it, but prior to that, I didn't why I do it, but prior to that, I didn't really have social media accounts or really have social media accounts or really have social media accounts or didn't use them. But in any case, didn't use them. But in any case, didn't use them. But in any case, there's no judgment for from me on that. there's no judgment for from me on that. there's no judgment for from me on that. I just I agree, it's a lot of I just I agree, it's a lot of I just I agree, it's a lot of cognitive load. It is, but they they're cognitive load. It is, but they they're cognitive load. It is, but they they're able to switch in and out of those of able to switch in and out of those of able to switch in and out of those of that in a way that it's hard for me that in a way that it's hard for me that in a way that it's hard for me and certainly hard for some of the and certainly hard for some of the and certainly hard for some of the people I work with. people I work with. people I work with. I'm curious about martial arts and I'm curious about martial arts and I'm curious about martial arts and running, um but is in particular martial running, um but is in particular martial running, um but is in particular martial arts, but do you think that arts, but do you think that arts, but do you think that playing a sport or engaging in martial playing a sport or engaging in martial playing a sport or engaging in martial arts can actually teach you how to be arts can actually teach you how to be arts can actually teach you how to be more comfortable in your physical body more comfortable in your physical body more comfortable in your physical body in a way that transfers to public in a way that transfers to public in a way that transfers to public speaking, one-on-one communication, speaking, one-on-one communication, speaking, one-on-one communication, small group communication, just small group communication, just small group communication, just presence, posture, stance. presence, posture, stance. presence, posture, stance. I enjoy the question, thank you. I don't I enjoy the question, thank you. I don't I enjoy the question, thank you. I don't often talk about my martial arts. I've often talk about my martial arts. I've often talk about my martial arts. I've been doing it over 40 years, and I've been doing it over 40 years, and I've been doing it over 40 years, and it's a very much a part of who I it's a very much a part of who I it's a very much a part of who I am. And I absolutely think what I've am. And I absolutely think what I've am. And I absolutely think what I've learned in the martial arts have helped learned in the martial arts have helped learned in the martial arts have helped me do better at what I do, and I think me do better at what I do, and I think me do better at what I do, and I think what I do have has helped me be better what I do have has helped me be better what I do have has helped me be better in the martial arts. There is a presence in the martial arts. There is a presence in the martial arts. There is a presence and a connection that you need to have and a connection that you need to have and a connection that you need to have to do martial arts well, especially when to do martial arts well, especially when to do martial arts well, especially when you're working with somebody else. you're working with somebody else. you're working with somebody else. Uh it gives a kind of confidence Uh it gives a kind of confidence Uh it gives a kind of confidence that I know I can handle myself in that I know I can handle myself in that I know I can handle myself in certain in circumstances. I don't expect certain in circumstances. I don't expect certain in circumstances. I don't expect to be attacked, but I know that in a to be attacked, but I know that in a to be attacked, but I know that in a situation where things go sideways that situation where things go sideways that situation where things go sideways that I can have some presence about myself, I can have some presence about myself, I can have some presence about myself, and that confidence is invaluable in and that confidence is invaluable in and that confidence is invaluable in everything I do. everything I do. everything I do. And martial arts is really a form of And martial arts is really a form of And martial arts is really a form of communication. I'm observing what my communication. I'm observing what my communication. I'm observing what my opponent or the my training partner is opponent or the my training partner is opponent or the my training partner is doing. I am trying to connect and doing. I am trying to connect and doing. I am trying to connect and anticipate the next move, but not get anticipate the next move, but not get anticipate the next move, but not get locked into it. locked into it. locked into it. It it really trains your brain and your It it really trains your brain and your It it really trains your brain and your body to be responsive and to be open. body to be responsive and to be open. body to be responsive and to be open. You know, people focus a lot on the You know, people focus a lot on the You know, people focus a lot on the martial, but the art side is really what martial, but the art side is really what martial, but the art side is really what as I get older is what really attracts as I get older is what really attracts as I get older is what really attracts me. Art is about expression, style, me. Art is about expression, style, me. Art is about expression, style, connection. And that to me as I've connection. And that to me as I've connection. And that to me as I've matured in my training has really become matured in my training has really become matured in my training has really become this new wealth of knowledge. You know, this new wealth of knowledge. You know, this new wealth of knowledge. You know, somebody say, "You've been studying the somebody say, "You've been studying the somebody say, "You've been studying the same thing for 40 years." It's not the same thing for 40 years." It's not the same thing for 40 years." It's not the same thing, it changes. It's multiple same thing, it changes. It's multiple same thing, it changes. It's multiple levels and ways of uncovering. So, I levels and ways of uncovering. So, I levels and ways of uncovering. So, I think it's great. I think everybody think it's great. I think everybody think it's great. I think everybody should have some physical activity they should have some physical activity they should have some physical activity they do that helps them in whatever do that helps them in whatever do that helps them in whatever professional activity or their personal professional activity or their personal professional activity or their personal lives. You can learn so much about lives. You can learn so much about lives. You can learn so much about yourself and how to connect with others. yourself and how to connect with others. yourself and how to connect with others. I think there's tremendous learning in I think there's tremendous learning in I think there's tremendous learning in for lack of a better term, exercise, for lack of a better term, exercise, for lack of a better term, exercise, yeah, but there's something unique about yeah, but there's something unique about yeah, but there's something unique about martial arts or a sport. Not to say that martial arts or a sport. Not to say that martial arts or a sport. Not to say that running isn't a sport, it can be, or running isn't a sport, it can be, or running isn't a sport, it can be, or that resistance training isn't a sport, that resistance training isn't a sport, that resistance training isn't a sport, it can be, but I think if people are it can be, but I think if people are it can be, but I think if people are just exercising and only viewing it just exercising and only viewing it just exercising and only viewing it through that lens through that lens through that lens that um that um that um they're not gleaning the full benefit. I they're not gleaning the full benefit. I they're not gleaning the full benefit. I actually try and make my resistance actually try and make my resistance actually try and make my resistance training sessions a sort of meditation. training sessions a sort of meditation. training sessions a sort of meditation. Yeah. I don't allow myself to text Yeah. I don't allow myself to text Yeah. I don't allow myself to text or in most cases or in most cases or in most cases uh bring in too much other information. uh bring in too much other information. uh bring in too much other information. I'll listen to music or a podcast. Yeah. I'll listen to music or a podcast. Yeah. I'll listen to music or a podcast. Yeah. But I'm careful with that. I want to But I'm careful with that. I want to But I'm careful with that. I want to focus on what I'm doing, and I think focus on what I'm doing, and I think focus on what I'm doing, and I think it's great practice for cognitive it's great practice for cognitive it's great practice for cognitive pursuits. My running is my meditation. I pursuits. My running is my meditation. I pursuits. My running is my meditation. I really when I run, I might listen to I really when I run, I might listen to I really when I run, I might listen to something, but I really meditate. I find something, but I really meditate. I find something, but I really meditate. I find I'm very creative as a result of it, and I'm very creative as a result of it, and I'm very creative as a result of it, and uh when I don't do it, I miss it. One uh when I don't do it, I miss it. One uh when I don't do it, I miss it. One area that I like about the martial arts, area that I like about the martial arts, area that I like about the martial arts, at least in the styles I've trained in at least in the styles I've trained in at least in the styles I've trained in they vary in terms of their activity. they vary in terms of their activity. they vary in terms of their activity. So, some of the stuff is completely So, some of the stuff is completely So, some of the stuff is completely spontaneous. You're sparring, it's spontaneous. You're sparring, it's spontaneous. You're sparring, it's spontaneous. There's some rules, but spontaneous. There's some rules, but spontaneous. There's some rules, but you're sparring. And in the style I you're sparring. And in the style I you're sparring. And in the style I train, there are things called train, there are things called train, there are things called katas or forms, where essentially a katas or forms, where essentially a katas or forms, where essentially a prearranged dance of moves. prearranged dance of moves. prearranged dance of moves. Long longer, everything is scripted. Uh Long longer, everything is scripted. Uh Long longer, everything is scripted. Uh and then there in my style, we do these and then there in my style, we do these and then there in my style, we do these things called self-defense techniques, things called self-defense techniques, things called self-defense techniques, where you practice certain moves to get where you practice certain moves to get where you practice certain moves to get out of out of out of Each of those is training you a Each of those is training you a Each of those is training you a different way of thinking and being, different way of thinking and being, different way of thinking and being, just like there different ways of just like there different ways of just like there different ways of thinking and being in communication. thinking and being in communication. thinking and being in communication. Sometimes it's completely spontaneous, Sometimes it's completely spontaneous, Sometimes it's completely spontaneous, sometimes I'm giving prepared remarks, sometimes I'm giving prepared remarks, sometimes I'm giving prepared remarks, sometimes it's Q&amp;A where I'm saying some sometimes it's Q&amp;A where I'm saying some sometimes it's Q&amp;A where I'm saying some things I've prepared, but others I things I've prepared, but others I things I've prepared, but others I haven't. So, finding vehicles to help you train So, finding vehicles to help you train So, finding vehicles to help you train in different ways, in different ways, in different ways, uh cross-training, if you will, for your uh cross-training, if you will, for your uh cross-training, if you will, for your communication can really help. communication can really help. communication can really help. Fantastic. And I really like this idea Fantastic. And I really like this idea Fantastic. And I really like this idea that we need to consider the uh the that we need to consider the uh the that we need to consider the uh the different styles of different audiences. different styles of different audiences. different styles of different audiences. Yeah. Along those lines, I solicited for Yeah. Along those lines, I solicited for Yeah. Along those lines, I solicited for questions uh from the audience on social media, uh from the audience on social media, uh from the audience on social media, and there's some terrific questions and there's some terrific questions and there's some terrific questions here. &gt;&gt; Great. Uh terrific because I know they &gt;&gt; Great. Uh terrific because I know they &gt;&gt; Great. Uh terrific because I know they relate to questions that many other relate to questions that many other relate to questions that many other people are sure to have as well. Uh people are sure to have as well. Uh people are sure to have as well. Uh To kick it off To kick it off To kick it off w- somebody asked somebody asked somebody asked Why do you think women apologize before Why do you think women apologize before Why do you think women apologize before sharing their opinions? What should they sharing their opinions? What should they sharing their opinions? What should they do instead? Do you observe this? do instead? Do you observe this? do instead? Do you observe this? I see this often. I see this often. I see this often. Apologizing is a way of trying to Apologizing is a way of trying to Apologizing is a way of trying to connect. Yet, I think it can backfire. So, Yet, I think it can backfire. So, Yet, I think it can backfire. So, instead of saying, "I'm sorry," or "I instead of saying, "I'm sorry," or "I instead of saying, "I'm sorry," or "I didn't do work," start with something didn't do work," start with something didn't do work," start with something that you're confident in. And if you do that you're confident in. And if you do that you're confident in. And if you do need to apologize because there's need to apologize because there's need to apologize because there's something you didn't do or you need to something you didn't do or you need to something you didn't do or you need to do, have that come later. do, have that come later. do, have that come later. The way you start an interaction sets The way you start an interaction sets The way you start an interaction sets the tone for the whole interaction. And the tone for the whole interaction. And the tone for the whole interaction. And if I start by putting myself one down if I start by putting myself one down if I start by putting myself one down because I apologize, "Oh, I did I'm not because I apologize, "Oh, I did I'm not because I apologize, "Oh, I did I'm not prepared or I should have done this prepared or I should have done this prepared or I should have done this differently," then our interaction is differently," then our interaction is differently," then our interaction is going to be very different. So, start going to be very different. So, start going to be very different. So, start with something that you're comfortable with something that you're comfortable with something that you're comfortable with and confident in, and then if you with and confident in, and then if you with and confident in, and then if you need to apologize, apologize later. It need to apologize, apologize later. It need to apologize, apologize later. It really makes a big difference. I'm going really makes a big difference. I'm going really makes a big difference. I'm going to layer in an additional question. I've to layer in an additional question. I've to layer in an additional question. I've seen people give talks that begin with seen people give talks that begin with seen people give talks that begin with "I didn't sleep that well last night or "I didn't sleep that well last night or "I didn't sleep that well last night or I'm jet-lagged, so forgive me if I blank I'm jet-lagged, so forgive me if I blank I'm jet-lagged, so forgive me if I blank and blank." Basically trying to blank and blank." Basically trying to blank and blank." Basically trying to preload the talk with preload the talk with preload the talk with um maybe a buffer so that if they make a um maybe a buffer so that if they make a um maybe a buffer so that if they make a mistake, they're more protected. I It mistake, they're more protected. I It mistake, they're more protected. I It drives me crazy, but maybe I'm just drives me crazy, but maybe I'm just drives me crazy, but maybe I'm just crazy. &gt;&gt; No, it bothers me, too. You know, &gt;&gt; No, it bothers me, too. You know, &gt;&gt; No, it bothers me, too. You know, Andrew, my wife taught me a long time Andrew, my wife taught me a long time Andrew, my wife taught me a long time ago I can't pre-apologize, and that's ago I can't pre-apologize, and that's ago I can't pre-apologize, and that's what people are trying to do, right? So, what people are trying to do, right? So, what people are trying to do, right? So, and all you do in those circumstances is and all you do in those circumstances is and all you do in those circumstances is prime people to pay attention to prime people to pay attention to prime people to pay attention to whatever it is you're doing. So, if I whatever it is you're doing. So, if I whatever it is you're doing. So, if I say I didn't sleep well, then people are say I didn't sleep well, then people are say I didn't sleep well, then people are going to be looking, "Oh, he's going to be looking, "Oh, he's going to be looking, "Oh, he's stuttering over his words, he's stuttering over his words, he's stuttering over his words, he's stumbling." You know, stumbling." You know, stumbling." You know, you want people to focus on your you want people to focus on your you want people to focus on your message. Don't pre-apologize. Just get message. Don't pre-apologize. Just get message. Don't pre-apologize. Just get to what you're doing, and if something to what you're doing, and if something to what you're doing, and if something comes up, you get to decide in the comes up, you get to decide in the comes up, you get to decide in the moment, do I address it or do I just moment, do I address it or do I just moment, do I address it or do I just keep going? keep going? keep going? How to communicate well across cultures How to communicate well across cultures How to communicate well across cultures and accents. You talked a little bit and accents. You talked a little bit and accents. You talked a little bit about this earlier, but maybe we could about this earlier, but maybe we could about this earlier, but maybe we could uh revisit that. uh revisit that. uh revisit that. So, culture and context loom large in So, culture and context loom large in So, culture and context loom large in all communication. Uh we have to think all communication. Uh we have to think all communication. Uh we have to think And when I talk about culture, I'm not And when I talk about culture, I'm not And when I talk about culture, I'm not just talking about country of origin. just talking about country of origin. just talking about country of origin. Different organizations have different Different organizations have different Different organizations have different cultures, different departments within cultures, different departments within cultures, different departments within organizations have cultures. Different organizations have cultures. Different organizations have cultures. Different generations have different generations have different generations have different cultures. So, we just have to be cultures. So, we just have to be cultures. So, we just have to be sensitive to that. Uh our messages have sensitive to that. Uh our messages have sensitive to that. Uh our messages have to play differently. So, whenever we to play differently. So, whenever we to play differently. So, whenever we communicate, we have to think about who communicate, we have to think about who communicate, we have to think about who we're communicating to and the context we're communicating to and the context we're communicating to and the context and culture in which we're and culture in which we're and culture in which we're communicating. We live in a diverse society and a We live in a diverse society and a We live in a diverse society and a diverse world, where we hear lots of diverse world, where we hear lots of diverse world, where we hear lots of viewpoints, lots of people from viewpoints, lots of people from viewpoints, lots of people from different places. Accents loom large. On different places. Accents loom large. On different places. Accents loom large. On my show, Think Fast, Talk Smart, I've my show, Think Fast, Talk Smart, I've my show, Think Fast, Talk Smart, I've interviewed a lot of people who are interviewed a lot of people who are interviewed a lot of people who are experts in non-native speaking. And what experts in non-native speaking. And what experts in non-native speaking. And what they all tell me is they all tell me is they all tell me is the goal of a non-native speaker is not the goal of a non-native speaker is not the goal of a non-native speaker is not to sound like a native speaker. It's to sound like a native speaker. It's to sound like a native speaker. It's impossible, it can't be, you're not a impossible, it can't be, you're not a impossible, it can't be, you're not a native speaker. Rather, focus on getting native speaker. Rather, focus on getting native speaker. Rather, focus on getting your message across. Take the pressure your message across. Take the pressure your message across. Take the pressure off of yourself. So, what does that off of yourself. So, what does that off of yourself. So, what does that mean? That means I might make my point, mean? That means I might make my point, mean? That means I might make my point, and then what I do is I repeat it with a and then what I do is I repeat it with a and then what I do is I repeat it with a story or I give an example, I tell an story or I give an example, I tell an story or I give an example, I tell an analogy. It's about getting the point analogy. It's about getting the point analogy. It's about getting the point across, not about worrying about, am I across, not about worrying about, am I across, not about worrying about, am I using exactly the right word in the using exactly the right word in the using exactly the right word in the right syntax? And the reality is, I right syntax? And the reality is, I right syntax? And the reality is, I don't know about you, but a lot of don't know about you, but a lot of don't know about you, but a lot of native speakers of English they don't native speakers of English they don't native speakers of English they don't speak English so well either themselves. speak English so well either themselves. speak English so well either themselves. So, I think if it's all about getting So, I think if it's all about getting So, I think if it's all about getting your point across and using repetition your point across and using repetition your point across and using repetition and other tools to help. and other tools to help. and other tools to help. How to deal with interrupting? How to deal with interrupting? How to deal with interrupting? We have a colleague at Stanford, by the We have a colleague at Stanford, by the We have a colleague at Stanford, by the way, that told me way, that told me way, that told me if they interrupt, it's a sign of if they interrupt, it's a sign of if they interrupt, it's a sign of interest which helped the interactions. But the which helped the interactions. But the which helped the interactions. But the question here is how should we handle question here is how should we handle question here is how should we handle interruptions? We still want to make the interrupter We still want to make the interrupter We still want to make the interrupter feel heard in most cases, but sometimes feel heard in most cases, but sometimes feel heard in most cases, but sometimes it can be distracting. it can be distracting. it can be distracting. Two ways. First, set expectations up Two ways. First, set expectations up Two ways. First, set expectations up front. Setting boundaries can be front. Setting boundaries can be front. Setting boundaries can be helpful. So, if I'm going into a helpful. So, if I'm going into a helpful. So, if I'm going into a situation, I might say, "I want to spend situation, I might say, "I want to spend situation, I might say, "I want to spend the first 5 minutes laying the first 5 minutes laying the first 5 minutes laying the foundation to what I'm going to say, and foundation to what I'm going to say, and foundation to what I'm going to say, and then I'd love to take your questions." So, if I'd love to take your questions." So, if I'd love to take your questions." So, if the person does interrupt, they're the person does interrupt, they're the person does interrupt, they're violating an expectation that was set. violating an expectation that was set. violating an expectation that was set. And that puts you in a better position And that puts you in a better position And that puts you in a better position to maybe shut it down. You can say, to maybe shut it down. You can say, to maybe shut it down. You can say, "Thank you, I hear you're really "Thank you, I hear you're really "Thank you, I hear you're really anxious. I really want to get through anxious. I really want to get through anxious. I really want to get through this material." this material." this material." So, setting boundaries can help. So, setting boundaries can help. So, setting boundaries can help. I believe one of the most useful I believe one of the most useful I believe one of the most useful communication tools is paraphrasing. communication tools is paraphrasing. communication tools is paraphrasing. Paraphrasing is where you take what Paraphrasing is where you take what Paraphrasing is where you take what somebody has said, you synthesize it, somebody has said, you synthesize it, somebody has said, you synthesize it, and you distill it down to something and you distill it down to something and you distill it down to something important. If somebody interrupts you, you can take If somebody interrupts you, you can take If somebody interrupts you, you can take the floor back by paraphrasing what the floor back by paraphrasing what the floor back by paraphrasing what they've said and moving back on. So, if they've said and moving back on. So, if they've said and moving back on. So, if I'm talking about the financial I'm talking about the financial I'm talking about the financial implications of something, and you come implications of something, and you come implications of something, and you come in and give me your opinion, you in and give me your opinion, you in and give me your opinion, you interrupt me, I can say, "Cost is really interrupt me, I can say, "Cost is really interrupt me, I can say, "Cost is really important." And in fact, I just took it important." And in fact, I just took it important." And in fact, I just took it back from you. back from you. back from you. If you are somebody who wants to just If you are somebody who wants to just If you are somebody who wants to just share your overwhelming knowledge, and share your overwhelming knowledge, and share your overwhelming knowledge, and you you're one of those people who you you're one of those people who you you're one of those people who bloviates I can stop that by interrupting with a I can stop that by interrupting with a I can stop that by interrupting with a paraphrase. I can say that point you paraphrase. I can say that point you paraphrase. I can say that point you just made about X really important. just made about X really important. just made about X really important. We're going to talk about that next on We're going to talk about that next on We're going to talk about that next on the agenda. I think paraphrasing is the agenda. I think paraphrasing is the agenda. I think paraphrasing is the most polite way to get control back, be most polite way to get control back, be most polite way to get control back, be it from an interruptor or somebody who's it from an interruptor or somebody who's it from an interruptor or somebody who's just talking too much. It can feel just talking too much. It can feel just talking too much. It can feel uncomfortable to interrupt somebody with uncomfortable to interrupt somebody with uncomfortable to interrupt somebody with a paraphrase, but if you're in front of a paraphrase, but if you're in front of a paraphrase, but if you're in front of a room of people or a meeting, not doing a room of people or a meeting, not doing a room of people or a meeting, not doing it is actually more rude to the other it is actually more rude to the other it is actually more rude to the other people than it is being rude to the people than it is being rude to the people than it is being rude to the person who spoke. So, paraphrasing I person who spoke. So, paraphrasing I person who spoke. So, paraphrasing I think gets you out of those think gets you out of those think gets you out of those circumstances. Someone said, "How do I prepare for a Someone said, "How do I prepare for a Someone said, "How do I prepare for a speech?" I think there's a lot speech?" I think there's a lot speech?" I think there's a lot &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; There's a lot that goes into that, but &gt;&gt; There's a lot that goes into that, but &gt;&gt; There's a lot that goes into that, but perhaps there's a shorter answer perhaps there's a shorter answer perhaps there's a shorter answer um that you could give us a you know a sort of you could give us a you know a sort of you could give us a you know a sort of key Yes. uh key bins of preparation. key Yes. uh key bins of preparation. key Yes. uh key bins of preparation. Absolutely. Let me give you top uh a few Absolutely. Let me give you top uh a few Absolutely. Let me give you top uh a few top things. First and foremost, you have top things. First and foremost, you have top things. First and foremost, you have to think about who is the audience I'm to think about who is the audience I'm to think about who is the audience I'm speaking to. What's important and speaking to. What's important and speaking to. What's important and relevant to them related to the topic I relevant to them related to the topic I relevant to them related to the topic I want to speak on. All of us when we want to speak on. All of us when we want to speak on. All of us when we communicate suffer from the curse of communicate suffer from the curse of communicate suffer from the curse of knowledge and the curse of passion. We knowledge and the curse of passion. We knowledge and the curse of passion. We know a lot about what we're saying and know a lot about what we're saying and know a lot about what we're saying and we care a lot about it and because of we care a lot about it and because of we care a lot about it and because of that we can make assumptions, start to that we can make assumptions, start to that we can make assumptions, start to deep, etc. First, think about your deep, etc. First, think about your deep, etc. First, think about your audience relative to your topic. That's audience relative to your topic. That's audience relative to your topic. That's number one. Number two, come up with a number one. Number two, come up with a number one. Number two, come up with a clear goal. Many of us take our audience clear goal. Many of us take our audience clear goal. Many of us take our audience on a journey of our discovery of what we on a journey of our discovery of what we on a journey of our discovery of what we want to say as we're saying it. We we want to say as we're saying it. We we want to say as we're saying it. We we don't have a clear path. To me, a goal don't have a clear path. To me, a goal don't have a clear path. To me, a goal has three parts: information, emotion, has three parts: information, emotion, has three parts: information, emotion, and action. What do I want them to know, and action. What do I want them to know, and action. What do I want them to know, how do I want them to feel, and what do how do I want them to feel, and what do how do I want them to feel, and what do I want them to do? I want them to do? I want them to do? Once you have an understanding of your Once you have an understanding of your Once you have an understanding of your audience and your goal, then apply a audience and your goal, then apply a audience and your goal, then apply a structure. Don't just list and itemize structure. Don't just list and itemize structure. Don't just list and itemize information. Problem, solution, benefit, information. Problem, solution, benefit, information. Problem, solution, benefit, past, present, future, what, so what, past, present, future, what, so what, past, present, future, what, so what, now what? There are myriad structures. now what? There are myriad structures. now what? There are myriad structures. If you do that, you will have content If you do that, you will have content If you do that, you will have content that's meaningful to your audience and that's meaningful to your audience and that's meaningful to your audience and increases the likelihood of fidelity of increases the likelihood of fidelity of increases the likelihood of fidelity of the communication. Then you have to the communication. Then you have to the communication. Then you have to practice. It's not enough to have a good practice. It's not enough to have a good practice. It's not enough to have a good message, you have to practice the message, you have to practice the message, you have to practice the delivery. If you do those things, you delivery. If you do those things, you delivery. If you do those things, you will give better talks, you will have will give better talks, you will have will give better talks, you will have better conversations, and better conversations, and better conversations, and better meetings. I was thinking about something a few I was thinking about something a few I was thinking about something a few moments ago moments ago moments ago for people that are afraid of public for people that are afraid of public for people that are afraid of public speaking because they might choke or speaking because they might choke or speaking because they might choke or dissolve into a puddle of their own dissolve into a puddle of their own dissolve into a puddle of their own tears on stage or freeze or whatever. tears on stage or freeze or whatever. tears on stage or freeze or whatever. Um do you think it's useful? I would think do you think it's useful? I would think do you think it's useful? I would think it would be useful to try and think it would be useful to try and think it would be useful to try and think about what you want to happen as opposed about what you want to happen as opposed about what you want to happen as opposed to what you don't want to happen. That's to what you don't want to happen. That's to what you don't want to happen. That's right. That's right. A lot of people right. That's right. A lot of people right. That's right. A lot of people envision the worst and they self-create envision the worst and they self-create envision the worst and they self-create that, right? It's a self-fulfilling that, right? It's a self-fulfilling that, right? It's a self-fulfilling prophecy. Imagine what the potential could be. Set Imagine what the potential could be. Set Imagine what the potential could be. Set yourself for that positive expectation. yourself for that positive expectation. yourself for that positive expectation. And it doesn't have to be this is going And it doesn't have to be this is going And it doesn't have to be this is going to be the best communication ever. Just to be the best communication ever. Just to be the best communication ever. Just be I'm going to add value. People are be I'm going to add value. People are be I'm going to add value. People are going to learn something. People will going to learn something. People will going to learn something. People will prevent The people won't make a mistake prevent The people won't make a mistake prevent The people won't make a mistake that I'm advising them to avoid. Just that I'm advising them to avoid. Just that I'm advising them to avoid. Just have a positive outcome in mind and have a positive outcome in mind and have a positive outcome in mind and that can really help. So, that can really help. So, that can really help. So, thinking about what value is in it for thinking about what value is in it for thinking about what value is in it for you and for your audience before you and for your audience before you and for your audience before you communicate can really make a big communicate can really make a big communicate can really make a big difference. A few people asked questions uh that A few people asked questions uh that A few people asked questions uh that relate to interpersonal relations that relate to interpersonal relations that relate to interpersonal relations that you maybe equipped to uh solve for them, but maybe equipped to uh solve for them, but maybe equipped to uh solve for them, but like how should I win an argument like how should I win an argument like how should I win an argument without losing somebody? I think that's without losing somebody? I think that's without losing somebody? I think that's a Is that a different podcast? That a Is that a different podcast? That a Is that a different podcast? That would be a whole different podcast. would be a whole different podcast. would be a whole different podcast. Here's what I'll tell you though, Here's what I'll tell you though, Here's what I'll tell you though, listening is important. A lot of our listening is important. A lot of our listening is important. A lot of our arguments are over things that arguments are over things that arguments are over things that really don't exist. When I've been I've really don't exist. When I've been I've really don't exist. When I've been I've done some mediation work in my life and done some mediation work in my life and done some mediation work in my life and the number one thing I make people do the number one thing I make people do the number one thing I make people do when I'm I bring two people who disagree when I'm I bring two people who disagree when I'm I bring two people who disagree together is I make each listen to the together is I make each listen to the together is I make each listen to the other and often the argument disappears. other and often the argument disappears. other and often the argument disappears. People didn't realize that. And the People didn't realize that. And the People didn't realize that. And the second bit of advice, I learned this second bit of advice, I learned this second bit of advice, I learned this from two friends of mine. And my wife from two friends of mine. And my wife from two friends of mine. And my wife and I deploy this a lot. When we are set and I deploy this a lot. When we are set and I deploy this a lot. When we are set up to have a disagreement, up to have a disagreement, up to have a disagreement, we each declare how important whatever we each declare how important whatever we each declare how important whatever the issue is to us is. Because we the issue is to us is. Because we the issue is to us is. Because we assume, you know, if I'm really assume, you know, if I'm really assume, you know, if I'm really passionate about something, I assume passionate about something, I assume passionate about something, I assume when we're arguing that you're equally when we're arguing that you're equally when we're arguing that you're equally as passionate. But that's not always as passionate. But that's not always as passionate. But that's not always true. But if I come at you with my full true. But if I come at you with my full true. But if I come at you with my full passion and you're not as passionate, passion and you're not as passionate, passion and you're not as passionate, I'm going to make you more passionate. I'm going to make you more passionate. I'm going to make you more passionate. So, all of a sudden we're fighting. So, all of a sudden we're fighting. So, all of a sudden we're fighting. So, if I want to go out to Chinese food, my if I want to go out to Chinese food, my if I want to go out to Chinese food, my wife wants to go out to Mexican food, I wife wants to go out to Mexican food, I wife wants to go out to Mexican food, I might say, "For me, Chinese food is an might say, "For me, Chinese food is an might say, "For me, Chinese food is an eight because I really been craving it." eight because I really been craving it." eight because I really been craving it." She says, "Mexican food for me is a She says, "Mexican food for me is a She says, "Mexican food for me is a three today." three today." three today." There's no fight. There's no argument. There's no fight. There's no argument. There's no fight. There's no argument. But if she says it's an eight and I have But if she says it's an eight and I have But if she says it's an eight and I have say it's an eight, then we have the say it's an eight, then we have the say it's an eight, then we have the issue. So, understanding the issue. So, understanding the issue. So, understanding the prioritization and really listening to prioritization and really listening to prioritization and really listening to understand what's involved, you can understand what's involved, you can understand what's involved, you can mitigate a lot of the conflict that mitigate a lot of the conflict that mitigate a lot of the conflict that you're having. you're having. you're having. Somebody asked, "How do I get rid of Somebody asked, "How do I get rid of Somebody asked, "How do I get rid of filler words, um, like, etc.?" filler words, um, like, etc.?" filler words, um, like, etc.?" I had a guest on my show. She's a I had a guest on my show. She's a I had a guest on my show. She's a psycholinguist and she helped me realize psycholinguist and she helped me realize psycholinguist and she helped me realize that filler words are not bad. Filler that filler words are not bad. Filler that filler words are not bad. Filler words are actually helpful. They do words are actually helpful. They do words are actually helpful. They do things for us. They save the space. things for us. They save the space. things for us. They save the space. So, if I'm not done talking and I don't So, if I'm not done talking and I don't So, if I'm not done talking and I don't want others to interrupt, I say um and want others to interrupt, I say um and want others to interrupt, I say um and uh. There's research in the child uh. There's research in the child uh. There's research in the child development literature that says development literature that says development literature that says when we speak to kids, before we say a when we speak to kids, before we say a when we speak to kids, before we say a new term or give a new idea, we will new term or give a new idea, we will new term or give a new idea, we will often preface it with a filler word, um often preface it with a filler word, um often preface it with a filler word, um or uh. We signal what's coming next is or uh. We signal what's coming next is or uh. We signal what's coming next is important and I think that's why it important and I think that's why it important and I think that's why it drives us nuts when somebody says so drives us nuts when somebody says so drives us nuts when somebody says so many filler words because we've been many filler words because we've been many filler words because we've been trained as kids that something important trained as kids that something important trained as kids that something important follows it and when all that follows it follows it and when all that follows it follows it and when all that follows it is another um, we get frustrated. So, is another um, we get frustrated. So, is another um, we get frustrated. So, the goal is not to eliminate these. The the goal is not to eliminate these. The the goal is not to eliminate these. The goal is to make them not distracting. In goal is to make them not distracting. In goal is to make them not distracting. In fact, playwrights and screenwriters will fact, playwrights and screenwriters will fact, playwrights and screenwriters will actually add filler words to make it actually add filler words to make it actually add filler words to make it sound human. sound human. sound human. The best way I know to reduce filler The best way I know to reduce filler The best way I know to reduce filler words, especially the ones that are most words, especially the ones that are most words, especially the ones that are most annoying, and those are the ones that annoying, and those are the ones that annoying, and those are the ones that sit in silence. So, I'm done speaking sit in silence. So, I'm done speaking sit in silence. So, I'm done speaking um and then I start speaking again. um and then I start speaking again. um and then I start speaking again. Those are the ones that really stand Those are the ones that really stand Those are the ones that really stand out. is a breath technique. I learned out. is a breath technique. I learned out. is a breath technique. I learned this from somebody who has been teaching this from somebody who has been teaching this from somebody who has been teaching communication skills for a long, long communication skills for a long, long communication skills for a long, long time. His name is Jerry Weisman and it's time. His name is Jerry Weisman and it's time. His name is Jerry Weisman and it's called landing phrases. called landing phrases. called landing phrases. When we speak, we need to be pushing air When we speak, we need to be pushing air When we speak, we need to be pushing air out. If I am inhaling, I can't speak. I If I am inhaling, I can't speak. I If I am inhaling, I can't speak. I invite everybody listening and watching invite everybody listening and watching invite everybody listening and watching to try to say um while inhaling. to try to say um while inhaling. to try to say um while inhaling. You can't do it. You can't do it. You can't do it. So, if I train myself at the end of my So, if I train myself at the end of my So, if I train myself at the end of my sentences and phrases to land the sentences and phrases to land the sentences and phrases to land the phrase, to be out of breath, phrase, to be out of breath, phrase, to be out of breath, I have to inhale. I have to inhale. I have to inhale. Not only can I not say um, I can't say Not only can I not say um, I can't say Not only can I not say um, I can't say anything. I build in a pause. So, as you anything. I build in a pause. So, as you anything. I build in a pause. So, as you speak, train yourself to land. And the speak, train yourself to land. And the speak, train yourself to land. And the reason I call it landing a phrase, it's reason I call it landing a phrase, it's reason I call it landing a phrase, it's like a gymnast who does all those flips like a gymnast who does all those flips like a gymnast who does all those flips and twirls and then they stick the and twirls and then they stick the and twirls and then they stick the landing. So, at the end of each of my landing. So, at the end of each of my landing. So, at the end of each of my phrases, I'm completely out of breath. phrases, I'm completely out of breath. phrases, I'm completely out of breath. I inhale and then I start speaking I inhale and then I start speaking I inhale and then I start speaking again. You can reduce significantly the again. You can reduce significantly the again. You can reduce significantly the filler words. Now, you have to practice filler words. Now, you have to practice filler words. Now, you have to practice this and the way I teach everybody to this and the way I teach everybody to this and the way I teach everybody to practice, look at your calendar or practice, look at your calendar or practice, look at your calendar or schedule every day and once a day read schedule every day and once a day read schedule every day and once a day read out loud everything on your schedule. out loud everything on your schedule. out loud everything on your schedule. And at the end of each one, land the And at the end of each one, land the And at the end of each one, land the phrase. So, I might say, "Going to lunch phrase. So, I might say, "Going to lunch phrase. So, I might say, "Going to lunch with Andrew." with Andrew." with Andrew." "Working out at the gym." "Working out at the gym." "Working out at the gym." "Seeing my son for dinner." At the end "Seeing my son for dinner." At the end "Seeing my son for dinner." At the end of each one of those phrases, I've of each one of those phrases, I've of each one of those phrases, I've landed my phrase. I'm out of breath. landed my phrase. I'm out of breath. landed my phrase. I'm out of breath. I'm training myself how to do that. I'm training myself how to do that. I'm training myself how to do that. You'll get rid of many of your filler You'll get rid of many of your filler You'll get rid of many of your filler words. Fantastic. I'm going to try to do that. I'm going to try to do that. I'm going to try to do that. You don't have many filler words. You don't have many filler words. You don't have many filler words. I have to check some recordings of the I have to check some recordings of the I have to check some recordings of the podcast. [laughter] podcast. [laughter] podcast. [laughter] Someone wants to know how to tell a Someone wants to know how to tell a Someone wants to know how to tell a story without turning it into a sermon. Ah. without turning it into a sermon. Ah. without turning it into a sermon. Ah. Like how to know when it's going on too Like how to know when it's going on too Like how to know when it's going on too long. There are two ways to answer that long. There are two ways to answer that long. There are two ways to answer that question. One is about time. How long question. One is about time. How long question. One is about time. How long does it take? My mother has a wonderful does it take? My mother has a wonderful does it take? My mother has a wonderful saying. She likes to say, "Tell the saying. She likes to say, "Tell the saying. She likes to say, "Tell the time, don't build the clock." Many of us time, don't build the clock." Many of us time, don't build the clock." Many of us are clock builders when we communicate. are clock builders when we communicate. are clock builders when we communicate. We say much more than we need to. So, if We say much more than we need to. So, if We say much more than we need to. So, if you have to tell a story, think about you have to tell a story, think about you have to tell a story, think about what's the most critical few. In the what's the most critical few. In the what's the most critical few. In the military, they talk about bottom line up military, they talk about bottom line up military, they talk about bottom line up front. Get that bottom line up there. front. Get that bottom line up there. front. Get that bottom line up there. So, don't say more than you need to. So, don't say more than you need to. So, don't say more than you need to. The other part is you have to make the The other part is you have to make the The other part is you have to make the story engaging and relevant to the story engaging and relevant to the story engaging and relevant to the people you're talking to. A lot of people you're talking to. A lot of people you're talking to. A lot of people have such a preamble to get to people have such a preamble to get to people have such a preamble to get to the start. the start. the start. A colleague of mine likes to talk about A colleague of mine likes to talk about A colleague of mine likes to talk about parachuting in. Just jump right in and parachuting in. Just jump right in and parachuting in. Just jump right in and then build the rest of the story. A then build the rest of the story. A then build the rest of the story. A lot of us Well, it was a rainy day and lot of us Well, it was a rainy day and lot of us Well, it was a rainy day and then it was this and it was that and it then it was this and it was that and it then it was this and it was that and it was that and you just get to the story was that and you just get to the story was that and you just get to the story first. So, if you parachute in and you first. So, if you parachute in and you first. So, if you parachute in and you remind yourself to be concise and clear, remind yourself to be concise and clear, remind yourself to be concise and clear, you're going to tell more engaging and you're going to tell more engaging and you're going to tell more engaging and better stories. better stories. better stories. Several people asked Several people asked Several people asked how to ask for a raise. how to ask for a raise. how to ask for a raise. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; There are several characteristics I'd &gt;&gt; There are several characteristics I'd &gt;&gt; There are several characteristics I'd like people to think about when you ask like people to think about when you ask like people to think about when you ask for something that you want, especially for something that you want, especially for something that you want, especially from a boss or an authority figure. from a boss or an authority figure. from a boss or an authority figure. First, think about context. First, think about context. First, think about context. Look at your boss's schedule before you Look at your boss's schedule before you Look at your boss's schedule before you ask for a raise. Are you the fifth ask for a raise. Are you the fifth ask for a raise. Are you the fifth meeting in a row before you go in? Maybe meeting in a row before you go in? Maybe meeting in a row before you go in? Maybe it's better to go tomorrow when you're it's better to go tomorrow when you're it's better to go tomorrow when you're early. So, context matters. People I early. So, context matters. People I early. So, context matters. People I have a colleague who studied parole have a colleague who studied parole have a colleague who studied parole decisions judges make and he found that decisions judges make and he found that decisions judges make and he found that decisions are different before that decisions are different before that decisions are different before lunch and after lunch, even though the lunch and after lunch, even though the lunch and after lunch, even though the cases are the same. cases are the same. cases are the same. When you ask, you have to you have to When you ask, you have to you have to When you ask, you have to you have to think about that. Second, when think about that. Second, when think about that. Second, when positioning yourself, positioning yourself, positioning yourself, think about from your boss's think about from your boss's think about from your boss's perspective, what are the criteria they perspective, what are the criteria they perspective, what are the criteria they would think about in terms of giving a would think about in terms of giving a would think about in terms of giving a raise. Often we come and say, "Well, raise. Often we come and say, "Well, raise. Often we come and say, "Well, I've done this and I've done this and I've done this and I've done this and I've done this and I've done this and I've done this and this colleague got I've done this and this colleague got I've done this and this colleague got that." Think about what value you have that." Think about what value you have that." Think about what value you have brought to them. So, approach it from brought to them. So, approach it from brought to them. So, approach it from their perspective. And think about how their perspective. And think about how their perspective. And think about how you can position it so that you are you can position it so that you are you can position it so that you are demonstrating your value again from demonstrating your value again from demonstrating your value again from their perspective. And you should their perspective. And you should their perspective. And you should practice. You should You should practice. You should You should practice. You should You should role-play. Talk to other people, say, role-play. Talk to other people, say, role-play. Talk to other people, say, "I'm thinking of saying this." Just so "I'm thinking of saying this." Just so "I'm thinking of saying this." Just so the words come out instead of just the words come out instead of just the words come out instead of just thinking in your head what you want to thinking in your head what you want to thinking in your head what you want to say. Several people asked about how best to Several people asked about how best to Several people asked about how best to communicate with people who are not very communicate with people who are not very communicate with people who are not very good at communicating. good at communicating. good at communicating. That's a hard one. Uh That's a hard one. Uh That's a hard one. Uh I would encourage people to lead with I would encourage people to lead with I would encourage people to lead with questions. Draw the other person out. questions. Draw the other person out. questions. Draw the other person out. Often, if you can get them talking about Often, if you can get them talking about Often, if you can get them talking about something that's important to them or something that's important to them or something that's important to them or connected to what you want, then you can connected to what you want, then you can connected to what you want, then you can engage in that conversation. So, again, engage in that conversation. So, again, engage in that conversation. So, again, it's pre-work. It's thinking about it's pre-work. It's thinking about it's pre-work. It's thinking about what's of value. Lead with questions and what's of value. Lead with questions and what's of value. Lead with questions and then as soon as the person responds, then as soon as the person responds, then as soon as the person responds, give them space to tell more. My give them space to tell more. My give them space to tell more. My mother-in-law had a black belt in small mother-in-law had a black belt in small mother-in-law had a black belt in small talk. She was amazing. Uh she was from talk. She was amazing. Uh she was from talk. She was amazing. Uh she was from the Midwest. Every time she'd fly out to the Midwest. Every time she'd fly out to the Midwest. Every time she'd fly out to visit, she'd come off the plane with visit, she'd come off the plane with visit, she'd come off the plane with three new best friends. And her secret, three new best friends. And her secret, three new best friends. And her secret, and you mentioned this earlier, were and you mentioned this earlier, were and you mentioned this earlier, were three words: tell me more. Once somebody three words: tell me more. Once somebody three words: tell me more. Once somebody answers a question, give them that space answers a question, give them that space answers a question, give them that space to say more and that really draws them to say more and that really draws them to say more and that really draws them out and gives you some ideas of what's out and gives you some ideas of what's out and gives you some ideas of what's important to them so you can latch on important to them so you can latch on important to them so you can latch on and talk about it more. So, lead with and talk about it more. So, lead with and talk about it more. So, lead with questions, give space for more questions, give space for more questions, give space for more communication. That's how you draw communication. That's how you draw communication. That's how you draw somebody who might be reticent or not somebody who might be reticent or not somebody who might be reticent or not comfortable speaking. comfortable speaking. comfortable speaking. Do you ever recommend people memorize Do you ever recommend people memorize Do you ever recommend people memorize speeches? Never. speeches? Never. speeches? Never. Uh there are times where I recommend Uh there are times where I recommend Uh there are times where I recommend being very familiar with how you start. being very familiar with how you start. being very familiar with how you start. Commencing is the part the point where Commencing is the part the point where Commencing is the part the point where people are most nervous about speaking people are most nervous about speaking people are most nervous about speaking is about 30 seconds before and about a is about 30 seconds before and about a is about 30 seconds before and about a minute into what they're doing. So, you minute into what they're doing. So, you minute into what they're doing. So, you can be very familiar but the reason can be very familiar but the reason can be very familiar but the reason memorizing is so bad is it burdens your memorizing is so bad is it burdens your memorizing is so bad is it burdens your cognitive load. You've created the right cognitive load. You've created the right cognitive load. You've created the right way to say it and you're constantly way to say it and you're constantly way to say it and you're constantly comparing what you wanted to say to what comparing what you wanted to say to what comparing what you wanted to say to what you're actually saying. So, having a you're actually saying. So, having a you're actually saying. So, having a road map, having a structure, having road map, having a structure, having road map, having a structure, having some familiarity with some ideas are some familiarity with some ideas are some familiarity with some ideas are important. If there's certain words that important. If there's certain words that important. If there's certain words that you really want to get across or certain you really want to get across or certain you really want to get across or certain data, have a note card, read it. I'd data, have a note card, read it. I'd data, have a note card, read it. I'd rather you do that than put the rather you do that than put the rather you do that than put the cognitive burden on yourself of cognitive burden on yourself of cognitive burden on yourself of memorizing. We talked a little bit about this We talked a little bit about this We talked a little bit about this earlier but maybe we can just recap and earlier but maybe we can just recap and earlier but maybe we can just recap and add anything that you want to the add anything that you want to the add anything that you want to the question that's very common here which question that's very common here which question that's very common here which is how to reduce pre-talk anxiety. And it how to reduce pre-talk anxiety. And it how to reduce pre-talk anxiety. And it could be public speaking or it could be could be public speaking or it could be could be public speaking or it could be one-on-one communication. one-on-one communication. one-on-one communication. We could talk a lot about this and when We could talk a lot about this and when We could talk a lot about this and when you were on my show Andrew, we talked you were on my show Andrew, we talked you were on my show Andrew, we talked about some of the biological things you about some of the biological things you about some of the biological things you can do. When it comes to managing can do. When it comes to managing can do. When it comes to managing anxiety, you have to manage both anxiety, you have to manage both anxiety, you have to manage both symptoms and sources. symptoms and sources. symptoms and sources. The symptoms are the things you The symptoms are the things you The symptoms are the things you physiologically experience. You have physiologically experience. You have physiologically experience. You have shared great advice on breathing etc. shared great advice on breathing etc. shared great advice on breathing etc. I'll give one example. When I get really I'll give one example. When I get really I'll give one example. When I get really nervous, I perspire and blush. nervous, I perspire and blush. nervous, I perspire and blush. A great way to manage that is to cool A great way to manage that is to cool A great way to manage that is to cool yourself down. The reason you're yourself down. The reason you're yourself down. The reason you're perspiring and blushing is your heart perspiring and blushing is your heart perspiring and blushing is your heart rate's going up, your body's tensing up. rate's going up, your body's tensing up. rate's going up, your body's tensing up. It's like when you exercise. The palms It's like when you exercise. The palms It's like when you exercise. The palms of your hand are thermoregulators for of your hand are thermoregulators for of your hand are thermoregulators for your body. Anybody who's ever held warm your body. Anybody who's ever held warm your body. Anybody who's ever held warm coffee or tea on a cold morning has felt coffee or tea on a cold morning has felt coffee or tea on a cold morning has felt themselves warm up. I will always hold themselves warm up. I will always hold themselves warm up. I will always hold something cold before I speak and it something cold before I speak and it something cold before I speak and it helps cool me down. I blush and perspire helps cool me down. I blush and perspire helps cool me down. I blush and perspire less. So, there's things we can do to manage So, there's things we can do to manage So, there's things we can do to manage physical symptoms. The breath work that physical symptoms. The breath work that physical symptoms. The breath work that you talk about is really helpful. But we you talk about is really helpful. But we you talk about is really helpful. But we also have to think about sources, the also have to think about sources, the also have to think about sources, the things that initiate and exacerbate our things that initiate and exacerbate our things that initiate and exacerbate our anxiety. I'll give one example. Many of anxiety. I'll give one example. Many of anxiety. I'll give one example. Many of us are made nervous by the goal that we us are made nervous by the goal that we us are made nervous by the goal that we have. I advocate for having a goal when have. I advocate for having a goal when have. I advocate for having a goal when you communicate but sometimes that goal you communicate but sometimes that goal you communicate but sometimes that goal makes us nervous. My students are afraid makes us nervous. My students are afraid makes us nervous. My students are afraid they're not going to get a good grade. they're not going to get a good grade. they're not going to get a good grade. The entrepreneurs I coach are afraid The entrepreneurs I coach are afraid The entrepreneurs I coach are afraid they're not going to get funding. Uh the they're not going to get funding. Uh the they're not going to get funding. Uh the people listening might be afraid their people listening might be afraid their people listening might be afraid their boss isn't going to support their idea. boss isn't going to support their idea. boss isn't going to support their idea. So, we're made nervous by a potential So, we're made nervous by a potential So, we're made nervous by a potential negative future outcome. So, the way to negative future outcome. So, the way to negative future outcome. So, the way to counteract that is to become present counteract that is to become present counteract that is to become present oriented. Lots of ways to do that. You oriented. Lots of ways to do that. You oriented. Lots of ways to do that. You can do deep breathing, you can walk can do deep breathing, you can walk can do deep breathing, you can walk around the building, have a conversation around the building, have a conversation around the building, have a conversation with somebody. I tell people do what with somebody. I tell people do what with somebody. I tell people do what athletes do. Listen to a song or a athletes do. Listen to a song or a athletes do. Listen to a song or a playlist that helps you get focused. playlist that helps you get focused. playlist that helps you get focused. Start at 100 and count backwards by a Start at 100 and count backwards by a Start at 100 and count backwards by a challenging numbers. Let's try 17s. challenging numbers. Let's try 17s. challenging numbers. Let's try 17s. Really helps to focus and be present Really helps to focus and be present Really helps to focus and be present oriented. My favorite way, and this is oriented. My favorite way, and this is oriented. My favorite way, and this is going to sound really silly, I like to going to sound really silly, I like to going to sound really silly, I like to say tongue twisters out loud. say tongue twisters out loud. say tongue twisters out loud. You can't say a tongue twister right and You can't say a tongue twister right and You can't say a tongue twister right and not be present oriented and it warms up not be present oriented and it warms up not be present oriented and it warms up your voice. It's now a perfect to warm your voice. It's now a perfect to warm your voice. It's now a perfect to warm up. So, before I ever do what any of my up. So, before I ever do what any of my up. So, before I ever do what any of my podcast interviews or a big talk, I will podcast interviews or a big talk, I will podcast interviews or a big talk, I will say a tongue twister out loud three say a tongue twister out loud three say a tongue twister out loud three times fast and it gets me present and times fast and it gets me present and times fast and it gets me present and warms me up. So, to manage anxiety, you warms me up. So, to manage anxiety, you warms me up. So, to manage anxiety, you have to manage symptoms and some of the have to manage symptoms and some of the have to manage symptoms and some of the things that initiate and exacerbate. things that initiate and exacerbate. things that initiate and exacerbate. There are a whole bunch of those and if There are a whole bunch of those and if There are a whole bunch of those and if you do it, you begin to create for you do it, you begin to create for you do it, you begin to create for yourself an anxiety management plan yourself an anxiety management plan yourself an anxiety management plan and you can invoke that plan and you can invoke that plan and you can invoke that plan and actually just having that plan helps actually just having that plan helps actually just having that plan helps reduce the anxiety you have. The very reduce the anxiety you have. The very reduce the anxiety you have. The very first thing we do in my strategic first thing we do in my strategic first thing we do in my strategic communication class is we have our communication class is we have our communication class is we have our students create an anxiety management students create an anxiety management students create an anxiety management plan and not only does it help them in plan and not only does it help them in plan and not only does it help them in the course, I have students years later the course, I have students years later the course, I have students years later say, "My grandmother passed away. I used say, "My grandmother passed away. I used say, "My grandmother passed away. I used the anxiety management plan to help with the anxiety management plan to help with the anxiety management plan to help with the eulogy or I'm doing a best man toast the eulogy or I'm doing a best man toast the eulogy or I'm doing a best man toast and I'm using it." and I'm using it." and I'm using it." Giving yourself tools to help manage Giving yourself tools to help manage Giving yourself tools to help manage anxiety is at one of the biggest gifts anxiety is at one of the biggest gifts anxiety is at one of the biggest gifts you can give to yourself. you can give to yourself. you can give to yourself. Fantastic. These are incredible These are incredible These are incredible bits and frankly entire meals of advice bits and frankly entire meals of advice bits and frankly entire meals of advice for people public communication and just for people public communication and just for people public communication and just one-on-one communication and everything one-on-one communication and everything one-on-one communication and everything in between is so important and people in between is so important and people in between is so important and people really carry around a lot of fear and really carry around a lot of fear and really carry around a lot of fear and anxiety about them but you've given us a anxiety about them but you've given us a anxiety about them but you've given us a ton of practical tools and I know these ton of practical tools and I know these ton of practical tools and I know these are time tested and there's data on many are time tested and there's data on many are time tested and there's data on many of them and the real world data are of them and the real world data are of them and the real world data are really what count the most. really what count the most. really what count the most. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. So, I want to thank you for coming here So, I want to thank you for coming here So, I want to thank you for coming here today to share them with us, also for today to share them with us, also for today to share them with us, also for the books that you've written. We'll put the books that you've written. We'll put the books that you've written. We'll put links to those in the show note captions links to those in the show note captions links to those in the show note captions and that you continue to get out there and that you continue to get out there and that you continue to get out there and on here as a public educator. You know, on here as a public educator. You know, on here as a public educator. You know, there are many, many people and books there are many, many people and books there are many, many people and books talking about these topics but you talking about these topics but you talking about these topics but you clearly thrown yourself into these as clearly thrown yourself into these as clearly thrown yourself into these as like the guy who's really tackling them like the guy who's really tackling them like the guy who's really tackling them for the greater good. So, I really for the greater good. So, I really for the greater good. So, I really appreciate the breadth and specificity appreciate the breadth and specificity appreciate the breadth and specificity of what you shared and I know everyone of what you shared and I know everyone of what you shared and I know everyone else will as well and I know that they're will as well and I know that they're will as well and I know that they're going to apply them. So, my goal was to going to apply them. So, my goal was to going to apply them. So, my goal was to do this outro without saying um once. I do this outro without saying um once. I do this outro without saying um once. I guess I just said um. guess I just said um. guess I just said um. You did it well. Thank you. Very fluent. You did it well. Thank you. Very fluent. You did it well. Thank you. Very fluent. Come back again. I'd love to. Thank you. Come back again. I'd love to. Thank you. Come back again. I'd love to. Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Matt Abrahams. To learn discussion with Matt Abrahams. To learn discussion with Matt Abrahams. To learn more about his work and to find links to more about his work and to find links to more about his work and to find links to the various resources we discussed, the various resources we discussed, the various resources we discussed, please see the show note caption. If please see the show note caption. If please see the show note caption. If you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, cost way to support us. In addition, cost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star you can leave us up to a five star you can leave us up to a five star review and you can now leave us comments review and you can now leave us comments review and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also at both Spotify and Apple. Please also at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the check out the sponsors mentioned at the check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's beginning and throughout today's beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for this podcast. If you have questions for this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or me or comments about the podcast or me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to guests or topics that you'd like me to guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section please put those in the comment section please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. on YouTube. I do read all the comments. on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I For those of you that haven't heard, I For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very have a new book coming out. It's my very have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an first book. It's entitled Protocols, an first book. It's entitled Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Human Body. Operating Manual for the Human Body. Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on This is a book that I've been working on This is a book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's for more than five years and that's for more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research based on more than 30 years of research based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols and experience and it covers protocols and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, for everything from sleep to exercise, for everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation and of course, I focus and motivation and of course, I focus and motivation and of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast but much of which Huberman Lab podcast but much of which Huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network newsletter, the Neural Network newsletter, the Neural Network newsletter, the Neural Network newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three protocols in the form of one to three protocols in the form of one to three page PDFs that cover everything from how page PDFs that cover everything from how page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize to optimize your sleep, how to optimize to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine delivery, cold exposure. We dopamine delivery, cold exposure. We dopamine delivery, cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter and enter your email. down to newsletter and enter your email. down to newsletter and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do not And I should emphasize that we do not And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you share your email with anybody. Thank you share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's once again for joining me for today's once again for joining me for today's discussion with Matt Abrahams. And last discussion with Matt Abrahams. And last discussion with Matt Abrahams. And last but certainly not least, thank you for but certainly not least, thank you for but certainly not least, thank you for your interest [music] your interest [music] your interest [music] in science.