Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are talking all about the science of are talking all about the science of are talking all about the science of gratitude. In part we're doing this gratitude. In part we're doing this gratitude. In part we're doing this because of the upcoming Thanksgiving because of the upcoming Thanksgiving because of the upcoming Thanksgiving holiday, which of course is all about holiday, which of course is all about holiday, which of course is all about giving thanks, gratitude, but also giving thanks, gratitude, but also giving thanks, gratitude, but also because there's now a wealth of data because there's now a wealth of data because there's now a wealth of data showing that having an effective showing that having an effective showing that having an effective gratitude practice gratitude practice gratitude practice can impact a huge number of health can impact a huge number of health can impact a huge number of health variables, both mental health and variables, both mental health and variables, both mental health and physical health in positive ways. Things physical health in positive ways. Things physical health in positive ways. Things like cardiovascular health, things like cardiovascular health, things like cardiovascular health, things like relationships, things like mental relationships, things like mental relationships, things like mental health, things like physical and health, things like physical and health, things like physical and cognitive performance. And these are not cognitive performance. And these are not cognitive performance. And these are not small effects. These are very large small effects. These are very large small effects. These are very large positive effects. positive effects. positive effects. However, in researching this episode, I However, in researching this episode, I However, in researching this episode, I was completely surprised as to what was completely surprised as to what was completely surprised as to what constitutes an effective gratitude constitutes an effective gratitude constitutes an effective gratitude practice. I, I think like many of you, would have I, I think like many of you, would have I, I think like many of you, would have thought that an effective gratitude thought that an effective gratitude thought that an effective gratitude practice simply involves writing down a practice simply involves writing down a practice simply involves writing down a few things or many things that we're few things or many things that we're few things or many things that we're grateful for, or thinking about those, grateful for, or thinking about those, grateful for, or thinking about those, or really making an effort to somatize or really making an effort to somatize or really making an effort to somatize or feel some of the elements of gratitude feel some of the elements of gratitude feel some of the elements of gratitude while writing out that list or thinking while writing out that list or thinking while writing out that list or thinking about that list. It turns out that an about that list. It turns out that an about that list. It turns out that an effective gratitude practice doesn't effective gratitude practice doesn't effective gratitude practice doesn't resemble that at all. resemble that at all. resemble that at all. The neuroimaging data, the physiological The neuroimaging data, the physiological The neuroimaging data, the physiological data looking at things like inflammatory data looking at things like inflammatory data looking at things like inflammatory markers, other studies purely looking at the other studies purely looking at the other studies purely looking at the psychology and the long and short-term psychology and the long and short-term psychology and the long and short-term effects of a an effective gratitude effects of a an effective gratitude effects of a an effective gratitude practice point to a completely different practice point to a completely different practice point to a completely different approach to using gratitude to approach to using gratitude to approach to using gratitude to positively impact health metrics. positively impact health metrics. positively impact health metrics. Fortunately, these are things that we Fortunately, these are things that we Fortunately, these are things that we can all do very easily. can all do very easily. can all do very easily. Uh some of them are actually uh fun. Uh some of them are actually uh fun. Uh some of them are actually uh fun. Uh you can do them in a variety of you can do them in a variety of you can do them in a variety of contexts. So today we're going to talk contexts. So today we're going to talk contexts. So today we're going to talk about the science of effective gratitude about the science of effective gratitude about the science of effective gratitude practices and we are going to describe practices and we are going to describe practices and we are going to describe what those are and how you can what those are and how you can what those are and how you can incorporate them into your life. incorporate them into your life. incorporate them into your life. Before we dive into today's topic, I Before we dive into today's topic, I Before we dive into today's topic, I just want to highlight a particularly just want to highlight a particularly just want to highlight a particularly interesting set of findings from the interesting set of findings from the interesting set of findings from the literature. This is a study that came literature. This is a study that came literature. This is a study that came out in the journal Cell Reports, Cell out in the journal Cell Reports, Cell out in the journal Cell Reports, Cell Press Journal, excellent journal. It's Press Journal, excellent journal. It's Press Journal, excellent journal. It's very relevant to today's topic. In fact, very relevant to today's topic. In fact, very relevant to today's topic. In fact, we're going to spend more time with this we're going to spend more time with this we're going to spend more time with this paper a little bit later in the episode. paper a little bit later in the episode. paper a little bit later in the episode. The study involved having subjects The study involved having subjects The study involved having subjects listen to a story. listen to a story. listen to a story. The subjects are all listening to the The subjects are all listening to the The subjects are all listening to the same story, but those subjects are not same story, but those subjects are not same story, but those subjects are not listening to it together. They're not listening to it together. They're not listening to it together. They're not rounded up in a circle or all in a room. rounded up in a circle or all in a room. rounded up in a circle or all in a room. They're in separate rooms or in entirely They're in separate rooms or in entirely They're in separate rooms or in entirely separate locations separate locations separate locations on the planet or they are actually on the planet or they are actually on the planet or they are actually brought into the laboratory on separate brought into the laboratory on separate brought into the laboratory on separate days. What this study found is that different What this study found is that different What this study found is that different subjects listening to the same story subjects listening to the same story subjects listening to the same story undergo the same undergo the same undergo the same variation in heart rate. variation in heart rate. variation in heart rate. In other words, the gaps between their In other words, the gaps between their In other words, the gaps between their heartbeats start to resemble one another heartbeats start to resemble one another heartbeats start to resemble one another in response to the same story. Now, this in response to the same story. Now, this in response to the same story. Now, this is very interesting. This is a is very interesting. This is a is very interesting. This is a coordination of the physiology of the coordination of the physiology of the coordination of the physiology of the body in response to a narrative, a story body in response to a narrative, a story body in response to a narrative, a story in different people. And yet when they in different people. And yet when they in different people. And yet when they line up the heart rates of these line up the heart rates of these line up the heart rates of these different people who listen to the story different people who listen to the story different people who listen to the story at completely different times, they find at completely different times, they find at completely different times, they find that those heart rates map onto one that those heart rates map onto one that those heart rates map onto one another almost identically. It's really another almost identically. It's really another almost identically. It's really remarkable. We're going to talk about what this We're going to talk about what this We're going to talk about what this means in terms of coordination of neural means in terms of coordination of neural means in terms of coordination of neural circuits in the brain and neural circuits in the brain and neural circuits in the brain and neural circuits in the body and the organs such circuits in the body and the organs such circuits in the body and the organs such as the heart, but also the lungs and as the heart, but also the lungs and as the heart, but also the lungs and other organs of the body and what this other organs of the body and what this other organs of the body and what this means for changing one's overall state. means for changing one's overall state. means for changing one's overall state. A key theme that's going to come up A key theme that's going to come up A key theme that's going to come up today again and again is the distinction today again and again is the distinction today again and again is the distinction between traits, which are between traits, which are between traits, which are pervasive aspects of who we are and how pervasive aspects of who we are and how pervasive aspects of who we are and how we tend to react to different types of we tend to react to different types of we tend to react to different types of circumstances, and states, which are circumstances, and states, which are circumstances, and states, which are more transient. They tend to more transient. They tend to more transient. They tend to uh you know, you can invoke a state in uh you know, you can invoke a state in uh you know, you can invoke a state in somebody, a state of fear or a state of somebody, a state of fear or a state of somebody, a state of fear or a state of relaxation. But relaxation. But relaxation. But what this study really starts to point what this study really starts to point what this study really starts to point to is that there are specific approaches to is that there are specific approaches to is that there are specific approaches that any of us can take in order to that any of us can take in order to that any of us can take in order to really rewire our nervous system such really rewire our nervous system such really rewire our nervous system such that we are calmer if we want to be that we are calmer if we want to be that we are calmer if we want to be calmer in certain circumstances, that we calmer in certain circumstances, that we calmer in certain circumstances, that we are more responsive in certain are more responsive in certain are more responsive in certain circumstances if that's our goal. So, circumstances if that's our goal. So, circumstances if that's our goal. So, we'll return to how one would go about we'll return to how one would go about we'll return to how one would go about doing that, but I think these results doing that, but I think these results doing that, but I think these results are just beautiful in the sense that are just beautiful in the sense that are just beautiful in the sense that they really show that our brain and our they really show that our brain and our they really show that our brain and our body are highly coordinated because body are highly coordinated because body are highly coordinated because people are listening to the story and people are listening to the story and people are listening to the story and the heart rate is the heart rate is the heart rate is changing in response to the story, but changing in response to the story, but changing in response to the story, but that there is a that there is a that there is a what we call a stereotopy, a sort of what we call a stereotopy, a sort of what we call a stereotopy, a sort of stereotyped response to a given story. stereotyped response to a given story. stereotyped response to a given story. In my mind, there was no reason why the In my mind, there was no reason why the In my mind, there was no reason why the results had to be this way. You know, results had to be this way. You know, results had to be this way. You know, two people listen to the same story, why two people listen to the same story, why two people listen to the same story, why should their heart rates be almost should their heart rates be almost should their heart rates be almost identical to the same story? Very, very identical to the same story? Very, very identical to the same story? Very, very interesting and points to the power of interesting and points to the power of interesting and points to the power of narrative and story in coordinating our narrative and story in coordinating our narrative and story in coordinating our physiology. And this is something physiology. And this is something physiology. And this is something powerful that we can leverage. Before we powerful that we can leverage. Before we powerful that we can leverage. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute and sunglasses that are of the absolute and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime highest quality. I've spent a lifetime highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system and I can working on the visual system and I can working on the visual system and I can tell you that the visual system has a tell you that the visual system has a tell you that the visual system has a number of important features that allow number of important features that allow number of important features that allow you to see things with crystal clarity, you to see things with crystal clarity, you to see things with crystal clarity, no matter what environment you're in. no matter what environment you're in. no matter what environment you're in. So, that means if you're in bright So, that means if you're in bright So, that means if you're in bright sunlight or you go into shadows, you sunlight or you go into shadows, you sunlight or you go into shadows, you should be able to see everything should be able to see everything should be able to see everything clearly. But many eyeglasses and clearly. But many eyeglasses and clearly. But many eyeglasses and sunglasses actually short circuit that sunglasses actually short circuit that sunglasses actually short circuit that feature of our visual system and make it feature of our visual system and make it feature of our visual system and make it such that we have to take off our such that we have to take off our such that we have to take off our glasses or if our screen dims, we feel glasses or if our screen dims, we feel glasses or if our screen dims, we feel like we can't see things quite right. like we can't see things quite right. like we can't see things quite right. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses have Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses have Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses have completely solved that problem. In completely solved that problem. In completely solved that problem. In addition, they're very lightweight, so addition, they're very lightweight, so addition, they're very lightweight, so you don't even remember that they're on you don't even remember that they're on you don't even remember that they're on your face. And if you get sweaty, they your face. And if you get sweaty, they your face. And if you get sweaty, they don't slip off. They were actually don't slip off. They were actually don't slip off. They were actually designed for cycling and running and designed for cycling and running and designed for cycling and running and things of that sort, but they have a things of that sort, but they have a things of that sort, but they have a terrific aesthetic. So, I wear readers terrific aesthetic. So, I wear readers terrific aesthetic. So, I wear readers at night or out to dinner when I'm at night or out to dinner when I'm at night or out to dinner when I'm driving, I wear their sunglasses, and driving, I wear their sunglasses, and driving, I wear their sunglasses, and the aesthetics are really terrific even the aesthetics are really terrific even the aesthetics are really terrific even though they're so-called performance though they're so-called performance though they're so-called performance glasses cuz as many of you know, glasses cuz as many of you know, glasses cuz as many of you know, performance glasses often make people performance glasses often make people performance glasses often make people look like cyborgs. These sunglasses and look like cyborgs. These sunglasses and look like cyborgs. These sunglasses and eyeglasses have the kind of aesthetic eyeglasses have the kind of aesthetic eyeglasses have the kind of aesthetic that you can wear them anywhere. While that you can wear them anywhere. While that you can wear them anywhere. While cycling, running, but also doing cycling, running, but also doing cycling, running, but also doing anything else you might be doing. If anything else you might be doing. If anything else you might be doing. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can go to roka.com, that's roka.com, and go to roka.com, that's roka.com, and go to roka.com, that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off enter the code Huberman to save 20% off enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com your first order. Again, that's roka.com your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better meet your immediate and help you better meet your immediate and help you better meet your immediate and long-term health goals. long-term health goals. long-term health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular I'm a big believer in getting regular I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason blood work done for the simple reason blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact that many of the factors that impact that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can your immediate and long-term health can your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood only be analyzed from a quality blood only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And now, with the advent of modern test. And now, with the advent of modern test. And now, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insights DNA tests, you can also get insights DNA tests, you can also get insights into your genes and how those affect or into your genes and how those affect or into your genes and how those affect or should affect your immediate and should affect your immediate and should affect your immediate and long-term health choices. A big problem long-term health choices. A big problem long-term health choices. A big problem with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get the out there, however, is that you get the out there, however, is that you get the data back and you don't know what to do data back and you don't know what to do data back and you don't know what to do with the data. Inside Tracker has solved with the data. Inside Tracker has solved with the data. Inside Tracker has solved that problem with a very easy-to-use that problem with a very easy-to-use that problem with a very easy-to-use dashboard where you get your numbers dashboard where you get your numbers dashboard where you get your numbers back from your blood tests, your DNA back from your blood tests, your DNA back from your blood tests, your DNA tests, and then it points to specific tests, and then it points to specific tests, and then it points to specific lifestyle factors, nutritional factors, lifestyle factors, nutritional factors, lifestyle factors, nutritional factors, and so forth that can allow you to bring and so forth that can allow you to bring and so forth that can allow you to bring the numbers into the ranges that are the numbers into the ranges that are the numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you. This is a huge optimal for you. This is a huge optimal for you. This is a huge advantage over other blood tests and DNA advantage over other blood tests and DNA advantage over other blood tests and DNA tests out there. Another feature that tests out there. Another feature that tests out there. Another feature that Inside Tracker has is their inner age Inside Tracker has is their inner age Inside Tracker has is their inner age test. The inner age test shows you what test. The inner age test shows you what test. The inner age test shows you what your biological age is and you can your biological age is and you can your biological age is and you can compare that to your chronological age. compare that to your chronological age. compare that to your chronological age. And of course, your biological age is And of course, your biological age is And of course, your biological age is equally, if not more important than your equally, if not more important than your equally, if not more important than your chronological age. So, this is an chronological age. So, this is an chronological age. So, this is an important number that you can get from important number that you can get from important number that you can get from Inside Tracker. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can go to Inside Tracker, you can go to Inside Tracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. And if you're listening to this plans. And if you're listening to this plans. And if you're listening to this during the week of Thanksgiving 2021 and during the week of Thanksgiving 2021 and during the week of Thanksgiving 2021 and you live in the United States, you can you live in the United States, you can you live in the United States, you can get a special offer for this week only. get a special offer for this week only. get a special offer for this week only. You can get $200 off their ultimate You can get $200 off their ultimate You can get $200 off their ultimate package, 25% off any other package, and package, 25% off any other package, and package, 25% off any other package, and you'll get the inner age test for free. you'll get the inner age test for free. you'll get the inner age test for free. Again, just go to Again, just go to Again, just go to insidetracker.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a zero Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a zero Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. sugar, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. sugar, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. Now, I'm not following a ketogenic Now, I'm not following a ketogenic Now, I'm not following a ketogenic nutrition plan. What works best for me nutrition plan. What works best for me nutrition plan. What works best for me is to fast until about 11:00 a.m. or is to fast until about 11:00 a.m. or is to fast until about 11:00 a.m. or noon most days, and then to eat a noon most days, and then to eat a noon most days, and then to eat a low-carbohydrate lunch, a low-carbohydrate lunch, a low-carbohydrate lunch, a low-carbohydrate snack in the afternoon, low-carbohydrate snack in the afternoon, low-carbohydrate snack in the afternoon, and in the evening is when I eat my in the evening is when I eat my in the evening is when I eat my starches. That's what allows me to be starches. That's what allows me to be starches. That's what allows me to be alert throughout the day, for work, for alert throughout the day, for work, for alert throughout the day, for work, for exercise, and so forth, and then to exercise, and so forth, and then to exercise, and so forth, and then to sleep really well at night. That's just sleep really well at night. That's just sleep really well at night. That's just what works for me, but it does require what works for me, but it does require what works for me, but it does require that throughout the day I'm eating fewer that throughout the day I'm eating fewer that throughout the day I'm eating fewer carbohydrates than I am at night. And carbohydrates than I am at night. And carbohydrates than I am at night. And oftentimes I want a snack, and the snack oftentimes I want a snack, and the snack oftentimes I want a snack, and the snack I want is usually Magic Spoon. Magic I want is usually Magic Spoon. Magic I want is usually Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon has 0 g of sugar, 13 to 14 g of Spoon has 0 g of sugar, 13 to 14 g of Spoon has 0 g of sugar, 13 to 14 g of protein, and only four net grams of protein, and only four net grams of protein, and only four net grams of carbohydrates in each serving. carbohydrates in each serving. carbohydrates in each serving. It's absolutely delicious. I It's absolutely delicious. I It's absolutely delicious. I particularly like the frosted flavor cuz particularly like the frosted flavor cuz particularly like the frosted flavor cuz it tastes like donuts, so then I try not it tastes like donuts, so then I try not it tastes like donuts, so then I try not to eat donuts. Um, no vendetta against to eat donuts. Um, no vendetta against to eat donuts. Um, no vendetta against donuts, but it's not really compatible donuts, but it's not really compatible donuts, but it's not really compatible with my eating plan. They also have with my eating plan. They also have with my eating plan. They also have flavors like cocoa, fruity, peanut flavors like cocoa, fruity, peanut flavors like cocoa, fruity, peanut butter. They're really delicious. Any butter. They're really delicious. Any butter. They're really delicious. Any ideas you have about keto-friendly ideas you have about keto-friendly ideas you have about keto-friendly cereals and foods not being delicious, cereals and foods not being delicious, cereals and foods not being delicious, you have to try Magic Spoon. It'll you have to try Magic Spoon. It'll you have to try Magic Spoon. It'll change your mind. In fact, I'm getting change your mind. In fact, I'm getting change your mind. In fact, I'm getting hungry just thinking about it right now. hungry just thinking about it right now. hungry just thinking about it right now. If you want to try Magic Spoon, you can If you want to try Magic Spoon, you can If you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman go to magicspoon.com/huberman go to magicspoon.com/huberman to get a variety pack. Just use the to get a variety pack. Just use the to get a variety pack. Just use the promo code Huberman at checkout to get promo code Huberman at checkout to get promo code Huberman at checkout to get $5 off your order. Again, that's $5 off your order. Again, that's $5 off your order. Again, that's magicspoon.com/huberman and use the code Huberman to get $5 off. and use the code Huberman to get $5 off. and use the code Huberman to get $5 off. Let's talk about gratitude. And to Let's talk about gratitude. And to Let's talk about gratitude. And to begin, I'd like to emphasize the various begin, I'd like to emphasize the various begin, I'd like to emphasize the various aspects of mental and physical health aspects of mental and physical health aspects of mental and physical health that have been shown to benefit from a that have been shown to benefit from a that have been shown to benefit from a regular gratitude practice. regular gratitude practice. regular gratitude practice. There are studies showing that There are studies showing that There are studies showing that performing a gratitude practice performing a gratitude practice performing a gratitude practice twice or three times or even just once a twice or three times or even just once a twice or three times or even just once a week can lead to a pervasive, a week can lead to a pervasive, a week can lead to a pervasive, a long-lasting impact on subjective long-lasting impact on subjective long-lasting impact on subjective well-being. People report feeling happier, more People report feeling happier, more People report feeling happier, more meaning, joy, even awe for their life meaning, joy, even awe for their life meaning, joy, even awe for their life experience simply in response to adding experience simply in response to adding experience simply in response to adding a gratitude practice. The key thing is a gratitude practice. The key thing is a gratitude practice. The key thing is it has to be the right gratitude it has to be the right gratitude it has to be the right gratitude practice, and we're going to talk about practice, and we're going to talk about practice, and we're going to talk about what the right gratitude practice looks what the right gratitude practice looks what the right gratitude practice looks like in just a little bit. like in just a little bit. like in just a little bit. But there are additional benefits of a But there are additional benefits of a But there are additional benefits of a gratitude practice. gratitude practice. gratitude practice. There are studies showing that There are studies showing that There are studies showing that a regular gratitude practice can provide a regular gratitude practice can provide a regular gratitude practice can provide resilience to trauma in two ways. It can resilience to trauma in two ways. It can resilience to trauma in two ways. It can provide a reframing and resilience to provide a reframing and resilience to provide a reframing and resilience to prior traumatic experiences, so prior traumatic experiences, so prior traumatic experiences, so buffering people against the negative uh buffering people against the negative uh buffering people against the negative uh physiological effects and psychological physiological effects and psychological physiological effects and psychological effects of earlier trauma, but also effects of earlier trauma, but also effects of earlier trauma, but also inoculating them in many ways to any inoculating them in many ways to any inoculating them in many ways to any traumas that might arrive later in life. traumas that might arrive later in life. traumas that might arrive later in life. So, that's a powerful thing. And today So, that's a powerful thing. And today So, that's a powerful thing. And today what we will talk about how that's what we will talk about how that's what we will talk about how that's actually accomplished is actually accomplished is actually accomplished is actually accomplished by shifting the way that accomplished by shifting the way that accomplished by shifting the way that the fear and defense networks in the fear and defense networks in the fear and defense networks in the brain actually function. And we'll get brain actually function. And we'll get brain actually function. And we'll get right down into the details of that. The right down into the details of that. The right down into the details of that. The other thing that a gratitude practice other thing that a gratitude practice other thing that a gratitude practice does is it's been shown to benefit does is it's been shown to benefit does is it's been shown to benefit social relationships, social relationships, social relationships, but not just for the relationship in but not just for the relationship in but not just for the relationship in which you express gratitude, right? So, which you express gratitude, right? So, which you express gratitude, right? So, on the face of it you might think, on the face of it you might think, on the face of it you might think, "Okay, if I express gratitude for "Okay, if I express gratitude for "Okay, if I express gratitude for somebody over and over and over and over somebody over and over and over and over somebody over and over and over and over and over then I'm going to feel better and over then I'm going to feel better and over then I'm going to feel better about that person." And indeed that is about that person." And indeed that is about that person." And indeed that is one effect of a gratitude practice, one effect of a gratitude practice, one effect of a gratitude practice, that's called a prosocial or intersocial that's called a prosocial or intersocial that's called a prosocial or intersocial gratitude practice, but gratitude practice, but gratitude practice, but there are now several studies, recent there are now several studies, recent there are now several studies, recent studies in good journals, pointing to studies in good journals, pointing to studies in good journals, pointing to the fact that a regular gratitude the fact that a regular gratitude the fact that a regular gratitude practice can also enhance one's social practice can also enhance one's social practice can also enhance one's social relationships across the board, in the relationships across the board, in the relationships across the board, in the workplace, at school, at with family, in workplace, at school, at with family, in workplace, at school, at with family, in romantic relationships, and even one's romantic relationships, and even one's romantic relationships, and even one's relationship to themselves, which is relationship to themselves, which is relationship to themselves, which is really what the subjective feelings of really what the subjective feelings of really what the subjective feelings of well-being are. So, it's clear to me well-being are. So, it's clear to me well-being are. So, it's clear to me that an effective gratitude practice has that an effective gratitude practice has that an effective gratitude practice has an outsized effect on many, many aspects an outsized effect on many, many aspects an outsized effect on many, many aspects of mental and physical health. And for of mental and physical health. And for of mental and physical health. And for those of you that are coming to this those of you that are coming to this those of you that are coming to this conversation thinking, "Gratitude conversation thinking, "Gratitude conversation thinking, "Gratitude practice, oh that's kind of wishy-washy practice, oh that's kind of wishy-washy practice, oh that's kind of wishy-washy or woo, it's going to involve, you know, or woo, it's going to involve, you know, or woo, it's going to involve, you know, putting your hand on your heart and putting your hand on your heart and putting your hand on your heart and feeling into all the amazing things that feeling into all the amazing things that feeling into all the amazing things that you happen to have even when things are you happen to have even when things are you happen to have even when things are really terrible. That's not where we're really terrible. That's not where we're really terrible. That's not where we're going at all. going at all. going at all. And equally important is to understand And equally important is to understand And equally important is to understand that the neurochemical that the neurochemical that the neurochemical the anti-inflammatory the anti-inflammatory the anti-inflammatory and the neural circuit mechanisms that and the neural circuit mechanisms that and the neural circuit mechanisms that gratitude can invoke are equally on par gratitude can invoke are equally on par gratitude can invoke are equally on par with some of the effects of pharmacology with some of the effects of pharmacology with some of the effects of pharmacology of things like high-intensity interval of things like high-intensity interval of things like high-intensity interval training and exercise and other things training and exercise and other things training and exercise and other things that we think of as kind of more potent that we think of as kind of more potent that we think of as kind of more potent forms of self-intervention. So, if you forms of self-intervention. So, if you forms of self-intervention. So, if you are of the mindset that a gratitude are of the mindset that a gratitude are of the mindset that a gratitude practice is kind of weak sauce, um, practice is kind of weak sauce, um, practice is kind of weak sauce, um, buckle up because the data actually buckle up because the data actually buckle up because the data actually point to the fact that a gratitude point to the fact that a gratitude point to the fact that a gratitude practice is a very, very potent way in practice is a very, very potent way in practice is a very, very potent way in which you can steer your mental and which you can steer your mental and which you can steer your mental and physical health in positive directions physical health in positive directions physical health in positive directions and that those effects are very and that those effects are very and that those effects are very long-lasting. Before we dive into the long-lasting. Before we dive into the long-lasting. Before we dive into the tools and mechanisms and scientific tools and mechanisms and scientific tools and mechanisms and scientific studies around gratitude I'd like to studies around gratitude I'd like to studies around gratitude I'd like to just set the framework for the just set the framework for the just set the framework for the discussion. Gratitude is what we call a discussion. Gratitude is what we call a discussion. Gratitude is what we call a prosocial behavior or a prosocial behavior or a prosocial behavior or a prosocial mindset. Now, you can be grateful for something Now, you can be grateful for something Now, you can be grateful for something without it involving anybody else. So, without it involving anybody else. So, without it involving anybody else. So, the social part isn't meant to convey the social part isn't meant to convey the social part isn't meant to convey anything about interpersonal relations, anything about interpersonal relations, anything about interpersonal relations, although it can and today we're going to although it can and today we're going to although it can and today we're going to talk a lot about how interpersonal talk a lot about how interpersonal talk a lot about how interpersonal relations can be incorporated into a relations can be incorporated into a relations can be incorporated into a gratitude practice in really powerful gratitude practice in really powerful gratitude practice in really powerful ways. But, prosocial behaviors are ways. But, prosocial behaviors are ways. But, prosocial behaviors are basically any behavior or mode of basically any behavior or mode of basically any behavior or mode of thinking that allow us to be more thinking that allow us to be more thinking that allow us to be more effective in interactions with other effective in interactions with other effective in interactions with other people including ourselves. people including ourselves. people including ourselves. Now, prosocial is not just a name that Now, prosocial is not just a name that Now, prosocial is not just a name that we give these different tools and we give these different tools and we give these different tools and practices and mindsets. They're actually practices and mindsets. They're actually practices and mindsets. They're actually neural circuits in the brain that are neural circuits in the brain that are neural circuits in the brain that are specifically wired for prosocial specifically wired for prosocial specifically wired for prosocial thoughts and behaviors. And these are thoughts and behaviors. And these are thoughts and behaviors. And these are distinctly different from the circuits distinctly different from the circuits distinctly different from the circuits in the brain that are involved in the brain that are involved in the brain that are involved in defensive behaviors. So, without getting defensive behaviors. So, without getting defensive behaviors. So, without getting into too much detail just yet, we will into too much detail just yet, we will into too much detail just yet, we will later we have circuits in the brain that are we have circuits in the brain that are we have circuits in the brain that are what we call appetitive. They are what we call appetitive. They are what we call appetitive. They are designed to bring us closer to things designed to bring us closer to things designed to bring us closer to things and to bring us and to bring us and to bring us into closer relation to the details of into closer relation to the details of into closer relation to the details of that sensory experience. Now, that could that sensory experience. Now, that could that sensory experience. Now, that could be a delicious food that you're eating. be a delicious food that you're eating. be a delicious food that you're eating. It could be interacting with a loved It could be interacting with a loved It could be interacting with a loved one. It could be interacting with a one. It could be interacting with a one. It could be interacting with a friend or anyone that you happen to friend or anyone that you happen to friend or anyone that you happen to like. It could even be in your relation like. It could even be in your relation like. It could even be in your relation to yourself. These circuits that we're to yourself. These circuits that we're to yourself. These circuits that we're calling prosocial circuits light up in calling prosocial circuits light up in calling prosocial circuits light up in the brain if in neuroimaging, meaning the brain if in neuroimaging, meaning the brain if in neuroimaging, meaning the neurons are firing more actively, the neurons are firing more actively, the neurons are firing more actively, more electrically, um, robustly. Uh, more electrically, um, robustly. Uh, more electrically, um, robustly. Uh, it's sort of like turning up the it's sort of like turning up the it's sort of like turning up the volume on these neural circuits in the volume on these neural circuits in the volume on these neural circuits in the brain. And the neural circuits in the brain. And the neural circuits in the brain. And the neural circuits in the brain that are associated with aversive brain that are associated with aversive brain that are associated with aversive or defensive behaviors, things like or defensive behaviors, things like or defensive behaviors, things like backing up, things like covering up the backing up, things like covering up the backing up, things like covering up the vital organs of the body, things like a vital organs of the body, things like a vital organs of the body, things like a quaking of the voice, all of the things quaking of the voice, all of the things quaking of the voice, all of the things that are associated with defensive that are associated with defensive that are associated with defensive behaviors are actually antagonized, behaviors are actually antagonized, behaviors are actually antagonized, meaning they are reduced when the meaning they are reduced when the meaning they are reduced when the prosocial circuits are more active. So, prosocial circuits are more active. So, prosocial circuits are more active. So, the framework here that I'd like to set the framework here that I'd like to set the framework here that I'd like to set is that we have this kind of seesaw of is that we have this kind of seesaw of is that we have this kind of seesaw of neural circuits in the brain. One set neural circuits in the brain. One set neural circuits in the brain. One set that are prosocial and are designed to that are prosocial and are designed to that are prosocial and are designed to bring us closer to others, including bring us closer to others, including bring us closer to others, including ourselves, closer to certain sensory ourselves, closer to certain sensory ourselves, closer to certain sensory experiences, right? Because a lot of experiences, right? Because a lot of experiences, right? Because a lot of prosocial behaviors can also be geared prosocial behaviors can also be geared prosocial behaviors can also be geared towards things like pets or food or towards things like pets or food or towards things like pets or food or anything that we find we want to be anything that we find we want to be anything that we find we want to be closer to and want more of. Whereas the closer to and want more of. Whereas the closer to and want more of. Whereas the defensive circuits defensive circuits defensive circuits involve areas of the brain, yes, such as involve areas of the brain, yes, such as involve areas of the brain, yes, such as areas that are involved in fear, but areas that are involved in fear, but areas that are involved in fear, but also areas of the brain and body that also areas of the brain and body that also areas of the brain and body that are literally associated with freezing are literally associated with freezing are literally associated with freezing or with backing up. So, the way to think or with backing up. So, the way to think or with backing up. So, the way to think about gratitude is it falls under this about gratitude is it falls under this about gratitude is it falls under this category of prosocial behaviors which category of prosocial behaviors which category of prosocial behaviors which are designed to bring us closer to are designed to bring us closer to are designed to bring us closer to different types of things and to enhance different types of things and to enhance different types of things and to enhance the level of detail that we extract from the level of detail that we extract from the level of detail that we extract from those experiences. Now, the existence of those experiences. Now, the existence of those experiences. Now, the existence of these two neural circuits that I've got these two neural circuits that I've got these two neural circuits that I've got placed on this, uh, sort of, placed on this, uh, sort of, placed on this, uh, sort of, metaphorical seesaw, if you will, metaphorical seesaw, if you will, metaphorical seesaw, if you will, runs counter to a lot of the messaging runs counter to a lot of the messaging runs counter to a lot of the messaging or the ideas that were put forth in the or the ideas that were put forth in the or the ideas that were put forth in the last century about the psychology of last century about the psychology of last century about the psychology of happiness and gratitude versus, uh, the happiness and gratitude versus, uh, the happiness and gratitude versus, uh, the psychology of depression and the psychology of depression and the psychology of depression and struggle and concern about the future. struggle and concern about the future. struggle and concern about the future. In fact, I'd like to read a quote from In fact, I'd like to read a quote from In fact, I'd like to read a quote from the great and we should call we really the great and we should call we really the great and we should call we really should call him the great Sigmund Freud should call him the great Sigmund Freud should call him the great Sigmund Freud because um despite uh having uh certain because um despite uh having uh certain because um despite uh having uh certain uh traits that people uh criticize him uh traits that people uh criticize him uh traits that people uh criticize him of, uh Freud was indeed a genius about of, uh Freud was indeed a genius about of, uh Freud was indeed a genius about many aspects of psychology. But, I just many aspects of psychology. But, I just many aspects of psychology. But, I just want to uh read you Freud's stance on want to uh read you Freud's stance on want to uh read you Freud's stance on happiness and this invokes elements of happiness and this invokes elements of happiness and this invokes elements of gratitude as well. And then you can uh gratitude as well. And then you can uh gratitude as well. And then you can uh gauge for yourself. gauge for yourself. gauge for yourself. Quote, "Our possibilities of happiness Quote, "Our possibilities of happiness Quote, "Our possibilities of happiness are already restricted by our are already restricted by our are already restricted by our constitution. So, he's saying that we're constitution. So, he's saying that we're constitution. So, he's saying that we're basically wired to not have happiness basically wired to not have happiness basically wired to not have happiness easily. Unhappiness is much less easily. Unhappiness is much less easily. Unhappiness is much less difficult to experience. We are difficult to experience. We are difficult to experience. We are threatened with suffering from three threatened with suffering from three threatened with suffering from three directions. One, from our own body, directions. One, from our own body, directions. One, from our own body, which is doomed to decay and which is doomed to decay and which is doomed to decay and dissolution, and which cannot even do dissolution, and which cannot even do dissolution, and which cannot even do without pain and anxiety as warning without pain and anxiety as warning without pain and anxiety as warning signals. Two, from the external world, signals. Two, from the external world, signals. Two, from the external world, which may rage against us with which may rage against us with which may rage against us with overwhelming and merciless forces of overwhelming and merciless forces of overwhelming and merciless forces of destruction. And three, and finally, destruction. And three, and finally, destruction. And three, and finally, from our relations with others, the from our relations with others, the from our relations with others, the suffering of which from this last source suffering of which from this last source suffering of which from this last source is perhaps more painful to us than any is perhaps more painful to us than any is perhaps more painful to us than any other." That's Sigmund Freud. And not all of his That's Sigmund Freud. And not all of his That's Sigmund Freud. And not all of his writings were uh that pessimistic, if writings were uh that pessimistic, if writings were uh that pessimistic, if you will. you will. you will. What Freud is referring to there What Freud is referring to there What Freud is referring to there are those defensive circuits. And of are those defensive circuits. And of are those defensive circuits. And of course, he talked about psychological course, he talked about psychological course, he talked about psychological defenses. And in full disclosure, I am a defenses. And in full disclosure, I am a defenses. And in full disclosure, I am a huge fan of much of the psychological huge fan of much of the psychological huge fan of much of the psychological literature and psychoanalysis of Sigmund Freud and psychoanalysis of Sigmund Freud and psychoanalysis of Sigmund Freud and his descendants, like Jung and others. I his descendants, like Jung and others. I his descendants, like Jung and others. I think there are strong elements of truth think there are strong elements of truth think there are strong elements of truth there. But, it gives you a sense of the there. But, it gives you a sense of the there. But, it gives you a sense of the kind of mindset of psychology early in kind of mindset of psychology early in kind of mindset of psychology early in the last century. the last century. the last century. And then, of course, was the emergence And then, of course, was the emergence And then, of course, was the emergence of the positive psychology movement, of the positive psychology movement, of the positive psychology movement, which was really about invoking the which was really about invoking the which was really about invoking the understanding and eventually the um understanding and eventually the um understanding and eventually the um elucidation of the neural circuits for elucidation of the neural circuits for elucidation of the neural circuits for things like happiness and awe and things like happiness and awe and things like happiness and awe and affiliation and things that we are affiliation and things that we are affiliation and things that we are calling prosocial circuits. So, the calling prosocial circuits. So, the calling prosocial circuits. So, the field of psychology has a dark and field of psychology has a dark and field of psychology has a dark and light, uh if you will, and the field of light, uh if you will, and the field of light, uh if you will, and the field of neuroscience has a dark and light. You neuroscience has a dark and light. You neuroscience has a dark and light. You have these what we call parallel have these what we call parallel have these what we call parallel pathways in the brain, and we have pathways in the brain, and we have pathways in the brain, and we have parallel pathways in the mind that set parallel pathways in the mind that set parallel pathways in the mind that set us up for feeling good about things or us up for feeling good about things or us up for feeling good about things or for feeling less good about things. I for feeling less good about things. I for feeling less good about things. I think what's really salient from the think what's really salient from the think what's really salient from the quote from Freud is that what he's quote from Freud is that what he's quote from Freud is that what he's saying is our default is to be concerned saying is our default is to be concerned saying is our default is to be concerned about the future, to be wrapped in our about the future, to be wrapped in our about the future, to be wrapped in our defenses, and to some extent that's defenses, and to some extent that's defenses, and to some extent that's true. And the reason we can say that's true is And the reason we can say that's true is And the reason we can say that's true is because most of us need a gratitude practice. We most of us need a gratitude practice. We most of us need a gratitude practice. We need to do certain things in order to need to do certain things in order to need to do certain things in order to feel good and to feel happy. We actually feel good and to feel happy. We actually feel good and to feel happy. We actually have to put work into it. It is quite have to put work into it. It is quite have to put work into it. It is quite possible that there's an asymmetry in possible that there's an asymmetry in possible that there's an asymmetry in the way that these prosocial versus the way that these prosocial versus the way that these prosocial versus defensive circuits are set up such that defensive circuits are set up such that defensive circuits are set up such that because defensive circuits are designed because defensive circuits are designed because defensive circuits are designed to keep us safe, psychologically and to keep us safe, psychologically and to keep us safe, psychologically and physically safe, that they have more physically safe, that they have more physically safe, that they have more robustness, or they can actually drive robustness, or they can actually drive robustness, or they can actually drive our behavior more easily. I'll give you our behavior more easily. I'll give you our behavior more easily. I'll give you an analogy in the system that I'm most an analogy in the system that I'm most an analogy in the system that I'm most familiar with as a neuroscientist, which familiar with as a neuroscientist, which familiar with as a neuroscientist, which is the visual system. In the visual is the visual system. In the visual is the visual system. In the visual system, we have parallel pathways. system, we have parallel pathways. system, we have parallel pathways. We have neurons in our eye that respond We have neurons in our eye that respond We have neurons in our eye that respond when things in our environment get when things in our environment get when things in our environment get brighter. Literally, when the lights go brighter. Literally, when the lights go brighter. Literally, when the lights go up, these neurons start firing like up, these neurons start firing like up, these neurons start firing like crazy. And we have neurons in our eye crazy. And we have neurons in our eye crazy. And we have neurons in our eye that respond when things get darker, that respond when things get darker, that respond when things get darker, when things start dimming or go from when things start dimming or go from when things start dimming or go from white to black. white to black. white to black. The circuits for detecting darkening are The circuits for detecting darkening are The circuits for detecting darkening are much more robust and much more numerous much more robust and much more numerous much more robust and much more numerous than are the circuits for brightness. than are the circuits for brightness. than are the circuits for brightness. And that is probably related, probably, And that is probably related, probably, And that is probably related, probably, to the fact that dark objects or to the fact that dark objects or to the fact that dark objects or experiencing looming, meaning incoming experiencing looming, meaning incoming experiencing looming, meaning incoming objects and being able to perceive them, objects and being able to perceive them, objects and being able to perceive them, is something that's vital to our is something that's vital to our is something that's vital to our survival. Whereas being able to perceive survival. Whereas being able to perceive survival. Whereas being able to perceive the brightening of things might be the brightening of things might be the brightening of things might be important to survival in certain important to survival in certain important to survival in certain contexts, you know, car lights coming at contexts, you know, car lights coming at contexts, you know, car lights coming at you at night or something of that sort, you at night or something of that sort, you at night or something of that sort, but not as often in a kind of a but not as often in a kind of a but not as often in a kind of a evolutionary or ethological context as evolutionary or ethological context as evolutionary or ethological context as the darkening of things. So, I think the darkening of things. So, I think the darkening of things. So, I think Freud's quote and the field of Freud's quote and the field of Freud's quote and the field of psychology now psychology now psychology now point to the fact that point to the fact that point to the fact that indeed, we have the capacity for indeed, we have the capacity for indeed, we have the capacity for happiness and we have the capacity for happiness and we have the capacity for happiness and we have the capacity for great worry and concern and depression great worry and concern and depression great worry and concern and depression and unhappiness. And the neural circuit and unhappiness. And the neural circuit and unhappiness. And the neural circuit literature also supports that. literature also supports that. literature also supports that. The key thing for today's discussion is The key thing for today's discussion is The key thing for today's discussion is that gratitude turns out to be one of that gratitude turns out to be one of that gratitude turns out to be one of the most potent wedges by which we can the most potent wedges by which we can the most potent wedges by which we can insert our thinking and as you also see, insert our thinking and as you also see, insert our thinking and as you also see, our the physiology of our body our the physiology of our body our the physiology of our body between these two circuits and give a between these two circuits and give a between these two circuits and give a little more little more little more levity, if you will, to the side of the levity, if you will, to the side of the levity, if you will, to the side of the seesaw that's associated with positive seesaw that's associated with positive seesaw that's associated with positive prosocial feelings. And if you keep prosocial feelings. And if you keep prosocial feelings. And if you keep imagining this seesaw imagery, imagining this seesaw imagery, imagining this seesaw imagery, what's really beautiful about gratitude what's really beautiful about gratitude what's really beautiful about gratitude practices is that if they're performed practices is that if they're performed practices is that if they're performed repeatedly and not even that often, but repeatedly and not even that often, but repeatedly and not even that often, but repeatedly, then one can actually shift repeatedly, then one can actually shift repeatedly, then one can actually shift their neural circuits such that the their neural circuits such that the their neural circuits such that the seesaw that I'm calling prosocial versus seesaw that I'm calling prosocial versus seesaw that I'm calling prosocial versus defensive behaviors can actually start defensive behaviors can actually start defensive behaviors can actually start to tilt and the little hinge, if you to tilt and the little hinge, if you to tilt and the little hinge, if you will, on the seesaw in the middle can be will, on the seesaw in the middle can be will, on the seesaw in the middle can be adjusted in little tighter when the side adjusted in little tighter when the side adjusted in little tighter when the side for gratitude and for well-being and for gratitude and for well-being and for gratitude and for well-being and for feelings of happiness is a little bit feelings of happiness is a little bit feelings of happiness is a little bit higher. What this means is that higher. What this means is that higher. What this means is that whether or not Freud was right or wrong, whether or not Freud was right or wrong, whether or not Freud was right or wrong, whether or not uh the neuroscientists on whether or not uh the neuroscientists on whether or not uh the neuroscientists on what in one camp or another right or what in one camp or another right or what in one camp or another right or wrong, we now know with certainty that a wrong, we now know with certainty that a wrong, we now know with certainty that a regular gratitude practice can shift the regular gratitude practice can shift the regular gratitude practice can shift the prosocial circuits so that they dominate prosocial circuits so that they dominate prosocial circuits so that they dominate our physiology and our mindset in ways our physiology and our mindset in ways our physiology and our mindset in ways that can enhance many, many aspects of that can enhance many, many aspects of that can enhance many, many aspects of our physical and mental health by our physical and mental health by our physical and mental health by default. So, we don't always have to default. So, we don't always have to default. So, we don't always have to constantly be in practice trying to be constantly be in practice trying to be constantly be in practice trying to be happy. So, the succinct way of saying happy. So, the succinct way of saying happy. So, the succinct way of saying all this is yes, indeed, we might be all this is yes, indeed, we might be all this is yes, indeed, we might be wired or in such that we have a greater wired or in such that we have a greater wired or in such that we have a greater propensity for unhappiness than propensity for unhappiness than propensity for unhappiness than happiness, but gratitude practices, happiness, but gratitude practices, happiness, but gratitude practices, provided they are the effective ones and provided they are the effective ones and provided they are the effective ones and they are performed regularly, they are performed regularly, they are performed regularly, can shift those circuits such that we can shift those circuits such that we can shift those circuits such that we are happier on average even when we are happier on average even when we are happier on average even when we are not performing those practices. Now, I'd not performing those practices. Now, I'd not performing those practices. Now, I'd like to talk about some of the like to talk about some of the like to talk about some of the neurochemistry and neural circuits neurochemistry and neural circuits neurochemistry and neural circuits associated with gratitude and prosocial associated with gratitude and prosocial associated with gratitude and prosocial behaviors. Numerous times on this podcast I've Numerous times on this podcast I've Numerous times on this podcast I've talked about so-called neuromodulators. talked about so-called neuromodulators. talked about so-called neuromodulators. For those of you that might have For those of you that might have For those of you that might have forgotten nerve, never heard of forgotten nerve, never heard of forgotten nerve, never heard of modulators before, neuromodulators are modulators before, neuromodulators are modulators before, neuromodulators are chemicals that are released in the brain chemicals that are released in the brain chemicals that are released in the brain and body that change the activity of and body that change the activity of and body that change the activity of other neural circuits. They make certain other neural circuits. They make certain other neural circuits. They make certain brain areas more likely to be active and brain areas more likely to be active and brain areas more likely to be active and other brain areas less likely to be other brain areas less likely to be other brain areas less likely to be active. These neuromodulators have names like These neuromodulators have names like These neuromodulators have names like dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, epinephrine, and so on. epinephrine, and so on. epinephrine, and so on. The main neuromodulators associated with The main neuromodulators associated with The main neuromodulators associated with gratitude and prosocial behaviors tends gratitude and prosocial behaviors tends gratitude and prosocial behaviors tends to be serotonin. Serotonin is released to be serotonin. Serotonin is released to be serotonin. Serotonin is released from a very small collection of neurons from a very small collection of neurons from a very small collection of neurons in the brainstem called the raphe, r a p in the brainstem called the raphe, r a p in the brainstem called the raphe, r a p h e, the raphe nucleus, and a few other h e, the raphe nucleus, and a few other h e, the raphe nucleus, and a few other places in the brain. And the raphe places in the brain. And the raphe places in the brain. And the raphe neurons send these little wires that we neurons send these little wires that we neurons send these little wires that we call axons out to numerous places in the call axons out to numerous places in the call axons out to numerous places in the brain, and they tend to increase the activity and they tend to increase the activity and they tend to increase the activity of particular neural circuits of particular neural circuits of particular neural circuits that lend themselves that lend themselves that lend themselves to more approach to more approach to more approach to particular types of experiences. That to particular types of experiences. That to particular types of experiences. That makes total sense if you think about it. makes total sense if you think about it. makes total sense if you think about it. Have a chemical that under certain Have a chemical that under certain Have a chemical that under certain circumstances released in the brain that circumstances released in the brain that circumstances released in the brain that triggers the activity of neural circuits triggers the activity of neural circuits triggers the activity of neural circuits that makes the organism, you, more that makes the organism, you, more that makes the organism, you, more likely to stay in an interaction with likely to stay in an interaction with likely to stay in an interaction with something or even lean in and seek a something or even lean in and seek a something or even lean in and seek a more detailed interaction with that more detailed interaction with that more detailed interaction with that person, place, or thing. Beautiful work from a cognitive Beautiful work from a cognitive Beautiful work from a cognitive neuropsychologist. His name is Antonio neuropsychologist. His name is Antonio neuropsychologist. His name is Antonio Damasio. He's a He's a He's a world-class neuroscientist, has been in the game a neuroscientist, has been in the game a neuroscientist, has been in the game a very long time, has explored the very long time, has explored the very long time, has explored the so-called neural correlates of so-called neural correlates of so-called neural correlates of gratitude. And two main brain areas are gratitude. And two main brain areas are gratitude. And two main brain areas are activated by these serotonergic systems, activated by these serotonergic systems, activated by these serotonergic systems, and when people experience something and when people experience something and when people experience something that makes them feel that makes them feel that makes them feel gratitude, even if it's shallow gratitude, even if it's shallow gratitude, even if it's shallow gratitude or deep and if it's all the gratitude or deep and if it's all the gratitude or deep and if it's all the way to deep gratitude, they see way to deep gratitude, they see way to deep gratitude, they see activation of these particular brain activation of these particular brain activation of these particular brain circuits I'll mention in a moment, and circuits I'll mention in a moment, and circuits I'll mention in a moment, and the amount of activation scales with how the amount of activation scales with how the amount of activation scales with how intensely the person experienced the intensely the person experienced the intensely the person experienced the feeling of gratitude. And those two feeling of gratitude. And those two feeling of gratitude. And those two areas have particular names, you don't areas have particular names, you don't areas have particular names, you don't need to know the names, but for those of need to know the names, but for those of need to know the names, but for those of you that want to know, they are the you that want to know, they are the you that want to know, they are the anterior cingulate cortex and the medial anterior cingulate cortex and the medial anterior cingulate cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex. And of course, these prefrontal cortex. And of course, these prefrontal cortex. And of course, these brain areas are connected to a number of brain areas are connected to a number of brain areas are connected to a number of other networks in the brain. In fact, other networks in the brain. In fact, other networks in the brain. In fact, that's how they get you or others to that's how they get you or others to that's how they get you or others to lean into certain experien- experiences lean into certain experien- experiences lean into certain experien- experiences because when these areas are active, because when these areas are active, because when these areas are active, certain thought processes get invoked. certain thought processes get invoked. certain thought processes get invoked. Those thought processes probably Those thought processes probably Those thought processes probably resemble something like, "Hmm, I'd like resemble something like, "Hmm, I'd like resemble something like, "Hmm, I'd like to experience more of this or hmm, this to experience more of this or hmm, this to experience more of this or hmm, this feels really good." And then they feels really good." And then they feels really good." And then they literally feed onto your muscles via the literally feed onto your muscles via the literally feed onto your muscles via the neurons, making you neurons, making you neurons, making you happy to stay stationary if you're happy to stay stationary if you're happy to stay stationary if you're experiencing something you like or to experiencing something you like or to experiencing something you like or to move closer to something that you find move closer to something that you find move closer to something that you find attractive to you, literally. attractive to you, literally. attractive to you, literally. So, these are powerful circuits. Of So, these are powerful circuits. Of So, these are powerful circuits. Of these two brain areas, the one I'd like these two brain areas, the one I'd like these two brain areas, the one I'd like to focus on the most is the medial to focus on the most is the medial to focus on the most is the medial prefrontal cortex. prefrontal cortex. prefrontal cortex. Many of you have probably heard of the Many of you have probably heard of the Many of you have probably heard of the medial prefrontal cortex because this is medial prefrontal cortex because this is medial prefrontal cortex because this is the area of the brain the area of the brain the area of the brain that is involved in planning and in deep that is involved in planning and in deep that is involved in planning and in deep thinking and evaluation of different thinking and evaluation of different thinking and evaluation of different types of experiences, past, present, or types of experiences, past, present, or types of experiences, past, present, or future. It seems actually that pretty much every It seems actually that pretty much every It seems actually that pretty much every study of a human anything seems to study of a human anything seems to study of a human anything seems to involve the medial prefrontal cortex, or involve the medial prefrontal cortex, or involve the medial prefrontal cortex, or at least one could get that impression at least one could get that impression at least one could get that impression uh just by looking at scientific uh just by looking at scientific uh just by looking at scientific abstracts and papers these days. abstracts and papers these days. abstracts and papers these days. So, I think it's worth us taking a step So, I think it's worth us taking a step So, I think it's worth us taking a step back and asking, "What does the medial back and asking, "What does the medial back and asking, "What does the medial prefrontal cortex really do, right?" How prefrontal cortex really do, right?" How prefrontal cortex really do, right?" How could this one piece of neural real could this one piece of neural real could this one piece of neural real estate that we all have right behind our estate that we all have right behind our estate that we all have right behind our forehead, how could that be involved in forehead, how could that be involved in forehead, how could that be involved in so many different things? And the reason so many different things? And the reason so many different things? And the reason it can be involved in so many different it can be involved in so many different it can be involved in so many different things, and the reason it's especially things, and the reason it's especially things, and the reason it's especially important for gratitude, is that medial important for gratitude, is that medial important for gratitude, is that medial prefrontal cortex sets context. Okay? It prefrontal cortex sets context. Okay? It prefrontal cortex sets context. Okay? It sets context and it literally defines sets context and it literally defines sets context and it literally defines the meaning of your experience. Now, the meaning of your experience. Now, the meaning of your experience. Now, this is not at all an abstract this is not at all an abstract this is not at all an abstract phenomenon. I'm going to give a very phenomenon. I'm going to give a very phenomenon. I'm going to give a very physiological example of this. physiological example of this. physiological example of this. And then we're going to translate it to And then we're going to translate it to And then we're going to translate it to gratitude, but I really want everyone to gratitude, but I really want everyone to gratitude, but I really want everyone to understand how is it that medial understand how is it that medial understand how is it that medial prefrontal cortex sets the context of prefrontal cortex sets the context of prefrontal cortex sets the context of everything in your life? everything in your life? everything in your life? Well, it does it the following way. You Well, it does it the following way. You Well, it does it the following way. You have a number of circuits deeper in your have a number of circuits deeper in your have a number of circuits deeper in your brain that simply create some brain that simply create some brain that simply create some sensations, or they allow you, I should sensations, or they allow you, I should sensations, or they allow you, I should say, to perceive certain sensations. say, to perceive certain sensations. say, to perceive certain sensations. Let's use the example of cold exposure, Let's use the example of cold exposure, Let's use the example of cold exposure, something that we sometimes talk about something that we sometimes talk about something that we sometimes talk about in this podcast for other reasons. in this podcast for other reasons. in this podcast for other reasons. If you were to deliberately place If you were to deliberately place If you were to deliberately place yourself into an ice bath, yourself into an ice bath, yourself into an ice bath, it would be uncomfortable, even if it would be uncomfortable, even if it would be uncomfortable, even if you're adapted to cold and so forth. you're adapted to cold and so forth. you're adapted to cold and so forth. The discomfort is non-negotiable. The discomfort is non-negotiable. The discomfort is non-negotiable. However, if you are doing it because you want to, if you are doing it because you want to, if you are doing it because you want to, or because you have knowledge that there or because you have knowledge that there or because you have knowledge that there are particular health benefits, are particular health benefits, are particular health benefits, the medial prefrontal cortex can then medial prefrontal cortex can then medial prefrontal cortex can then control areas of your deeper brain like control areas of your deeper brain like control areas of your deeper brain like the hypothalamus to positively impact the hypothalamus to positively impact the hypothalamus to positively impact the neurochemicals that are released the neurochemicals that are released the neurochemicals that are released into your system. You'll still get a lot into your system. You'll still get a lot into your system. You'll still get a lot of adrenaline by getting into the ice of adrenaline by getting into the ice of adrenaline by getting into the ice bath, but the fact that you are doing bath, but the fact that you are doing bath, but the fact that you are doing this deliberately, this deliberately, this deliberately, and your knowledge that you are making and your knowledge that you are making and your knowledge that you are making the choice, that it's you that's the choice, that it's you that's the choice, that it's you that's deciding to put yourself through this deciding to put yourself through this deciding to put yourself through this discomfort, has been shown to has been shown to has been shown to create a very different and positive create a very different and positive create a very different and positive effect on things like dopamine, on effect on things like dopamine, on effect on things like dopamine, on things like anti-inflammatory markers, things like anti-inflammatory markers, things like anti-inflammatory markers, uh, in your immune system, etc., uh, in your immune system, etc., uh, in your immune system, etc., compared to if compared to if compared to if someone pushes you into an ice bath or someone pushes you into an ice bath or someone pushes you into an ice bath or if you are doing it because someone if you are doing it because someone if you are doing it because someone insists that you do it and you really insists that you do it and you really insists that you do it and you really don't want to. So, there's a very really don't want to. So, there's a very really don't want to. So, there's a very subtle distinction here. It's just a subtle distinction here. It's just a subtle distinction here. It's just a It's just a distinction of motivation It's just a distinction of motivation It's just a distinction of motivation and desire or lack of motivation and desire or lack of motivation and desire or lack of motivation and being forced into something. And there being forced into something. And there being forced into something. And there are a number of other effects of this are a number of other effects of this are a number of other effects of this that have been uh described in the that have been uh described in the that have been uh described in the episode with Robert Sapolsky uh that I episode with Robert Sapolsky uh that I episode with Robert Sapolsky uh that I did earlier this last year, he talked did earlier this last year, he talked did earlier this last year, he talked about a study in animals which has about a study in animals which has about a study in animals which has also been shown in humans if you take a also been shown in humans if you take a also been shown in humans if you take a mouse from a sense and it runs on a mouse from a sense and it runs on a mouse from a sense and it runs on a running wheel, which mice really like to running wheel, which mice really like to running wheel, which mice really like to do, there are many positive effects on there are many positive effects on there are many positive effects on reducing blood pressure, improvements in reducing blood pressure, improvements in reducing blood pressure, improvements in neurochemistry, etc. in that mouse. neurochemistry, etc. in that mouse. neurochemistry, etc. in that mouse. However, if there's a mouse in the cage right if there's a mouse in the cage right if there's a mouse in the cage right next to it that's trapped in the running next to it that's trapped in the running next to it that's trapped in the running wheel and it has to run every time the wheel and it has to run every time the wheel and it has to run every time the other mouse runs because the wheels are other mouse runs because the wheels are other mouse runs because the wheels are linked, well, then the second mouse linked, well, then the second mouse linked, well, then the second mouse that's forced to do the exact same that's forced to do the exact same that's forced to do the exact same running experiences negative shifts in their experiences negative shifts in their experiences negative shifts in their overall health metrics. Blood pressure overall health metrics. Blood pressure overall health metrics. Blood pressure goes up, stress hormones go up, etc. goes up, stress hormones go up, etc. goes up, stress hormones go up, etc. because it's not actually making the because it's not actually making the because it's not actually making the choice. Medial prefrontal cortex is the knob. It Medial prefrontal cortex is the knob. It Medial prefrontal cortex is the knob. It is or the switch rather that can take is or the switch rather that can take is or the switch rather that can take one experience and allow us to frame it one experience and allow us to frame it one experience and allow us to frame it such that it creates positive health such that it creates positive health such that it creates positive health effects. And the exact same experience effects. And the exact same experience effects. And the exact same experience framed as something we don't want to do framed as something we don't want to do framed as something we don't want to do or that we are forced to do can create or that we are forced to do can create or that we are forced to do can create negative health effects. negative health effects. negative health effects. Now, how exactly the neurons in medial Now, how exactly the neurons in medial Now, how exactly the neurons in medial prefrontal cortex do that is rather prefrontal cortex do that is rather prefrontal cortex do that is rather complicated and frankly not completely complicated and frankly not completely complicated and frankly not completely understood. But it's somehow able to understood. But it's somehow able to understood. But it's somehow able to adjust the activity of other neural adjust the activity of other neural adjust the activity of other neural circuits that are purely reflexive, as circuits that are purely reflexive, as circuits that are purely reflexive, as we say in neuroscience, like really dumb we say in neuroscience, like really dumb we say in neuroscience, like really dumb neural circuits. They're just like neural circuits. They're just like neural circuits. They're just like switches. And place a context onto it. switches. And place a context onto it. switches. And place a context onto it. So, gratitude is a mindset gratitude is a mindset gratitude is a mindset that activates prefrontal cortex that activates prefrontal cortex that activates prefrontal cortex and in doing so sets the context of your and in doing so sets the context of your and in doing so sets the context of your experience such that you can derive tremendous such that you can derive tremendous such that you can derive tremendous health benefits, which leads us to the health benefits, which leads us to the health benefits, which leads us to the question, what kind of gratitude question, what kind of gratitude question, what kind of gratitude practice is going to accomplish this, practice is going to accomplish this, practice is going to accomplish this, right? Because it is not simply the case right? Because it is not simply the case right? Because it is not simply the case that I could take a knife, don't please that I could take a knife, don't please that I could take a knife, don't please don't do this experiment, and cut my don't do this experiment, and cut my don't do this experiment, and cut my hand and say, "Oh, you know, I'm do I'm hand and say, "Oh, you know, I'm do I'm hand and say, "Oh, you know, I'm do I'm going to enjoy this. I'm doing this cuz going to enjoy this. I'm doing this cuz going to enjoy this. I'm doing this cuz it this is good for me and it won't it this is good for me and it won't it this is good for me and it won't hurt." Of course, it'll hurt just like hurt." Of course, it'll hurt just like hurt." Of course, it'll hurt just like the ice bath is cold no matter what. the ice bath is cold no matter what. the ice bath is cold no matter what. But, I can't lie to myself, right? If I But, I can't lie to myself, right? If I But, I can't lie to myself, right? If I If I have some knowledge that cutting If I have some knowledge that cutting If I have some knowledge that cutting myself is bad for me, that's very hard myself is bad for me, that's very hard myself is bad for me, that's very hard to override. And so, the medial to override. And so, the medial to override. And so, the medial prefrontal cortex has a tremendous prefrontal cortex has a tremendous prefrontal cortex has a tremendous capacity to set context, and it does capacity to set context, and it does capacity to set context, and it does that beautifully with respect to that beautifully with respect to that beautifully with respect to gratitude, but you can't simply lie to gratitude, but you can't simply lie to gratitude, but you can't simply lie to yourself. You can't simply say, "Oh, yourself. You can't simply say, "Oh, yourself. You can't simply say, "Oh, well, every experience is a learning well, every experience is a learning well, every experience is a learning experience." Or, um experience." Or, um experience." Or, um you know, a terrible thing happens, oh you know, a terrible thing happens, oh you know, a terrible thing happens, oh good, I'm just going to say good, and good, I'm just going to say good, and good, I'm just going to say good, and that your body will react as if it's that your body will react as if it's that your body will react as if it's good for you. That's a myth, and good for you. That's a myth, and good for you. That's a myth, and frankly, it's a myth that's fairly frankly, it's a myth that's fairly frankly, it's a myth that's fairly pervasive in the self-help and pervasive in the self-help and pervasive in the self-help and self-actualization literature. self-actualization literature. self-actualization literature. We have the opportunity to reframe and We have the opportunity to reframe and We have the opportunity to reframe and set context on our experiences, but that set context on our experiences, but that set context on our experiences, but that requires a very specific set of requires a very specific set of requires a very specific set of practices. We can't simply lie to practices. We can't simply lie to practices. We can't simply lie to ourselves or {quote} fake it until we ourselves or {quote} fake it until we ourselves or {quote} fake it until we make it. Neural circuitry is very make it. Neural circuitry is very make it. Neural circuitry is very powerful and very plastic. It can be powerful and very plastic. It can be powerful and very plastic. It can be modified, and it's very modified, and it's very modified, and it's very context-dependent, but it's not stupid. context-dependent, but it's not stupid. context-dependent, but it's not stupid. And when you lie to yourself about And when you lie to yourself about And when you lie to yourself about whether or not an experience is actually whether or not an experience is actually whether or not an experience is actually good for you good for you good for you or not, or not, or not, your brain knows. your brain knows. your brain knows. So, what does an effective gratitude So, what does an effective gratitude So, what does an effective gratitude practice look like? practice look like? practice look like? Well, let's examine what an ineffective let's examine what an ineffective let's examine what an ineffective what a poor gratitude practice looks what a poor gratitude practice looks what a poor gratitude practice looks like, because therein lies some really like, because therein lies some really like, because therein lies some really important information, important information, important information, including the fact that I, and I think including the fact that I, and I think including the fact that I, and I think millions of other people out there, millions of other people out there, millions of other people out there, are doing it wrong. are doing it wrong. are doing it wrong. Most gratitude practices that you see Most gratitude practices that you see Most gratitude practices that you see online and that people talk about in online and that people talk about in online and that people talk about in various talks and so forth, various talks and so forth, various talks and so forth, involve something like writing down or involve something like writing down or involve something like writing down or reciting or thinking about reciting or thinking about reciting or thinking about five or 10 or three or 20 things that five or 10 or three or 20 things that five or 10 or three or 20 things that you're especially grateful for. And then you're especially grateful for. And then you're especially grateful for. And then really trying to feel into some of really trying to feel into some of really trying to feel into some of those, really those, really those, really trying to think deeply about the trying to think deeply about the trying to think deeply about the emotions, the sensations, the emotions, the sensations, the emotions, the sensations, the perceptions that are associated with perceptions that are associated with perceptions that are associated with those particular people, places, and those particular people, places, and those particular people, places, and things on your list. things on your list. things on your list. Most studies Most studies Most studies actually point to the fact that actually point to the fact that actually point to the fact that style of gratitude practice is not that style of gratitude practice is not that style of gratitude practice is not particularly effective in shifting your particularly effective in shifting your particularly effective in shifting your neural circuitry, your neurochemistry, neural circuitry, your neurochemistry, neural circuitry, your neurochemistry, or your somatic circuitry, the or your somatic circuitry, the or your somatic circuitry, the circuits in your body cuz you literally circuits in your body cuz you literally circuits in your body cuz you literally have organs and neural circuits that are have organs and neural circuits that are have organs and neural circuits that are connected, the circuits of your brain connected, the circuits of your brain connected, the circuits of your brain and body toward and body toward and body toward enhanced activation of prefrontal enhanced activation of prefrontal enhanced activation of prefrontal cortex, enhanced activation of these cortex, enhanced activation of these cortex, enhanced activation of these prosocial neural networks that we were prosocial neural networks that we were prosocial neural networks that we were talking about earlier. talking about earlier. talking about earlier. Now, that may come as a surprise to many Now, that may come as a surprise to many Now, that may come as a surprise to many of you and certainly came as a surprise of you and certainly came as a surprise of you and certainly came as a surprise to me. to me. to me. There is some evidence that if there's a There is some evidence that if there's a There is some evidence that if there's a shift in so-called autonomic arousal shift in so-called autonomic arousal shift in so-called autonomic arousal during these gratitude practices, these during these gratitude practices, these during these gratitude practices, these ones that I'm calling ineffective, that ones that I'm calling ineffective, that ones that I'm calling ineffective, that they can be made slightly more they can be made slightly more they can be made slightly more effective. So, what do I mean by a shift effective. So, what do I mean by a shift effective. So, what do I mean by a shift in autonomic arousal? Well, very in autonomic arousal? Well, very in autonomic arousal? Well, very briefly, we have a aspect to our nervous briefly, we have a aspect to our nervous briefly, we have a aspect to our nervous system, both within our brain and body system, both within our brain and body system, both within our brain and body that we call the autonomic nervous that we call the autonomic nervous that we call the autonomic nervous system. It's a little bit of a misnomer system. It's a little bit of a misnomer system. It's a little bit of a misnomer because autonomic means automatic, and because autonomic means automatic, and because autonomic means automatic, and in fact, we can take control of the in fact, we can take control of the in fact, we can take control of the autonomic nervous system. It has one autonomic nervous system. It has one autonomic nervous system. It has one branch, meaning one set of connections branch, meaning one set of connections branch, meaning one set of connections and circuits that are associated with and circuits that are associated with and circuits that are associated with making us more alert, the so-called making us more alert, the so-called making us more alert, the so-called sympathetic nervous system. nervous system. nervous system. Or I should say sympathetic arm of the Or I should say sympathetic arm of the Or I should say sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, but that's autonomic nervous system, but that's autonomic nervous system, but that's really a mouthful. It's really a mouthful. It's really a mouthful. It's really associated with enhanced alertness associated with enhanced alertness associated with enhanced alertness of any kind, for excitement or fear, and of any kind, for excitement or fear, and of any kind, for excitement or fear, and it has nothing to do with sympathy. It's it has nothing to do with sympathy. It's it has nothing to do with sympathy. It's just about enhanced alertness. And then just about enhanced alertness. And then just about enhanced alertness. And then the other arm of the autonomic nervous the other arm of the autonomic nervous the other arm of the autonomic nervous system is the so-called parasympathetic system is the so-called parasympathetic system is the so-called parasympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, but arm of the autonomic nervous system, but arm of the autonomic nervous system, but that's also a mouthful. So, let's just that's also a mouthful. So, let's just that's also a mouthful. So, let's just say it's the calming aspect of the say it's the calming aspect of the say it's the calming aspect of the autonomic nervous system. So, it's autonomic nervous system. So, it's autonomic nervous system. So, it's associated with decreased heart rate, associated with decreased heart rate, associated with decreased heart rate, decreased breathing rate, etc. decreased breathing rate, etc. decreased breathing rate, etc. So, we have these two aspects to our So, we have these two aspects to our So, we have these two aspects to our autonomic nervous system, and it has autonomic nervous system, and it has autonomic nervous system, and it has been shown that if people are brought been shown that if people are brought been shown that if people are brought into a state of heightened sympathetic into a state of heightened sympathetic into a state of heightened sympathetic tone, meaning more alertness, tone, meaning more alertness, tone, meaning more alertness, then the intensity of the emotions that then the intensity of the emotions that then the intensity of the emotions that they experience in their gratitude they experience in their gratitude they experience in their gratitude practice is enhanced, and the practice is enhanced, and the practice is enhanced, and the effectiveness of that gratitude practice effectiveness of that gratitude practice effectiveness of that gratitude practice can be enhanced. can be enhanced. can be enhanced. This is seen nowadays, somewhat This is seen nowadays, somewhat This is seen nowadays, somewhat commonly, as having people, for commonly, as having people, for commonly, as having people, for instance, cyclic hyperventilated breathing, as we cyclic hyperventilated breathing, as we cyclic hyperventilated breathing, as we call it in my laboratory. call it in my laboratory. call it in my laboratory. Breathing that's very intense of the Breathing that's very intense of the Breathing that's very intense of the inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale very inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale very inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale very deeply for 25 or 30 breaths, then people deeply for 25 or 30 breaths, then people deeply for 25 or 30 breaths, then people will sit in a meditative stance, or will sit in a meditative stance, or will sit in a meditative stance, or they'll focus on their they'll focus on their they'll focus on their on their notepad and paper, and they'll on their notepad and paper, and they'll on their notepad and paper, and they'll write out the things that they'll write out the things that they'll write out the things that they're grateful for, and then they'll they're grateful for, and then they'll they're grateful for, and then they'll really try and feel into those things, really try and feel into those things, really try and feel into those things, or they'll think about those things. And or they'll think about those things. And or they'll think about those things. And it makes perfect sense as to why it makes perfect sense as to why it makes perfect sense as to why enhancing autonomic arousal enhancing autonomic arousal enhancing autonomic arousal toward more alertness would create more toward more alertness would create more toward more alertness would create more robust feelings, or more robust impact robust feelings, or more robust impact robust feelings, or more robust impact of these gratitude practices, because in of these gratitude practices, because in of these gratitude practices, because in that state, you are more alert, and that state, you are more alert, and that state, you are more alert, and therefore you are able to bring more therefore you are able to bring more therefore you are able to bring more detail, more richness to the perception detail, more richness to the perception detail, more richness to the perception and the understanding of what those and the understanding of what those and the understanding of what those things on your list happen to be. things on your list happen to be. things on your list happen to be. But, and I should say that there are numerous and I should say that there are numerous and I should say that there are numerous other approaches to this. At you know, other approaches to this. At you know, other approaches to this. At you know, sort of self-help type stuff, and sort of self-help type stuff, and sort of self-help type stuff, and self-actualization seminars, people will self-actualization seminars, people will self-actualization seminars, people will do things like cold baths, or they'll do things like cold baths, or they'll do things like cold baths, or they'll do chanting, or they'll have any number of chanting, or they'll have any number of chanting, or they'll have any number of different experiences, all of which are different experiences, all of which are different experiences, all of which are mainly geared towards increased mainly geared towards increased mainly geared towards increased autonomic arousal. You know, there are autonomic arousal. You know, there are autonomic arousal. You know, there are even practices out there using even practices out there using even practices out there using pharmacology to create increased pharmacology to create increased pharmacology to create increased autonomic arousal, and then drop into autonomic arousal, and then drop into autonomic arousal, and then drop into gratitude. Across the board, those increase the Across the board, those increase the Across the board, those increase the potency of the gratitude practice, of potency of the gratitude practice, of potency of the gratitude practice, of listing things out on paper or in one's listing things out on paper or in one's listing things out on paper or in one's mind or saying them out loud. But, mind or saying them out loud. But, mind or saying them out loud. But, somewhat surprisingly, at least to me, somewhat surprisingly, at least to me, somewhat surprisingly, at least to me, that form of just expressing thanks, that form of just expressing thanks, that form of just expressing thanks, expressing gratitude, expressing gratitude, expressing gratitude, is not the most effective way to shift is not the most effective way to shift is not the most effective way to shift these prosocial circuits in positive these prosocial circuits in positive these prosocial circuits in positive ways for one's physiology and anatomy ways for one's physiology and anatomy ways for one's physiology and anatomy and psychology. and psychology. and psychology. Turns out that the most potent form of Turns out that the most potent form of Turns out that the most potent form of gratitude practice is not a gratitude practice is not a gratitude practice is not a gratitude practice where you give gratitude practice where you give gratitude practice where you give gratitude or express gratitude, but rather where or express gratitude, but rather where or express gratitude, but rather where you receive gratitude, where you receive you receive gratitude, where you receive you receive gratitude, where you receive thanks. And this to me was very thanks. And this to me was very thanks. And this to me was very surprising. There are a number of surprising. There are a number of surprising. There are a number of studies about this now. One in studies about this now. One in studies about this now. One in particular that I think is interesting particular that I think is interesting particular that I think is interesting is called prefrontal activation while is called prefrontal activation while is called prefrontal activation while listening to a letter of gratitude read listening to a letter of gratitude read listening to a letter of gratitude read aloud by a coworker face-to-face, a near aloud by a coworker face-to-face, a near aloud by a coworker face-to-face, a near study, NIRS. I'll explain what all this study, NIRS. I'll explain what all this study, NIRS. I'll explain what all this means. You now know what the prefrontal means. You now know what the prefrontal means. You now know what the prefrontal activation part is. This is activation part is. This is activation part is. This is activation of the prefrontal cortex. The NIRS of the prefrontal cortex. The NIRS of the prefrontal cortex. The NIRS study, that's just a technical study, that's just a technical study, that's just a technical term. It's a It's a form of imaging brain It's a It's a form of imaging brain It's a It's a form of imaging brain activity. It's non-invasive, so it's a activity. It's non-invasive, so it's a activity. It's non-invasive, so it's a kind of a skull cap. It looks like a kind of a skull cap. It looks like a kind of a skull cap. It looks like a looks like a hoodie with a bunch of looks like a hoodie with a bunch of looks like a hoodie with a bunch of wires coming out of it basically, that wires coming out of it basically, that wires coming out of it basically, that can measure neural activity without can measure neural activity without can measure neural activity without having to remove any parts of the skull having to remove any parts of the skull having to remove any parts of the skull or put a person into one of these or put a person into one of these or put a person into one of these tube-like fMRI machines, which is very tube-like fMRI machines, which is very tube-like fMRI machines, which is very invasive. It's also a wonderful tool invasive. It's also a wonderful tool invasive. It's also a wonderful tool because it allows human subjects in the because it allows human subjects in the because it allows human subjects in the laboratory to move around and to engage laboratory to move around and to engage laboratory to move around and to engage with one another. So, in this particular with one another. So, in this particular with one another. So, in this particular experiment, what they did is they had experiment, what they did is they had experiment, what they did is they had coworkers write a letter of gratitude, coworkers write a letter of gratitude, coworkers write a letter of gratitude, of thanks, to another coworker, of thanks, to another coworker, of thanks, to another coworker, unbeknownst to the other coworker, and unbeknownst to the other coworker, and unbeknownst to the other coworker, and then they sat down together, and then they sat down together, and then they sat down together, and then they imaged brain activity as this they imaged brain activity as this they imaged brain activity as this letter was being read and as the letter was being read and as the letter was being read and as the letter was being heard, received. And it showed was being heard, received. And it showed was being heard, received. And it showed very robust effects on these prefrontal very robust effects on these prefrontal very robust effects on these prefrontal networks that pointed to the fact that networks that pointed to the fact that networks that pointed to the fact that receiving gratitude is actually much receiving gratitude is actually much receiving gratitude is actually much more potent in terms of the positive more potent in terms of the positive more potent in terms of the positive shifts that it can create than giving shifts that it can create than giving shifts that it can create than giving gratitude. So this raises a couple of gratitude. So this raises a couple of gratitude. So this raises a couple of important points. First of all, if you important points. First of all, if you important points. First of all, if you are somebody who is prone to write are somebody who is prone to write are somebody who is prone to write letters of gratitude, ideally letters of gratitude, ideally letters of gratitude, ideally I think it's requisite that these I think it's requisite that these I think it's requisite that these be genuine letters of gratitude or be genuine letters of gratitude or be genuine letters of gratitude or saying things that are genuine saying things that are genuine saying things that are genuine expressions of gratitude. This could be expressions of gratitude. This could be expressions of gratitude. This could be by text or in person or by phone. You have within you a very potent form You have within you a very potent form You have within you a very potent form of shifting somebody else's neurology. of shifting somebody else's neurology. of shifting somebody else's neurology. Now, that's wonderful and I think there Now, that's wonderful and I think there Now, that's wonderful and I think there are many people like that out there, but are many people like that out there, but are many people like that out there, but for many people who are want to for many people who are want to for many people who are want to experience the positive effects of experience the positive effects of experience the positive effects of gratitude, you it's probably not the gratitude, you it's probably not the gratitude, you it's probably not the most uh advantageous approach to just most uh advantageous approach to just most uh advantageous approach to just sit around waiting hoping that someone's sit around waiting hoping that someone's sit around waiting hoping that someone's going to deliver all these letters or going to deliver all these letters or going to deliver all these letters or words of gratitude. How is it that you words of gratitude. How is it that you words of gratitude. How is it that you can create that sense of receiving can create that sense of receiving can create that sense of receiving gratitude for yourself and thereby gratitude for yourself and thereby gratitude for yourself and thereby derive the effects of gratitude as derive the effects of gratitude as derive the effects of gratitude as outlined in this particular study. And outlined in this particular study. And outlined in this particular study. And there we go back to the important work there we go back to the important work there we go back to the important work of the great Antonio Damasio who of the great Antonio Damasio who of the great Antonio Damasio who explored these neural correlates of explored these neural correlates of explored these neural correlates of gratitude to define the areas of the gratitude to define the areas of the gratitude to define the areas of the brain that are associated with prosocial brain that are associated with prosocial brain that are associated with prosocial behaviors like the prefrontal cortex. behaviors like the prefrontal cortex. behaviors like the prefrontal cortex. And what's really interesting about the And what's really interesting about the And what's really interesting about the work that Damasio and colleagues did is work that Damasio and colleagues did is work that Damasio and colleagues did is first of all, they used functional first of all, they used functional first of all, they used functional magnetic resonance imaging. So this is a magnetic resonance imaging. So this is a magnetic resonance imaging. So this is a very high resolution approach to very high resolution approach to very high resolution approach to exploring what areas of the brain are exploring what areas of the brain are exploring what areas of the brain are active and they has very high what we active and they has very high what we active and they has very high what we call temporal resolution meaning you can call temporal resolution meaning you can call temporal resolution meaning you can see things in time at very fine scale. see things in time at very fine scale. see things in time at very fine scale. So a lot of mechanistic detail can So a lot of mechanistic detail can So a lot of mechanistic detail can emerge from these sorts of studies. What emerge from these sorts of studies. What emerge from these sorts of studies. What they did was interesting. Rather than they did was interesting. Rather than they did was interesting. Rather than have people have people have people express gratitude, they had the subjects express gratitude, they had the subjects express gratitude, they had the subjects go into the scanner, so their brains are go into the scanner, so their brains are go into the scanner, so their brains are being imaged, and they watched being imaged, and they watched being imaged, and they watched narratives, stories about other people narratives, stories about other people narratives, stories about other people experiencing positive things in their experiencing positive things in their experiencing positive things in their life. And in this case, this was life. And in this case, this was life. And in this case, this was these were powerful stories. These were these were powerful stories. These were these were powerful stories. These were stories about survivors of genocide. So, stories about survivors of genocide. So, stories about survivors of genocide. So, that's what they're watching. that's what they're watching. that's what they're watching. The subjects were subjects that The subjects were subjects that The subjects were subjects that were not survivors of genocide. So, they were not survivors of genocide. So, they were not survivors of genocide. So, they were watching these videotapes of people were watching these videotapes of people were watching these videotapes of people that had survived genocide that had survived genocide that had survived genocide and had people help them along the way as had people help them along the way as had people help them along the way as part of their story of survival, either part of their story of survival, either part of their story of survival, either psychological and or obviously they psychological and or obviously they psychological and or obviously they survived long enough to make the video, survived long enough to make the video, survived long enough to make the video, so were physical survival. So, within so were physical survival. So, within so were physical survival. So, within these stories, there was a these stories, there was a these stories, there was a there was a conveyance of a lot of there was a conveyance of a lot of there was a conveyance of a lot of struggle. These people talked about the struggle. These people talked about the struggle. These people talked about the horrible situations they were in, but horrible situations they were in, but horrible situations they were in, but also small but highly significant small but highly significant small but highly significant features of their history that had led features of their history that had led features of their history that had led to their own feelings of gratitude. So, to their own feelings of gratitude. So, to their own feelings of gratitude. So, for instance, you know, it says a woman for instance, you know, it says a woman for instance, you know, it says a woman at the This is literally from the at the This is literally from the at the This is literally from the scientific paper. scientific paper. scientific paper. You know, somebody had been sick for You know, somebody had been sick for You know, somebody had been sick for weeks. So, the woman's describing how weeks. So, the woman's describing how weeks. So, the woman's describing how she'd been sick for weeks, and then she'd been sick for weeks, and then she'd been sick for weeks, and then another prisoner another prisoner another prisoner who was a doctor finds a particular who was a doctor finds a particular who was a doctor finds a particular medicine somehow. It doesn't describe medicine somehow. It doesn't describe medicine somehow. It doesn't describe how. And literally saves her life. Or an how. And literally saves her life. Or an how. And literally saves her life. Or an ally who was also in a stricken ally who was also in a stricken ally who was also in a stricken circumstance gave this person a pair of glasses when gave this person a pair of glasses when gave this person a pair of glasses when their eyesight started to falter. their eyesight started to falter. their eyesight started to falter. So, these sorts of stories. Now, just So, these sorts of stories. Now, just So, these sorts of stories. Now, just hearing this in the context of nothing hearing this in the context of nothing hearing this in the context of nothing but a scientific paper in discussion, but a scientific paper in discussion, but a scientific paper in discussion, these probably don't aren't that these probably don't aren't that these probably don't aren't that impactful. What's really important about impactful. What's really important about impactful. What's really important about this study and is really important for this study and is really important for this study and is really important for all of us to know is that these stories all of us to know is that these stories all of us to know is that these stories of other people receiving things that of other people receiving things that of other people receiving things that were powerful for them in their life were powerful for them in their life were powerful for them in their life trajectory is embedded in story. trajectory is embedded in story. trajectory is embedded in story. And the human brain especially is so And the human brain especially is so And the human brain especially is so oriented towards story. We have oriented towards story. We have oriented towards story. We have neural circuits that like to link neural circuits that like to link neural circuits that like to link together past, present, future, have together past, present, future, have together past, present, future, have different characters, protagonists and different characters, protagonists and different characters, protagonists and antagonists. From the time we're very antagonists. From the time we're very antagonists. From the time we're very young until the time we're very old, young until the time we're very old, young until the time we're very old, story is one of the major ways that we story is one of the major ways that we story is one of the major ways that we organize information in the brain. There organize information in the brain. There organize information in the brain. There there does seem to be storytelling and there does seem to be storytelling and there does seem to be storytelling and story listening circuits in the and story listening circuits in the and story listening circuits in the brain. So, what's important is not um brain. So, what's important is not um brain. So, what's important is not um simply that these people survived simply that these people survived simply that these people survived genocide. That's obviously important uh genocide. That's obviously important uh genocide. That's obviously important uh and wonderful, but it's not just and wonderful, but it's not just and wonderful, but it's not just that they were helped along the way. that they were helped along the way. that they were helped along the way. It's that the description of their help It's that the description of their help It's that the description of their help is embedded in a larger story. So, the is embedded in a larger story. So, the is embedded in a larger story. So, the human subject is uh in this scientific human subject is uh in this scientific human subject is uh in this scientific study is watching these powerful study is watching these powerful study is watching these powerful stories. And stories. And stories. And the neural circuits associated with the neural circuits associated with the neural circuits associated with prosocial behaviors and with gratitude prosocial behaviors and with gratitude prosocial behaviors and with gratitude become robustly active when they start become robustly active when they start become robustly active when they start to feel some affiliation with the person to feel some affiliation with the person to feel some affiliation with the person telling the story. They start to feel telling the story. They start to feel telling the story. They start to feel some resonance. We might call that some resonance. We might call that some resonance. We might call that empathy, but it doesn't necessarily have empathy, but it doesn't necessarily have empathy, but it doesn't necessarily have to be empathy. Empathy is a somewhat to be empathy. Empathy is a somewhat to be empathy. Empathy is a somewhat complicated uh thing to define because complicated uh thing to define because complicated uh thing to define because it involves it involves it involves literally a setting aside of one's own literally a setting aside of one's own literally a setting aside of one's own emotions and really focusing almost emotions and really focusing almost emotions and really focusing almost entirely or experiencing almost entirely or experiencing almost entirely or experiencing almost entirely the emotions of another. It could be the emotions of another. It could be the emotions of another. It could be sympathy. It could be empathy. What we sympathy. It could be empathy. What we sympathy. It could be empathy. What we do know is that it do know is that it do know is that it that the stories themselves were able to that the stories themselves were able to that the stories themselves were able to shift the physiology of the subjects in shift the physiology of the subjects in shift the physiology of the subjects in the in this study and activate these the in this study and activate these the in this study and activate these what we're calling gratitude circuitry what we're calling gratitude circuitry what we're calling gratitude circuitry that involves the prefrontal cortex. So, that involves the prefrontal cortex. So, that involves the prefrontal cortex. So, if you think about the earlier study if you think about the earlier study if you think about the earlier study that receiving gratitude is the most that receiving gratitude is the most that receiving gratitude is the most powerful way to activate these circuits powerful way to activate these circuits powerful way to activate these circuits for gratitude, for gratitude, for gratitude, the subjects in this study in many ways the subjects in this study in many ways the subjects in this study in many ways are receiving a sense of gratitude are receiving a sense of gratitude are receiving a sense of gratitude but through the narrative of one of but through the narrative of one of but through the narrative of one of these other subjects, which I find these other subjects, which I find these other subjects, which I find fascinating. You know, I would have fascinating. You know, I would have fascinating. You know, I would have thought a great gratitude practice would thought a great gratitude practice would thought a great gratitude practice would be sit down and list out all the things be sit down and list out all the things be sit down and list out all the things you're grateful for. That just seems so you're grateful for. That just seems so you're grateful for. That just seems so logical to me, but it turns out that logical to me, but it turns out that logical to me, but it turns out that these neural circuits don't work that these neural circuits don't work that these neural circuits don't work that way that to really activate these way that to really activate these way that to really activate these circuits for gratitude and the serotonin circuits for gratitude and the serotonin circuits for gratitude and the serotonin and that probably the oxytocin system as and that probably the oxytocin system as and that probably the oxytocin system as well and that's prefrontal networks, well and that's prefrontal networks, well and that's prefrontal networks, one has to powerfully associate one has to powerfully associate one has to powerfully associate with the idea of receiving help. Okay, with the idea of receiving help. Okay, with the idea of receiving help. Okay, the subjects are the subjects are the subjects are associating or experiencing empathy or associating or experiencing empathy or associating or experiencing empathy or sympathy for somebody else who received sympathy for somebody else who received sympathy for somebody else who received help. In the other study we described a help. In the other study we described a help. In the other study we described a few minutes ago, the person hearing the few minutes ago, the person hearing the few minutes ago, the person hearing the letter was receiving gratitude and that letter was receiving gratitude and that letter was receiving gratitude and that would amplify the activity of these would amplify the activity of these would amplify the activity of these circuits. And that takes us to a larger theme of And that takes us to a larger theme of And that takes us to a larger theme of what are these prosocial circuits? And what are these prosocial circuits? And what are these prosocial circuits? And an important concept to emerge from this an important concept to emerge from this an important concept to emerge from this is one that's most often associated with is one that's most often associated with is one that's most often associated with the autism literature frankly, which is the autism literature frankly, which is the autism literature frankly, which is this idea of theory of mind. So just this idea of theory of mind. So just this idea of theory of mind. So just very briefly, theory of mind is the very briefly, theory of mind is the very briefly, theory of mind is the ability to attribute or to understand ability to attribute or to understand ability to attribute or to understand the experience of another the experience of another the experience of another without actually experiencing the thing without actually experiencing the thing without actually experiencing the thing that they're experiencing. Again, it that they're experiencing. Again, it that they're experiencing. Again, it kind of sounds like empathy, but this kind of sounds like empathy, but this kind of sounds like empathy, but this was actually a um was actually a um was actually a um uh term that's now been demonstrated in the term that's now been demonstrated in the term that's now been demonstrated in the psychology and neuroscience that's been psychology and neuroscience that's been psychology and neuroscience that's been linked to some uh very robust findings linked to some uh very robust findings linked to some uh very robust findings associated with brain areas and so forth associated with brain areas and so forth associated with brain areas and so forth that was looking at autistic kids and that was looking at autistic kids and that was looking at autistic kids and non-autistic kids. Uh the person largely non-autistic kids. Uh the person largely non-autistic kids. Uh the person largely responsible for developing theory of responsible for developing theory of responsible for developing theory of mind is Simon Baron-Cohen. He I believe mind is Simon Baron-Cohen. He I believe mind is Simon Baron-Cohen. He I believe he's either the brother or the cousin. I he's either the brother or the cousin. I he's either the brother or the cousin. I can't remember recall which to the I can't remember recall which to the I can't remember recall which to the comedian Sacha Baron-Cohen. Simon comedian Sacha Baron-Cohen. Simon comedian Sacha Baron-Cohen. Simon Baron-Cohen is a professor at Oxford Baron-Cohen is a professor at Oxford Baron-Cohen is a professor at Oxford University or at least he was the last University or at least he was the last University or at least he was the last time I checked. And the theory of mind time I checked. And the theory of mind time I checked. And the theory of mind test can be done on adults or on test can be done on adults or on test can be done on adults or on children and we can sort of do that children and we can sort of do that children and we can sort of do that experiment right now if you like and you experiment right now if you like and you experiment right now if you like and you can think about how you would behave if can think about how you would behave if can think about how you would behave if you were a subject in uh a theory of you were a subject in uh a theory of you were a subject in uh a theory of mind test. Theory of mind test involves mind test. Theory of mind test involves mind test. Theory of mind test involves you or a child or some other adult you or a child or some other adult you or a child or some other adult sitting down and watching a video of a sitting down and watching a video of a sitting down and watching a video of a child going into a room or a person child going into a room or a person child going into a room or a person going into a room, opening up a desk of going into a room, opening up a desk of going into a room, opening up a desk of uh or dresser, a drawer for instance or uh or dresser, a drawer for instance or uh or dresser, a drawer for instance or a desk drawer and placing something in a desk drawer and placing something in a desk drawer and placing something in it like a pen or a toy and then leaving. it like a pen or a toy and then leaving. it like a pen or a toy and then leaving. And then another person walking into the And then another person walking into the And then another person walking into the room and clearly looking for something in the and clearly looking for something in the and clearly looking for something in the room and one presumes it's the toy or the pen and one presumes it's the toy or the pen and one presumes it's the toy or the pen depending on the context. depending on the context. depending on the context. People who have strong theory of mind People who have strong theory of mind People who have strong theory of mind make the obvious conclusion that the make the obvious conclusion that the make the obvious conclusion that the person looking around for the pan or the person looking around for the pan or the person looking around for the pan or the or the toy is confused or they um or the toy is confused or they um or the toy is confused or they um they're perplexed. They don't know where they're perplexed. They don't know where they're perplexed. They don't know where the toy is. They're looking for the toy. the toy is. They're looking for the toy. the toy is. They're looking for the toy. Someone who is uh fairly far uh to one Someone who is uh fairly far uh to one Someone who is uh fairly far uh to one side of the autism or Asperger's side of the autism or Asperger's side of the autism or Asperger's spectrum will simply focus on the location of the will simply focus on the location of the will simply focus on the location of the object, on the location of the pen object, on the location of the pen object, on the location of the pen or the toy. And this is especially true or the toy. And this is especially true or the toy. And this is especially true in children. They will say, "Well, it's in children. They will say, "Well, it's in children. They will say, "Well, it's in the second drawer. It's in the second in the second drawer. It's in the second in the second drawer. It's in the second drawer." And they'll say, "Well, how drawer." And they'll say, "Well, how drawer." And they'll say, "Well, how does uh the person who comes into the does uh the person who comes into the does uh the person who comes into the room feel?" And they'll say, "Well, it's room feel?" And they'll say, "Well, it's room feel?" And they'll say, "Well, it's in the drawer." So, they tend to focus in the drawer." So, they tend to focus in the drawer." So, they tend to focus on the specific factual elements of the on the specific factual elements of the on the specific factual elements of the scenario rather than place their mind scenario rather than place their mind scenario rather than place their mind into the mind of the other person, into the mind of the other person, into the mind of the other person, so-called theory of mind. Now, that so-called theory of mind. Now, that so-called theory of mind. Now, that doesn't mean that people with autism and doesn't mean that people with autism and doesn't mean that people with autism and Asperger's don't have empathy. In some Asperger's don't have empathy. In some Asperger's don't have empathy. In some cases, they can. It sort of depends on cases, they can. It sort of depends on cases, they can. It sort of depends on where they are on the spectrum and so where they are on the spectrum and so where they are on the spectrum and so forth. But, theory of mind has very forth. But, theory of mind has very forth. But, theory of mind has very strong basis in these prefrontal cortex strong basis in these prefrontal cortex strong basis in these prefrontal cortex neural circuits that we were talking neural circuits that we were talking neural circuits that we were talking about because, as you now know, the about because, as you now know, the about because, as you now know, the prefrontal cortex sets context on what prefrontal cortex sets context on what prefrontal cortex sets context on what we see and experience. And the theory of we see and experience. And the theory of we see and experience. And the theory of mind task that I just described uh very mind task that I just described uh very mind task that I just described uh very briefly is a is a is a pure example of pure example of pure example of context setting, right? It's not about context setting, right? It's not about context setting, right? It's not about the fact just the factual elements about the fact just the factual elements about the fact just the factual elements about the location of the objects. It's about the location of the objects. It's about the location of the objects. It's about the context. Someone is looking for the context. Someone is looking for the context. Someone is looking for something that someone else put some something that someone else put some something that someone else put some place that makes it such that place that makes it such that place that makes it such that object is hidden. So, basically, theory object is hidden. So, basically, theory object is hidden. So, basically, theory of mind is your ability to put yourself of mind is your ability to put yourself of mind is your ability to put yourself into the mindset of another. into the mindset of another. into the mindset of another. And in order to get activation of these in order to get activation of these in order to get activation of these gratitude circuits, one needs to put gratitude circuits, one needs to put gratitude circuits, one needs to put themselves into the mindset of another themselves into the mindset of another themselves into the mindset of another or to directly receive gratitude. So, or to directly receive gratitude. So, or to directly receive gratitude. So, let's just take a moment and start to let's just take a moment and start to let's just take a moment and start to think about how we are going to build think about how we are going to build think about how we are going to build out the ultimate gratitude practice, out the ultimate gratitude practice, out the ultimate gratitude practice, meaning the most effective gratitude meaning the most effective gratitude meaning the most effective gratitude practice for us to do for us to do for us to do because of all the many positive effects because of all the many positive effects because of all the many positive effects that an effective gratitude practice can that an effective gratitude practice can that an effective gratitude practice can have if it's the proper one. It's very clear that receiving gratitude It's very clear that receiving gratitude It's very clear that receiving gratitude is powerful, but it's also very clear is powerful, but it's also very clear is powerful, but it's also very clear that waiting around to receive that waiting around to receive that waiting around to receive that gratitude is an impractical approach. gratitude is an impractical approach. gratitude is an impractical approach. Now, there are methods that have been Now, there are methods that have been Now, there are methods that have been developed by my colleague at Stanford, developed by my colleague at Stanford, developed by my colleague at Stanford, Kelly McGonigal, and others that Kelly McGonigal, and others that Kelly McGonigal, and others that actually have developed things for the actually have developed things for the actually have developed things for the workplace, for school, for co-workers workplace, for school, for co-workers workplace, for school, for co-workers and students to write out um and students to write out um and students to write out um particular worksheets related to, you particular worksheets related to, you particular worksheets related to, you know, what they're thankful for from know, what they're thankful for from know, what they're thankful for from others and exchange them. And so, those others and exchange them. And so, those others and exchange them. And so, those are very useful practices. I don't want are very useful practices. I don't want are very useful practices. I don't want to take anything away from the important to take anything away from the important to take anything away from the important work that Kelly and others have done. work that Kelly and others have done. work that Kelly and others have done. But, in the absence of having other But, in the absence of having other But, in the absence of having other people to do these practices with, people to do these practices with, people to do these practices with, what we know for sure is that there has what we know for sure is that there has what we know for sure is that there has to be a real experience of somebody to be a real experience of somebody to be a real experience of somebody else's experience. And that the best way else's experience. And that the best way else's experience. And that the best way to do that is story. So, to do that is story. So, to do that is story. So, in thinking about how to build out an in thinking about how to build out an in thinking about how to build out an effective gratitude practice, effective gratitude practice, effective gratitude practice, it's very worthwhile, I believe, to it's very worthwhile, I believe, to it's very worthwhile, I believe, to find someone's narrative that's powerful find someone's narrative that's powerful find someone's narrative that's powerful for you. In many ways to think about for you. In many ways to think about for you. In many ways to think about this is it's got to be a story that this is it's got to be a story that this is it's got to be a story that inspires you because of the, for lack of inspires you because of the, for lack of inspires you because of the, for lack of a better phrase, the beauty of the human a better phrase, the beauty of the human a better phrase, the beauty of the human spirit or the ability of humans to help spirit or the ability of humans to help spirit or the ability of humans to help other humans. And I find this remarkable other humans. And I find this remarkable other humans. And I find this remarkable because what this really means is that because what this really means is that because what this really means is that the circuits for gratitude are such that the circuits for gratitude are such that the circuits for gratitude are such that we can exchange we can exchange we can exchange gratitude. We can actually observe gratitude. We can actually observe gratitude. We can actually observe someone else getting help, someone else someone else getting help, someone else someone else getting help, someone else giving help, and that observation of our giving help, and that observation of our giving help, and that observation of our species doing that for one another species doing that for one another species doing that for one another allows us to experience the feeling of a allows us to experience the feeling of a allows us to experience the feeling of a genuine chemical and neural circuit genuine chemical and neural circuit genuine chemical and neural circuit activation lift, if you will. activation lift, if you will. activation lift, if you will. Very, very different than simply writing Very, very different than simply writing Very, very different than simply writing out the things that you're thankful for, out the things that you're thankful for, out the things that you're thankful for, right? And so, right? And so, right? And so, how would you do this? Well, how would you do this? Well, how would you do this? Well, people digest story in a number of people digest story in a number of people digest story in a number of different ways. People watch movies, different ways. People watch movies, different ways. People watch movies, people uh listen to podcasts, people uh listen to podcasts, people uh listen to podcasts, people read books. There are tremendous number read books. There are tremendous number read books. There are tremendous number of stories out there. of stories out there. of stories out there. It's clear that an effective gratitude It's clear that an effective gratitude It's clear that an effective gratitude practice has to be repeated from time to practice has to be repeated from time to practice has to be repeated from time to time. So, what I would not suggest is time. So, what I would not suggest is time. So, what I would not suggest is that we build a protocol in which you're that we build a protocol in which you're that we build a protocol in which you're constantly foraging for inspirational constantly foraging for inspirational constantly foraging for inspirational stories over and over again. You know, stories over and over again. You know, stories over and over again. You know, social media and the internet are social media and the internet are social media and the internet are replete with those. replete with those. replete with those. Uh that's not going to be a very potent Uh that's not going to be a very potent Uh that's not going to be a very potent protocol or tool because the most potent protocol or tool because the most potent protocol or tool because the most potent protocol or tool for gratitude is going protocol or tool for gratitude is going protocol or tool for gratitude is going to be one that you repeat over and over to be one that you repeat over and over to be one that you repeat over and over again. Rather, the most effective protocol or Rather, the most effective protocol or Rather, the most effective protocol or tool is going to be tool is going to be tool is going to be either to think into, and you could either to think into, and you could either to think into, and you could write this out if you like, but think write this out if you like, but think write this out if you like, but think into when somebody was thankful for into when somebody was thankful for into when somebody was thankful for something that you did, and really start something that you did, and really start something that you did, and really start to think about how you felt in receiving to think about how you felt in receiving to think about how you felt in receiving that gratitude, or that gratitude, or that gratitude, or and or, I should say, and or, I should say, and or, I should say, imagining or thinking about deeply the imagining or thinking about deeply the imagining or thinking about deeply the emotional experience of somebody else emotional experience of somebody else emotional experience of somebody else receiving help. receiving help. receiving help. Now, what narrative you select is going Now, what narrative you select is going Now, what narrative you select is going to be very dependent on you and your to be very dependent on you and your to be very dependent on you and your taste. It's going to be very dependent taste. It's going to be very dependent taste. It's going to be very dependent on what resonates with you. But again, I on what resonates with you. But again, I on what resonates with you. But again, I want to emphasize that want to emphasize that want to emphasize that the story that you select does not have the story that you select does not have the story that you select does not have to have any semblance to your own life to have any semblance to your own life to have any semblance to your own life experience. It's just about what happens experience. It's just about what happens experience. It's just about what happens to move you. And so, the way that one to move you. And so, the way that one to move you. And so, the way that one could do this, and actually I've started could do this, and actually I've started could do this, and actually I've started this practice for myself on the basis of this practice for myself on the basis of this practice for myself on the basis of the learnings I've had in the in the learnings I've had in the in the learnings I've had in the in the last few weeks around preparing for this last few weeks around preparing for this last few weeks around preparing for this episode, is to find a story that's episode, is to find a story that's episode, is to find a story that's particularly meaningful for you, and particularly meaningful for you, and particularly meaningful for you, and then to just take some short notes, then to just take some short notes, then to just take some short notes, bullet point notes, uh about maybe list bullet point notes, uh about maybe list bullet point notes, uh about maybe list out for instance on a just a small sheet out for instance on a just a small sheet out for instance on a just a small sheet of paper, um or in your phone if of paper, um or in your phone if of paper, um or in your phone if that's your preference, uh just list out that's your preference, uh just list out that's your preference, uh just list out for instance, you know, what the for instance, you know, what the for instance, you know, what the struggle was, struggle was, struggle was, what the help was, and what the help was, and what the help was, and something about how that impacts you something about how that impacts you something about how that impacts you emotionally. Okay? This is something emotionally. Okay? This is something emotionally. Okay? This is something just for you. You don't have to share it just for you. You don't have to share it just for you. You don't have to share it with anybody. with anybody. with anybody. That kind of shorthand list of bullet That kind of shorthand list of bullet That kind of shorthand list of bullet point notes serves as your shorthand for point notes serves as your shorthand for point notes serves as your shorthand for getting into this mode that we're getting into this mode that we're getting into this mode that we're calling gratitude. And actually closely calling gratitude. And actually closely calling gratitude. And actually closely mimics a lot of what was done in these mimics a lot of what was done in these mimics a lot of what was done in these various studies. Because even though the various studies. Because even though the various studies. Because even though the studies I've talked about up until now studies I've talked about up until now studies I've talked about up until now were really focused on were really focused on were really focused on what we call acute imaging studies where what we call acute imaging studies where what we call acute imaging studies where someone watched a story or received someone watched a story or received someone watched a story or received gratitude while the experiment was done gratitude while the experiment was done gratitude while the experiment was done and then that's it, one and done. There and then that's it, one and done. There and then that's it, one and done. There are other studies looking at gratitude are other studies looking at gratitude are other studies looking at gratitude in this context over many weeks, up to 6 in this context over many weeks, up to 6 in this context over many weeks, up to 6 weeks. And what weeks. And what weeks. And what one observes is that there's so-called one observes is that there's so-called one observes is that there's so-called neuroplasticity of these circuits. neuroplasticity of these circuits. neuroplasticity of these circuits. Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response system's ability to change in response system's ability to change in response to experience. to experience. to experience. And that these neural circuits start And that these neural circuits start And that these neural circuits start developing a familiarity with the developing a familiarity with the developing a familiarity with the narrative. So that for instance, let's narrative. So that for instance, let's narrative. So that for instance, let's say you sit down the first time you've say you sit down the first time you've say you sit down the first time you've found a story that you find you've found a story that you find you've found a story that you find particularly compelling, you've written particularly compelling, you've written particularly compelling, you've written down um a few notes about what that down um a few notes about what that down um a few notes about what that story is, just to remind you, story is, just to remind you, story is, just to remind you, um and then you read those out and you um and then you read those out and you um and then you read those out and you think into the richness of that think into the richness of that think into the richness of that experience, that receiving of gratitude. experience, that receiving of gratitude. experience, that receiving of gratitude. Or if you prefer, you're doing the Or if you prefer, you're doing the Or if you prefer, you're doing the protocol where you're thinking about protocol where you're thinking about protocol where you're thinking about when someone was deeply grateful or was when someone was deeply grateful or was when someone was deeply grateful or was great genuinely grateful to you, that great genuinely grateful to you, that great genuinely grateful to you, that you're thinking about that, the neural you're thinking about that, the neural you're thinking about that, the neural circuits become activated circuits become activated circuits become activated with each subsequent repeat of the with each subsequent repeat of the with each subsequent repeat of the practice. Now, this could be done practice. Now, this could be done practice. Now, this could be done literally for 1 minute or 2 minutes or 3 literally for 1 minute or 2 minutes or 3 literally for 1 minute or 2 minutes or 3 minutes. This is not an extensively long minutes. This is not an extensively long minutes. This is not an extensively long practice. And that's another beauty of practice. And that's another beauty of practice. And that's another beauty of gratitude practices is that they have of gratitude practices is that they have of gratitude practices is that they have these outsized positive effects on so these outsized positive effects on so these outsized positive effects on so many aspects of our physiology, but many aspects of our physiology, but many aspects of our physiology, but these are very short practices. They're these are very short practices. They're these are very short practices. They're the kind of thing that you can do the kind of thing that you can do the kind of thing that you can do walking to your car, the kind of thing walking to your car, the kind of thing walking to your car, the kind of thing you can just sit down for a minute and you can just sit down for a minute and you can just sit down for a minute and set a timer and do. Because they are set a timer and do. Because they are set a timer and do. Because they are really about changing your state of mind really about changing your state of mind really about changing your state of mind and body. And if you have an experience and body. And if you have an experience and body. And if you have an experience of receiving gratitude or a story that's of receiving gratitude or a story that's of receiving gratitude or a story that's very potent for you, it becomes a sort very potent for you, it becomes a sort very potent for you, it becomes a sort of shortcut into the gratitude network, of shortcut into the gratitude network, of shortcut into the gratitude network, these prosocial networks, meaning the these prosocial networks, meaning the these prosocial networks, meaning the activation of these circuits becomes activation of these circuits becomes activation of these circuits becomes almost instantaneous. And that's very almost instantaneous. And that's very almost instantaneous. And that's very different than a lot of other practices different than a lot of other practices different than a lot of other practices out there. You know, I'm not aware of out there. You know, I'm not aware of out there. You know, I'm not aware of any meditation practices, for instance, any meditation practices, for instance, any meditation practices, for instance, that you can do only a few times that you can do only a few times that you can do only a few times and then within, and then within, and then within, you know, a week or so you just have to you know, a week or so you just have to you know, a week or so you just have to do them for 1 minute, you immediately do them for 1 minute, you immediately do them for 1 minute, you immediately drop into the kind of optimal state that drop into the kind of optimal state that drop into the kind of optimal state that meditation practice is designed to that meditation practice is designed to that meditation practice is designed to create. There are some shorter create. There are some shorter create. There are some shorter meditation practices that are very meditation practices that are very meditation practices that are very potent and very effective like that, but potent and very effective like that, but potent and very effective like that, but gratitude and the circuits associated gratitude and the circuits associated gratitude and the circuits associated with it appear to be especially plastic, with it appear to be especially plastic, with it appear to be especially plastic, meaning especially prone to meaning especially prone to meaning especially prone to being able to be triggered, in the good being able to be triggered, in the good being able to be triggered, in the good sense of the word triggered, just by sense of the word triggered, just by sense of the word triggered, just by simply reminding yourself of this simply reminding yourself of this simply reminding yourself of this particular narrative. Now, there's particular narrative. Now, there's particular narrative. Now, there's another very clear and positive effect another very clear and positive effect another very clear and positive effect of using this narrative or story-based of using this narrative or story-based of using this narrative or story-based approach to a gratitude practice. approach to a gratitude practice. approach to a gratitude practice. And that's what story does for our And that's what story does for our And that's what story does for our physiology. Earlier in the episode, I mentioned this Earlier in the episode, I mentioned this Earlier in the episode, I mentioned this really incredible study in which really incredible study in which really incredible study in which listening to a story listening to a story listening to a story coordinated the heart rate of different coordinated the heart rate of different coordinated the heart rate of different individuals. And change literally changed the way And change literally changed the way And change literally changed the way that their heart was beating. The that their heart was beating. The that their heart was beating. The title of the study is "Conscious title of the study is "Conscious title of the study is "Conscious Processing of Narrative Stimuli Processing of Narrative Stimuli Processing of Narrative Stimuli Synchronizes Heart Rate Between Synchronizes Heart Rate Between Synchronizes Heart Rate Between Individuals". The first author is Perez, Individuals". The first author is Perez, Individuals". The first author is Perez, again published in Cell Reports, Cell again published in Cell Reports, Cell again published in Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, excellent journal. And Press journal, excellent journal. And Press journal, excellent journal. And it's a really elegant study. They looked it's a really elegant study. They looked it's a really elegant study. They looked at instantaneous heart rate, they use at instantaneous heart rate, they use at instantaneous heart rate, they use electrocardiogram to do that, which is electrocardiogram to do that, which is electrocardiogram to do that, which is simply a way to look at heartbeats with simply a way to look at heartbeats with simply a way to look at heartbeats with very fine precision. They also looked at very fine precision. They also looked at very fine precision. They also looked at the breathing of subjects as they the breathing of subjects as they the breathing of subjects as they listened to these stories. listened to these stories. listened to these stories. Some of you may know that breathing and Some of you may know that breathing and Some of you may know that breathing and heart rate are actually linked to one heart rate are actually linked to one heart rate are actually linked to one another in a really interesting way. The another in a really interesting way. The another in a really interesting way. The simple way to put it is that when you simple way to put it is that when you simple way to put it is that when you inhale, your heart rate speeds up a inhale, your heart rate speeds up a inhale, your heart rate speeds up a little bit, and when you exhale, your little bit, and when you exhale, your little bit, and when you exhale, your heart rate slows down. And this is heart rate slows down. And this is heart rate slows down. And this is because of the movement of the diaphragm because of the movement of the diaphragm because of the movement of the diaphragm in your thoracic cavity, and the in your thoracic cavity, and the in your thoracic cavity, and the physicians and medical types call this physicians and medical types call this physicians and medical types call this respiratory sinus arrhythmia. respiratory sinus arrhythmia. respiratory sinus arrhythmia. There's a mechanism there we could get There's a mechanism there we could get There's a mechanism there we could get into but I don't want to distract us into but I don't want to distract us into but I don't want to distract us from the main theme here. So just from the main theme here. So just from the main theme here. So just remember when you inhale, your heart remember when you inhale, your heart remember when you inhale, your heart rate speeds up and when you exhale, your rate speeds up and when you exhale, your rate speeds up and when you exhale, your heart rate slows down. They looked at heart rate slows down. They looked at heart rate slows down. They looked at breathing, they looked at heart rate in breathing, they looked at heart rate in breathing, they looked at heart rate in different individuals and different individuals and different individuals and listening to a story listening to a story listening to a story produced very consistent gaps between produced very consistent gaps between produced very consistent gaps between the heart rates of the people who are the heart rates of the people who are the heart rates of the people who are listening. Different individuals in the study who Different individuals in the study who Different individuals in the study who were not located in the same place when were not located in the same place when were not located in the same place when they listened to the story, they listened to the story, they listened to the story, listening to the story on different listening to the story on different listening to the story on different times, different days entirely, times, different days entirely, times, different days entirely, had very similar heartbeat patterns had very similar heartbeat patterns had very similar heartbeat patterns listening to this story. listening to this story. listening to this story. What this means for your gratitude What this means for your gratitude What this means for your gratitude practice is that having a story that you practice is that having a story that you practice is that having a story that you can return to can return to can return to over and over again, even if it's not over and over again, even if it's not over and over again, even if it's not the entire story, you're just using the entire story, you're just using the entire story, you're just using the shorthand bullet point version of your shorthand bullet point version of your shorthand bullet point version of your story, will create a perceptible and real shift will create a perceptible and real shift will create a perceptible and real shift in your heartbeat and in your breathing. in your heartbeat and in your breathing. in your heartbeat and in your breathing. And actually that's been demonstrated And actually that's been demonstrated And actually that's been demonstrated over and over now that an effective over and over now that an effective over and over now that an effective gratitude practice is one that can gratitude practice is one that can gratitude practice is one that can rapidly shift not just the activation of rapidly shift not just the activation of rapidly shift not just the activation of these circuits in your brain for these circuits in your brain for these circuits in your brain for prosocial behaviors, but also prosocial behaviors, but also prosocial behaviors, but also activation of particular circuits in activation of particular circuits in activation of particular circuits in your heart and in your lungs and the your heart and in your lungs and the your heart and in your lungs and the other organs of your body such that you other organs of your body such that you other organs of your body such that you can get into a reproducible state of can get into a reproducible state of can get into a reproducible state of gratitude each time. So an important gratitude each time. So an important gratitude each time. So an important component here is that there be some component here is that there be some component here is that there be some element of story. Again, you don't have element of story. Again, you don't have element of story. Again, you don't have to listen to or read or think about the to listen to or read or think about the to listen to or read or think about the entire story start to finish in order to entire story start to finish in order to entire story start to finish in order to extract these benefits and that it be extract these benefits and that it be extract these benefits and that it be the same story over and over. the same story over and over. the same story over and over. And as a consequence, that's going to And as a consequence, that's going to And as a consequence, that's going to shift your physiology into presumably a shift your physiology into presumably a shift your physiology into presumably a more relaxed state because typically more relaxed state because typically more relaxed state because typically that's the one that's associated with that's the one that's associated with that's the one that's associated with gratitude, although gratitude, although gratitude, although activation of these gratitude circuits activation of these gratitude circuits activation of these gratitude circuits has also been shown to create sense of has also been shown to create sense of has also been shown to create sense of awe or sense of joy. There are a few awe or sense of joy. There are a few awe or sense of joy. There are a few studies looking at uh um and kind of studies looking at uh um and kind of studies looking at uh um and kind of parsing the difference between gratitude parsing the difference between gratitude parsing the difference between gratitude and joy. Uh I was able to find a few and joy. Uh I was able to find a few and joy. Uh I was able to find a few studies about that, but uh in general, studies about that, but uh in general, studies about that, but uh in general, they tend to the neural circuits that they tend to the neural circuits that they tend to the neural circuits that are activated tend to overlap quite a are activated tend to overlap quite a are activated tend to overlap quite a lot with those uh that act that create a lot with those uh that act that create a lot with those uh that act that create a sense of gratitude. So, we don't want to sense of gratitude. So, we don't want to sense of gratitude. So, we don't want to split hairs unnecessarily there. The key split hairs unnecessarily there. The key split hairs unnecessarily there. The key thing is that you want to use the same thing is that you want to use the same thing is that you want to use the same story, even if it's your if it's your story, even if it's your if it's your story, even if it's your if it's your own experience or somebody else's, and own experience or somebody else's, and own experience or somebody else's, and keep coming back to it over and over keep coming back to it over and over keep coming back to it over and over again. That makes it a very potent tool again. That makes it a very potent tool again. That makes it a very potent tool that you can get a tremendous amount of that you can get a tremendous amount of that you can get a tremendous amount of benefit from with even as short as 60 benefit from with even as short as 60 benefit from with even as short as 60 seconds of practice. seconds of practice. seconds of practice. Earlier I talked about how you can't lie Earlier I talked about how you can't lie Earlier I talked about how you can't lie to yourself and say, "You know, I'm so to yourself and say, "You know, I'm so to yourself and say, "You know, I'm so grateful for this thing that I actually grateful for this thing that I actually grateful for this thing that I actually hate." And in a moment I'm going to tell hate." And in a moment I'm going to tell hate." And in a moment I'm going to tell you about some scientific data that you about some scientific data that you about some scientific data that proves the statement I made is true. And proves the statement I made is true. And proves the statement I made is true. And that you can't just lie to yourself and that you can't just lie to yourself and that you can't just lie to yourself and derive the benefits of a gratitude derive the benefits of a gratitude derive the benefits of a gratitude practice. The data are also going to point to the The data are also going to point to the The data are also going to point to the fact that if you are giving gratitude, fact that if you are giving gratitude, fact that if you are giving gratitude, not just receiving it, but giving not just receiving it, but giving not just receiving it, but giving gratitude, that too has to be genuine. gratitude, that too has to be genuine. gratitude, that too has to be genuine. There's a really interesting study There's a really interesting study There's a really interesting study published in Scientific Reports, which published in Scientific Reports, which published in Scientific Reports, which is a Nature Research journal. is a Nature Research journal. is a Nature Research journal. Uh the title of it is Neural Responses Uh the title of it is Neural Responses Uh the title of it is Neural Responses to Intention and Benefit Appraisal are to Intention and Benefit Appraisal are to Intention and Benefit Appraisal are Critical in Distinguishing Gratitude and Critical in Distinguishing Gratitude and Critical in Distinguishing Gratitude and Joy. It's a somewhat complicated study, Joy. It's a somewhat complicated study, Joy. It's a somewhat complicated study, so I'm just going to hit on some of the so I'm just going to hit on some of the so I'm just going to hit on some of the high points, but basically what they did high points, but basically what they did high points, but basically what they did is they use functional magnetic is they use functional magnetic is they use functional magnetic resonance imaging. resonance imaging. resonance imaging. So, they could look at brain circuitry So, they could look at brain circuitry So, they could look at brain circuitry activation with very high precision. And activation with very high precision. And activation with very high precision. And they had people receiving money they had people receiving money they had people receiving money in this in this in this in the context of this uh experiment, in the context of this uh experiment, in the context of this uh experiment, and they had some knowledge as to and they had some knowledge as to and they had some knowledge as to whether or not the money that they were whether or not the money that they were whether or not the money that they were receiving was given to them receiving was given to them receiving was given to them wholeheartedly or reluctantly. wholeheartedly or reluctantly. wholeheartedly or reluctantly. And there were a number of different And there were a number of different And there were a number of different variables in the study, including how variables in the study, including how variables in the study, including how much money was given. So, in some cases much money was given. So, in some cases much money was given. So, in some cases it was very little, in other cases it was very little, in other cases it was very little, in other cases it was modest, in other cases it was a lot was modest, in other cases it was a lot was modest, in other cases it was a lot more. And they also varied the extent to which And they also varied the extent to which And they also varied the extent to which the giver of the money, that they called the giver of the money, that they called the giver of the money, that they called the benefactor, was doing it the benefactor, was doing it the benefactor, was doing it wholeheartedly or seemed to be doing it wholeheartedly or seemed to be doing it wholeheartedly or seemed to be doing it somewhat reluctantly. And they looked at somewhat reluctantly. And they looked at somewhat reluctantly. And they looked at whether or not whether or not whether or not the sense of gratitude scaled with the sense of gratitude scaled with the sense of gratitude scaled with the amount of money received amount of money received amount of money received and or and or and or the intention of the benefactor, whether the intention of the benefactor, whether the intention of the benefactor, whether or not the person giving the money was or not the person giving the money was or not the person giving the money was doing it wholeheartedly or reluctantly. doing it wholeheartedly or reluctantly. doing it wholeheartedly or reluctantly. And what's remarkable is that And what's remarkable is that And what's remarkable is that while the amount of money given was a while the amount of money given was a while the amount of money given was a strong component in whether or not strong component in whether or not strong component in whether or not somebody felt that they had received somebody felt that they had received somebody felt that they had received gratitude, which makes sense, you know, gratitude, which makes sense, you know, gratitude, which makes sense, you know, the amount of money is some the amount of money is some the amount of money is some metric of whether or not somebody feels metric of whether or not somebody feels metric of whether or not somebody feels thanked. The stronger variable, the bigger The stronger variable, the bigger The stronger variable, the bigger impact, came from whether or not the impact, came from whether or not the impact, came from whether or not the person giving the money person giving the money person giving the money was giving it with a wholehearted was giving it with a wholehearted was giving it with a wholehearted intention and not a reluctant intention. intention and not a reluctant intention. intention and not a reluctant intention. And of course there was an interaction And of course there was an interaction And of course there was an interaction where the best circumstance, of course, where the best circumstance, of course, where the best circumstance, of course, is where the person received a lot of is where the person received a lot of is where the person received a lot of money from somebody who wholeheartedly money from somebody who wholeheartedly money from somebody who wholeheartedly wanted to give them a lot of money. And wanted to give them a lot of money. And wanted to give them a lot of money. And they did every derivation of this, but they did every derivation of this, but they did every derivation of this, but this is important. This tells us this is important. This tells us this is important. This tells us many things that extend way beyond many things that extend way beyond many things that extend way beyond gratitude practices, which is that gratitude practices, which is that gratitude practices, which is that genuine thanks are what count. Okay, we genuine thanks are what count. Okay, we genuine thanks are what count. Okay, we could probably presume that, but could probably presume that, but could probably presume that, but receiving genuine thanks is also a receiving genuine thanks is also a receiving genuine thanks is also a strong variable in determining whether strong variable in determining whether strong variable in determining whether or not we experience real gratitude or not we experience real gratitude or not we experience real gratitude or whether or not it's empty, regardless of whether or not it's empty, regardless of whether or not it's empty, regardless of the size of a gift. So, this constrains the size of a gift. So, this constrains the size of a gift. So, this constrains our gratitude practices somewhat, but I our gratitude practices somewhat, but I our gratitude practices somewhat, but I think in an interesting and important think in an interesting and important think in an interesting and important way. You can't make this stuff up. You can't You can't make this stuff up. You can't You can't make this stuff up. You can't tell yourself that an experience was tell yourself that an experience was tell yourself that an experience was great or that, um, you know, I got a lot great or that, um, you know, I got a lot great or that, um, you know, I got a lot of money and therefore it justified of money and therefore it justified of money and therefore it justified it, even though, you know, I think that it, even though, you know, I think that it, even though, you know, I think that they give it to me reluctantly or my they give it to me reluctantly or my they give it to me reluctantly or my boss hates me, but they gave me a raise. boss hates me, but they gave me a raise. boss hates me, but they gave me a raise. Um, that stuff stings uh for all the Um, that stuff stings uh for all the Um, that stuff stings uh for all the right reasons because there are circuits right reasons because there are circuits right reasons because there are circuits in our brain and body that are oriented in our brain and body that are oriented in our brain and body that are oriented towards these prosocial interactions. towards these prosocial interactions. towards these prosocial interactions. And in some sense, what we are looking And in some sense, what we are looking And in some sense, what we are looking for as a species, what these circuits for as a species, what these circuits for as a species, what these circuits want, if you will, is to receive things want, if you will, is to receive things want, if you will, is to receive things from people that are giving them from people that are giving them from people that are giving them wholeheartedly. And that tells us that wholeheartedly. And that tells us that wholeheartedly. And that tells us that if we are the giver, that we better if we are the giver, that we better if we are the giver, that we better be giving wholeheartedly or we are be giving wholeheartedly or we are be giving wholeheartedly or we are undermining the sense of gratitude that undermining the sense of gratitude that undermining the sense of gratitude that someone is going to receive from us. So, someone is going to receive from us. So, someone is going to receive from us. So, we are gradually building up the we are gradually building up the we are gradually building up the ultimate gratitude practice based on ultimate gratitude practice based on ultimate gratitude practice based on the variety of scientific literature the variety of scientific literature the variety of scientific literature that's out there. And I know that many that's out there. And I know that many that's out there. And I know that many people are probably interested in people are probably interested in people are probably interested in developing a gratitude practice that has developing a gratitude practice that has developing a gratitude practice that has long-lasting, maybe even permanent long-lasting, maybe even permanent long-lasting, maybe even permanent positive effects on their neural positive effects on their neural positive effects on their neural circuitry. So, with that in mind, I want to turn our with that in mind, I want to turn our with that in mind, I want to turn our attention to a really interesting study. attention to a really interesting study. attention to a really interesting study. It's entitled Effects of Gratitude It's entitled Effects of Gratitude It's entitled Effects of Gratitude Meditation on Neural Network Functional Meditation on Neural Network Functional Meditation on Neural Network Functional Connectivity and Brain-Heart Coupling. Connectivity and Brain-Heart Coupling. Connectivity and Brain-Heart Coupling. And to make a long story short and a lot And to make a long story short and a lot And to make a long story short and a lot simpler than that title, simpler than that title, simpler than that title, repeated gratitude practice changes the way that gratitude practice changes the way that gratitude practice changes the way that your brain circuits work. And it also your brain circuits work. And it also your brain circuits work. And it also changes the way in which your heart and changes the way in which your heart and changes the way in which your heart and your brain interact. your brain interact. your brain interact. You're familiar with the fact that your You're familiar with the fact that your You're familiar with the fact that your brain controls your heart because you brain controls your heart because you brain controls your heart because you could be stressed about something that's could be stressed about something that's could be stressed about something that's perceived with your brain, and then your perceived with your brain, and then your perceived with your brain, and then your heart rate will speed up. You're heart rate will speed up. You're heart rate will speed up. You're probably also familiar with the fact probably also familiar with the fact probably also familiar with the fact that if your heart rate speeds up for that if your heart rate speeds up for that if your heart rate speeds up for some reason or no reason, you're some reason or no reason, you're some reason or no reason, you're probably think, "Well, what's making my probably think, "Well, what's making my probably think, "Well, what's making my heart rate speed up?" That's because heart rate speed up?" That's because heart rate speed up?" That's because they, the brain and the heart are they, the brain and the heart are they, the brain and the heart are reciprocally inner- innervated, as we reciprocally inner- innervated, as we reciprocally inner- innervated, as we say. They're talking to one another in say. They're talking to one another in say. They're talking to one another in both directions. It's a two-way highway. both directions. It's a two-way highway. both directions. It's a two-way highway. This study looked at changes in This study looked at changes in This study looked at changes in so-called functional connectivity within so-called functional connectivity within so-called functional connectivity within the brain and between the brain and the brain and between the brain and the brain and between the brain and the heart in response to gratitude practices. in response to gratitude practices. in response to gratitude practices. And as a control, they used what I think And as a control, they used what I think And as a control, they used what I think is very interesting, a resentment is very interesting, a resentment is very interesting, a resentment intervention. Uh, I think resentment is intervention. Uh, I think resentment is intervention. Uh, I think resentment is a is a an apt control, uh, and quite a is a an apt control, uh, and quite a is a an apt control, uh, and quite different than gratitude. different than gratitude. different than gratitude. To make a long story short, what they To make a long story short, what they To make a long story short, what they found is that a repeated gratitude found is that a repeated gratitude found is that a repeated gratitude practice could change the resting state practice could change the resting state practice could change the resting state functional connectivity in emotion and functional connectivity in emotion and functional connectivity in emotion and motivation related brain regions. If I motivation related brain regions. If I motivation related brain regions. If I haven't mentioned a strong enough haven't mentioned a strong enough haven't mentioned a strong enough incentive for doing a regular gratitude incentive for doing a regular gratitude incentive for doing a regular gratitude practice until now, practice until now, practice until now, this is definitely the one to pay this is definitely the one to pay this is definitely the one to pay attention to. attention to. attention to. Because what they found was a regular Because what they found was a regular Because what they found was a regular gratitude practice gratitude practice gratitude practice could shift the functional connectivity could shift the functional connectivity could shift the functional connectivity of emotion pathways in ways that made of emotion pathways in ways that made of emotion pathways in ways that made anxiety and fear circuits less likely to anxiety and fear circuits less likely to anxiety and fear circuits less likely to be active and circuits for feelings of be active and circuits for feelings of be active and circuits for feelings of well-being, but also motivation to be well-being, but also motivation to be well-being, but also motivation to be much more active. I find that remarkable much more active. I find that remarkable much more active. I find that remarkable and important because a number of people and important because a number of people and important because a number of people struggle with issues of motivation. A struggle with issues of motivation. A struggle with issues of motivation. A lot of people who are highly motivated lot of people who are highly motivated lot of people who are highly motivated also have issues with anxiety and fear. also have issues with anxiety and fear. also have issues with anxiety and fear. And so, this study really points to the And so, this study really points to the And so, this study really points to the fact that it's a two-fer. If you have a fact that it's a two-fer. If you have a fact that it's a two-fer. If you have a good gratitude practice and you repeat good gratitude practice and you repeat good gratitude practice and you repeat it regularly, you reduce the fear it regularly, you reduce the fear it regularly, you reduce the fear anxiety circuits. You anxiety circuits. You anxiety circuits. You increase the efficacy of the positive increase the efficacy of the positive increase the efficacy of the positive emotion feel-good circuits and the emotion feel-good circuits and the emotion feel-good circuits and the circuits associated with motivation and circuits associated with motivation and circuits associated with motivation and pursuits are actually enhanced as well. pursuits are actually enhanced as well. pursuits are actually enhanced as well. So, that's a very strong incentive to So, that's a very strong incentive to So, that's a very strong incentive to uh, in have a gratitude practice and one uh, in have a gratitude practice and one uh, in have a gratitude practice and one that you use regularly. We'll talk about that you use regularly. We'll talk about that you use regularly. We'll talk about how regularly in just a moment. how regularly in just a moment. how regularly in just a moment. I don't want to go into too many details I don't want to go into too many details I don't want to go into too many details of the study, although we will put a of the study, although we will put a of the study, although we will put a reference to it if you like. It includes reference to it if you like. It includes reference to it if you like. It includes a lot of fMRI data, imaging data of a lot of fMRI data, imaging data of a lot of fMRI data, imaging data of different brain areas, many tables different brain areas, many tables different brain areas, many tables and examples of matrices of before and examples of matrices of before and examples of matrices of before and after gratitude, after resentment, uh, after gratitude, after resentment, uh, after gratitude, after resentment, uh, etc. You do indeed have circuits in your etc. You do indeed have circuits in your etc. You do indeed have circuits in your brain for resentment, whether you like brain for resentment, whether you like brain for resentment, whether you like it or not. it or not. it or not. Um, we all do. And uh, some people just Um, we all do. And uh, some people just Um, we all do. And uh, some people just those circuits are more robust than those circuits are more robust than those circuits are more robust than others. But the remarkable thing is one others. But the remarkable thing is one others. But the remarkable thing is one can shift can shift can shift these circuits in the direction that I these circuits in the direction that I these circuits in the direction that I think most people would like, which is think most people would like, which is think most people would like, which is more sense of well-being and motivation more sense of well-being and motivation more sense of well-being and motivation and less uh, resentment and fear. and less uh, resentment and fear. and less uh, resentment and fear. Literally. And what's really cool about Literally. And what's really cool about Literally. And what's really cool about this study also is that this study also is that this study also is that the interventions are only 5 minutes the interventions are only 5 minutes the interventions are only 5 minutes long. It's incredible. 5 minutes long. It's incredible. 5 minutes long. It's incredible. 5 minutes long. And so as we start to build out our And so as we start to build out our And so as we start to build out our ideal gratitude practice, we know that ideal gratitude practice, we know that ideal gratitude practice, we know that it has to have certain features. First it has to have certain features. First it has to have certain features. First of all, it has to be grounded in a of all, it has to be grounded in a of all, it has to be grounded in a story, probably a story that you've story, probably a story that you've story, probably a story that you've heard in its entirety at least once, but heard in its entirety at least once, but heard in its entirety at least once, but then you can have a shorthand version then you can have a shorthand version then you can have a shorthand version that's so called bullet points that I that's so called bullet points that I that's so called bullet points that I talked about before that allow you to talked about before that allow you to talked about before that allow you to drop into that story where the emotional drop into that story where the emotional drop into that story where the emotional associations with that story. So you associations with that story. So you associations with that story. So you don't have to listen to the whole story don't have to listen to the whole story don't have to listen to the whole story each time. That story should be one in each time. That story should be one in each time. That story should be one in which you are genuinely being thanked which you are genuinely being thanked which you are genuinely being thanked for something and it made you feel good. for something and it made you feel good. for something and it made you feel good. Or it could be a story about someone Or it could be a story about someone Or it could be a story about someone else genuinely expressing thanks, okay? else genuinely expressing thanks, okay? else genuinely expressing thanks, okay? Based on this Based on this Based on this description of the gratitude practices description of the gratitude practices description of the gratitude practices that we talked about earlier. that we talked about earlier. that we talked about earlier. Your gratitude practice can be very Your gratitude practice can be very Your gratitude practice can be very brief. I mean, it can be as brief as 1 brief. I mean, it can be as brief as 1 brief. I mean, it can be as brief as 1 minute, 60 seconds, or 5 minutes, which minute, 60 seconds, or 5 minutes, which minute, 60 seconds, or 5 minutes, which still seems very brief to me, although still seems very brief to me, although still seems very brief to me, although in these studies they were getting these in these studies they were getting these in these studies they were getting these really major effects just from 5 minutes really major effects just from 5 minutes really major effects just from 5 minutes of gratitude practice. of gratitude practice. of gratitude practice. Some of these papers involve Some of these papers involve Some of these papers involve people doing some people doing some people doing some focusing on their breathing and calming focusing on their breathing and calming focusing on their breathing and calming themselves as they go into the gratitude practice, as they go into the gratitude practice, as they go into the gratitude practice, but that's within the 5-minute block. So but that's within the 5-minute block. So but that's within the 5-minute block. So if you decide that you're going to do a if you decide that you're going to do a if you decide that you're going to do a gratitude practice that involves a gratitude practice that involves a gratitude practice that involves first, you know, I don't doing some calming you know, I don't doing some calming you know, I don't doing some calming breathing, exhale emphasized breathing breathing, exhale emphasized breathing breathing, exhale emphasized breathing for instance, or physiological sighs, for instance, or physiological sighs, for instance, or physiological sighs, things I've talked about before on this things I've talked about before on this things I've talked about before on this podcast that can help calm you down cuz podcast that can help calm you down cuz podcast that can help calm you down cuz they have a lot of exhales, which you they have a lot of exhales, which you they have a lot of exhales, which you now know slows your heart rate down, and now know slows your heart rate down, and now know slows your heart rate down, and then doing your gratitude practice, then doing your gratitude practice, then doing your gratitude practice, that's fine. that's fine. that's fine. It's actually not necessary, but a lot It's actually not necessary, but a lot It's actually not necessary, but a lot of these studies used that. I think once of these studies used that. I think once of these studies used that. I think once a narrative has been set, you've heard a narrative has been set, you've heard a narrative has been set, you've heard the story and it has meaning for you or the story and it has meaning for you or the story and it has meaning for you or you have a recollection of a story where you have a recollection of a story where you have a recollection of a story where you were genuinely thanked, then I think you were genuinely thanked, then I think you were genuinely thanked, then I think just 60 seconds or maybe 120 seconds just 60 seconds or maybe 120 seconds just 60 seconds or maybe 120 seconds should be sufficient. Then the question should be sufficient. Then the question should be sufficient. Then the question becomes how often to repeat this becomes how often to repeat this becomes how often to repeat this gratitude practice. gratitude practice. gratitude practice. That's not exactly clear from the That's not exactly clear from the That's not exactly clear from the existing literature. I can't point to existing literature. I can't point to existing literature. I can't point to any one study that says five times a any one study that says five times a any one study that says five times a week or four times a week. So, I'm going week or four times a week. So, I'm going week or four times a week. So, I'm going to throw out a number, to throw out a number, to throw out a number, uh which is three times a week. And then uh which is three times a week. And then uh which is three times a week. And then people will ask, "Well, when should I do people will ask, "Well, when should I do people will ask, "Well, when should I do that gratitude practice?" And I'll tell that gratitude practice?" And I'll tell that gratitude practice?" And I'll tell you uh what I tell most everybody about you uh what I tell most everybody about you uh what I tell most everybody about most every practice with a few most every practice with a few most every practice with a few exceptions, which is the best time of exceptions, which is the best time of exceptions, which is the best time of day to do this practice is when you day to do this practice is when you day to do this practice is when you first wake up in the morning first wake up in the morning first wake up in the morning or before you go to sleep at night or before you go to sleep at night or before you go to sleep at night or any time of day. any time of day. any time of day. So, we've talked about some of the So, we've talked about some of the So, we've talked about some of the neural circuitry changes associated with neural circuitry changes associated with neural circuitry changes associated with a regular gratitude practice. And I a regular gratitude practice. And I a regular gratitude practice. And I should mention that there's an should mention that there's an should mention that there's an additional neural circuitry shift that additional neural circuitry shift that additional neural circuitry shift that occurs. It relates to a structure that I It relates to a structure that I It relates to a structure that I mentioned just briefly earlier, which is mentioned just briefly earlier, which is mentioned just briefly earlier, which is the so-called ACC or anterior cingulate the so-called ACC or anterior cingulate the so-called ACC or anterior cingulate cortex. This is an area of the brain cortex. This is an area of the brain cortex. This is an area of the brain that has several functions, but more and that has several functions, but more and that has several functions, but more and more data are pointing to the fact that more data are pointing to the fact that more data are pointing to the fact that the ACC is actually involved in the ACC is actually involved in the ACC is actually involved in empathy and is involved in understanding empathy and is involved in understanding empathy and is involved in understanding the emotional states of others in the emotional states of others in the emotional states of others in general, even if it doesn't evoke a general, even if it doesn't evoke a general, even if it doesn't evoke a sense of empathy. And there are several sense of empathy. And there are several sense of empathy. And there are several studies that point to the fact that in studies that point to the fact that in studies that point to the fact that in humans who have a regular gratitude humans who have a regular gratitude humans who have a regular gratitude practice, the ACC becomes more robustly practice, the ACC becomes more robustly practice, the ACC becomes more robustly engaged uh even with these very brief engaged uh even with these very brief engaged uh even with these very brief gratitude practices. Uh we actually have gratitude practices. Uh we actually have gratitude practices. Uh we actually have a project in our lab. a project in our lab. a project in our lab. Uh this is actually done in animal Uh this is actually done in animal Uh this is actually done in animal models with uh models with uh models with uh where animals observe other animals where animals observe other animals where animals observe other animals experiencing uh certain emotional states. And one of the certain emotional states. And one of the certain emotional states. And one of the brain areas that we've identified as brain areas that we've identified as brain areas that we've identified as important for this uh it's kind of a important for this uh it's kind of a important for this uh it's kind of a primordial form of empathy cuz we really primordial form of empathy cuz we really primordial form of empathy cuz we really don't know what these uh mice are don't know what these uh mice are don't know what these uh mice are thinking. Uh we work on humans. In thinking. Uh we work on humans. In thinking. Uh we work on humans. In the case where we work on humans, of the case where we work on humans, of the case where we work on humans, of course, we ask them and they tell us uh course, we ask them and they tell us uh course, we ask them and they tell us uh what they think they're thinking. Uh what they think they're thinking. Uh what they think they're thinking. Uh with the mice, we ask them, but they with the mice, we ask them, but they with the mice, we ask them, but they don't tell us much of anything don't tell us much of anything don't tell us much of anything interesting. Instead, we measure a interesting. Instead, we measure a interesting. Instead, we measure a number of physiological signals. But, number of physiological signals. But, number of physiological signals. But, the important point is that the ACC, the important point is that the ACC, the important point is that the ACC, the anterior cingulate cortex, seems to the anterior cingulate cortex, seems to the anterior cingulate cortex, seems to be an important hub for the be an important hub for the be an important hub for the generation and execution of empathy at generation and execution of empathy at generation and execution of empathy at as it relates to feelings and empathic as it relates to feelings and empathic as it relates to feelings and empathic behaviors, altruistic behaviors of behaviors, altruistic behaviors of behaviors, altruistic behaviors of animals helping animals and humans animals helping animals and humans animals helping animals and humans helping other humans. We see this in the helping other humans. We see this in the helping other humans. We see this in the animal models, we see this in humans. animal models, we see this in humans. animal models, we see this in humans. So, if you want to be a more empathic So, if you want to be a more empathic So, if you want to be a more empathic person, a gratitude practice is also person, a gratitude practice is also person, a gratitude practice is also going to be very effective for that, it going to be very effective for that, it going to be very effective for that, it appears, especially using this narrative appears, especially using this narrative appears, especially using this narrative type approach where you are using type approach where you are using type approach where you are using someone else's narrative of receiving someone else's narrative of receiving someone else's narrative of receiving gratitude as a way to tap into your own gratitude as a way to tap into your own gratitude as a way to tap into your own sense of gratitude. Thus far, we've sense of gratitude. Thus far, we've sense of gratitude. Thus far, we've mainly talked about the effects of mainly talked about the effects of mainly talked about the effects of gratitude on neural circuit activation gratitude on neural circuit activation gratitude on neural circuit activation and changes, a little bit about some of and changes, a little bit about some of and changes, a little bit about some of the changes that are happening in terms the changes that are happening in terms the changes that are happening in terms of the body, heart rate, and breathing, of the body, heart rate, and breathing, of the body, heart rate, and breathing, and so forth, but we haven't talked a and so forth, but we haven't talked a and so forth, but we haven't talked a lot yet about the changes in health lot yet about the changes in health lot yet about the changes in health metrics, in things like inflammation or metrics, in things like inflammation or metrics, in things like inflammation or reductions in inflammation, reductions in inflammation, reductions in inflammation, and immunity and things of that sort. and immunity and things of that sort. and immunity and things of that sort. So, with that in mind, I'd like to So, with that in mind, I'd like to So, with that in mind, I'd like to describe the results of a really describe the results of a really describe the results of a really interesting recent study that was interesting recent study that was interesting recent study that was published in the journal Brain, published in the journal Brain, published in the journal Brain, Behavior, and Immunity. This was Behavior, and Immunity. This was Behavior, and Immunity. This was published 2021. The title of this of the published 2021. The title of this of the published 2021. The title of this of the study is exploring neural mechanisms of study is exploring neural mechanisms of study is exploring neural mechanisms of the health benefits of gratitude in the health benefits of gratitude in the health benefits of gratitude in women, a randomized control trial. The women, a randomized control trial. The women, a randomized control trial. The first author is Haslett. first author is Haslett. first author is Haslett. And basically, what this paper showed And basically, what this paper showed And basically, what this paper showed was that was that was that women who had a regular gratitude women who had a regular gratitude women who had a regular gratitude practice of the sort that we've been practice of the sort that we've been practice of the sort that we've been talking about up until now, talking about up until now, talking about up until now, showed reductions in amygdala activity, a brain reductions in amygdala activity, a brain reductions in amygdala activity, a brain area associated with threat detection, a area associated with threat detection, a area associated with threat detection, a intimate part of the fear network in the intimate part of the fear network in the intimate part of the fear network in the brain. So, reductions in brain. So, reductions in brain. So, reductions in amygdala activation and amygdala activation and amygdala activation and large reductions in the large reductions in the large reductions in the production of something called TNF production of something called TNF production of something called TNF alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and IL-6, interleukin 6. Now, if you happen IL-6, interleukin 6. Now, if you happen IL-6, interleukin 6. Now, if you happen to have listened to the episode that I to have listened to the episode that I to have listened to the episode that I did on activating your immune system and did on activating your immune system and did on activating your immune system and immune function, you heard about TNF immune function, you heard about TNF immune function, you heard about TNF alpha and IL-6. TNF alpha and IL-6 are alpha and IL-6. TNF alpha and IL-6 are alpha and IL-6. TNF alpha and IL-6 are inflammatory cytokines. These are inflammatory cytokines. These are inflammatory cytokines. These are chemicals that exist in your body and chemicals that exist in your body and chemicals that exist in your body and that are released from cells when there that are released from cells when there that are released from cells when there is damage or kind of a systemic stress, is damage or kind of a systemic stress, is damage or kind of a systemic stress, when your system is in duress. And in when your system is in duress. And in when your system is in duress. And in the short term, they can be beneficial. the short term, they can be beneficial. the short term, they can be beneficial. They can call in signals for wound They can call in signals for wound They can call in signals for wound healing and repair of cells, etc. But healing and repair of cells, etc. But healing and repair of cells, etc. But you don't want TNF alpha and IL-6 levels you don't want TNF alpha and IL-6 levels you don't want TNF alpha and IL-6 levels to be too high and you don't want those to be too high and you don't want those to be too high and you don't want those levels to be up for too long. And so, levels to be up for too long. And so, levels to be up for too long. And so, this study is really nice because they this study is really nice because they this study is really nice because they showed significant effects in reducing showed significant effects in reducing showed significant effects in reducing TNF alpha and IL-6 in response to a TNF alpha and IL-6 in response to a TNF alpha and IL-6 in response to a gratitude practice. And because they gratitude practice. And because they gratitude practice. And because they also observed reductions in amygdala also observed reductions in amygdala also observed reductions in amygdala activation, this area associated with threat this area associated with threat this area associated with threat detection and fear, detection and fear, detection and fear, it's likely it's likely it's likely and I should emphasize likely cuz I and I should emphasize likely cuz I and I should emphasize likely cuz I don't know that the direction of the don't know that the direction of the don't know that the direction of the effect is that there are neural circuit effect is that there are neural circuit effect is that there are neural circuit changes which in turn shift the degree changes which in turn shift the degree changes which in turn shift the degree to which these inflammatory cytokines to which these inflammatory cytokines to which these inflammatory cytokines are released in the body. Although, for are released in the body. Although, for are released in the body. Although, for all I know, it could be the other way, all I know, it could be the other way, all I know, it could be the other way, too. It could be that having a gratitude too. It could be that having a gratitude too. It could be that having a gratitude practice shifts something about heart practice shifts something about heart practice shifts something about heart rate and breathing which in turn shifts rate and breathing which in turn shifts rate and breathing which in turn shifts the or lowers the amount of TNF alpha the or lowers the amount of TNF alpha the or lowers the amount of TNF alpha and IL-6 and that in turn reduces and IL-6 and that in turn reduces and IL-6 and that in turn reduces activation of the amygdala. We don't activation of the amygdala. We don't activation of the amygdala. We don't really know the direction of the effect really know the direction of the effect really know the direction of the effect the effect, excuse me, but if I had to the effect, excuse me, but if I had to the effect, excuse me, but if I had to speculate, I would speculate that it was speculate, I would speculate that it was speculate, I would speculate that it was a shift in neural circuitry that led to a shift in neural circuitry that led to a shift in neural circuitry that led to a change in the circuits of the body. a change in the circuits of the body. a change in the circuits of the body. And another interesting aspect of this And another interesting aspect of this And another interesting aspect of this study is that the reductions in amygdala study is that the reductions in amygdala study is that the reductions in amygdala activation and the reductions in TNF activation and the reductions in TNF activation and the reductions in TNF alpha and IL-6 were very rapid. They alpha and IL-6 were very rapid. They alpha and IL-6 were very rapid. They occurred almost immediately after the gratitude almost immediately after the gratitude almost immediately after the gratitude practice was completed. And even though practice was completed. And even though practice was completed. And even though that study was performed exclusively on that study was performed exclusively on that study was performed exclusively on female subjects, female subjects, female subjects, based on the biology and circuitry of based on the biology and circuitry of based on the biology and circuitry of the amygdala and the biology of TNF the amygdala and the biology of TNF the amygdala and the biology of TNF alpha and IL-6 performing this alpha and IL-6 performing this alpha and IL-6 performing this inflammatory role in both men and women, inflammatory role in both men and women, inflammatory role in both men and women, I don't see any reason why the results I don't see any reason why the results I don't see any reason why the results of that study wouldn't pertain to both of that study wouldn't pertain to both of that study wouldn't pertain to both men and women. men and women. men and women. So, what about the chemistry associated So, what about the chemistry associated So, what about the chemistry associated with gratitude? Are there certain with gratitude? Are there certain with gratitude? Are there certain chemicals in our brain or that we could chemicals in our brain or that we could chemicals in our brain or that we could enhance in our brain that would enhance in our brain that would enhance in our brain that would enhance our gratitude practice? our gratitude practice? our gratitude practice? Indeed, there are. And earlier I Indeed, there are. And earlier I Indeed, there are. And earlier I mentioned the chemical, the mentioned the chemical, the mentioned the chemical, the neuromodulator, serotonin as having a neuromodulator, serotonin as having a neuromodulator, serotonin as having a powerful influence on the activation of powerful influence on the activation of powerful influence on the activation of neural circuits associated with neural circuits associated with neural circuits associated with prosocial behaviors and gratitude and prosocial behaviors and gratitude and prosocial behaviors and gratitude and other sort of feel-good behaviors. other sort of feel-good behaviors. other sort of feel-good behaviors. To make a long story short, To make a long story short, To make a long story short, neuromodulators like dopamine and neuromodulators like dopamine and neuromodulators like dopamine and epinephrine and norepinephrine tend to epinephrine and norepinephrine tend to epinephrine and norepinephrine tend to place us into a state of exteroception, place us into a state of exteroception, place us into a state of exteroception, meaning a state of observing things and meaning a state of observing things and meaning a state of observing things and focusing on things outside the immediate focusing on things outside the immediate focusing on things outside the immediate reach of our body and confines of our reach of our body and confines of our reach of our body and confines of our skin. They tend to put us in pursuit or skin. They tend to put us in pursuit or skin. They tend to put us in pursuit or in thinking about things out in the in thinking about things out in the in thinking about things out in the future or out away from our physical future or out away from our physical future or out away from our physical body. Whereas the neuromodulator serotonin and Whereas the neuromodulator serotonin and Whereas the neuromodulator serotonin and some of the associated pathways like some of the associated pathways like some of the associated pathways like oxytocin and other neurochemicals oxytocin and other neurochemicals oxytocin and other neurochemicals tend to, I want to emphasize tend to be tend to, I want to emphasize tend to be tend to, I want to emphasize tend to be associated with states that are about associated with states that are about associated with states that are about contentment with what we have within the contentment with what we have within the contentment with what we have within the confines of our body and our immediate confines of our body and our immediate confines of our body and our immediate experience. So, they're not so much experience. So, they're not so much experience. So, they're not so much about pursuit, but about gratitude and about pursuit, but about gratitude and about pursuit, but about gratitude and about appreciation for what we already about appreciation for what we already about appreciation for what we already have. I'd be remiss if I didn't therefore I'd be remiss if I didn't therefore I'd be remiss if I didn't therefore point out that point out that point out that if one were to shift their chemistry if one were to shift their chemistry if one were to shift their chemistry toward having higher levels of toward having higher levels of toward having higher levels of serotonin, you would serotonin, you would serotonin, you would by all logic experience heightened by all logic experience heightened by all logic experience heightened levels of gratitude. And indeed, some levels of gratitude. And indeed, some levels of gratitude. And indeed, some people do this. They will take compounds people do this. They will take compounds people do this. They will take compounds that increase serotonin. There are a that increase serotonin. There are a that increase serotonin. There are a number of compounds out there. As you number of compounds out there. As you number of compounds out there. As you know, I'm certainly not suggesting know, I'm certainly not suggesting know, I'm certainly not suggesting people do that. A couple of the people do that. A couple of the people do that. A couple of the supplement-based legal over-the-counter supplement-based legal over-the-counter supplement-based legal over-the-counter approaches to this approaches to this approaches to this are things like 5-HTP, which is a are things like 5-HTP, which is a are things like 5-HTP, which is a precursor to serotonin. Some people will precursor to serotonin. Some people will precursor to serotonin. Some people will take 5-HTP to try and enhance their take 5-HTP to try and enhance their take 5-HTP to try and enhance their sleep. I'm not a fan of doing that sleep. I'm not a fan of doing that sleep. I'm not a fan of doing that personally. I've talked about this in the sleep I've talked about this in the sleep I've talked about this in the sleep episodes, but episodes, but episodes, but the state that we call sleep has a very the state that we call sleep has a very the state that we call sleep has a very complex and important architecture as it complex and important architecture as it complex and important architecture as it relates to neurochemicals and by taking relates to neurochemicals and by taking relates to neurochemicals and by taking serotonin by supplement or by serotonin by supplement or by serotonin by supplement or by stimulating serotonin release by stimulating serotonin release by stimulating serotonin release by supplement with 5-HTP or with tryptophan supplement with 5-HTP or with tryptophan supplement with 5-HTP or with tryptophan which is an amino acid precursor to which is an amino acid precursor to which is an amino acid precursor to serotonin, one can run into the to serotonin, one can run into the to serotonin, one can run into the problem of disrupting the normal problem of disrupting the normal problem of disrupting the normal architecture of sleep cycles throughout architecture of sleep cycles throughout architecture of sleep cycles throughout the night. I experienced that as if I've the night. I experienced that as if I've the night. I experienced that as if I've taken 5-HTP or tryptophan, I fall asleep taken 5-HTP or tryptophan, I fall asleep taken 5-HTP or tryptophan, I fall asleep very deeply but then I wake up 3 hours very deeply but then I wake up 3 hours very deeply but then I wake up 3 hours later and I can't fall asleep at all and later and I can't fall asleep at all and later and I can't fall asleep at all and actually it sometimes even messes up my actually it sometimes even messes up my actually it sometimes even messes up my sleep the subsequent night. Some people sleep the subsequent night. Some people sleep the subsequent night. Some people are not so sensitive to 5-HTP and are not so sensitive to 5-HTP and are not so sensitive to 5-HTP and tryptophan and they actually really like tryptophan and they actually really like tryptophan and they actually really like it. So again, you have to talk to your it. So again, you have to talk to your it. So again, you have to talk to your doctor to decide what's right for you. doctor to decide what's right for you. doctor to decide what's right for you. You're responsible for your health, not You're responsible for your health, not You're responsible for your health, not me and you have to determine what works me and you have to determine what works me and you have to determine what works for you. Everyone's slightly individual. for you. Everyone's slightly individual. for you. Everyone's slightly individual. But one could imagine enhancing their amount one could imagine enhancing their amount one could imagine enhancing their amount of serotonin in their brain and body by of serotonin in their brain and body by of serotonin in their brain and body by taking 5-HTP or tryptophan before a taking 5-HTP or tryptophan before a taking 5-HTP or tryptophan before a gratitude practice. That seems a little gratitude practice. That seems a little gratitude practice. That seems a little bit extreme given that the gratitude bit extreme given that the gratitude bit extreme given that the gratitude practice is only about a minute to 5 practice is only about a minute to 5 practice is only about a minute to 5 minutes long on a regular basis, but minutes long on a regular basis, but minutes long on a regular basis, but there may be instances in which you're there may be instances in which you're there may be instances in which you're really trying to amplify these circuitry really trying to amplify these circuitry really trying to amplify these circuitry in the brain and body that are in the brain and body that are in the brain and body that are associated with gratitude and therefore associated with gratitude and therefore associated with gratitude and therefore that might be something that you want to that might be something that you want to that might be something that you want to explore. There's a new compound that's out there, There's a new compound that's out there, There's a new compound that's out there, a legal over-the-counter compound. a legal over-the-counter compound. a legal over-the-counter compound. At least it's uh legal in the United At least it's uh legal in the United At least it's uh legal in the United States. I don't know about overseas. And States. I don't know about overseas. And States. I don't know about overseas. And um that's a compound called kanna, k a n um that's a compound called kanna, k a n um that's a compound called kanna, k a n a. Uh it's an interesting compound. It n a. Uh it's an interesting compound. It n a. Uh it's an interesting compound. It goes by another name as well uh which is goes by another name as well uh which is goes by another name as well uh which is and I'm going to mispronounce this and I and I'm going to mispronounce this and I and I'm going to mispronounce this and I apologize. This is sceletium tortuosum. apologize. This is sceletium tortuosum. apologize. This is sceletium tortuosum. Please see our uh timestamps if you want Please see our uh timestamps if you want Please see our uh timestamps if you want to see the spelling of that. to see the spelling of that. to see the spelling of that. Um but I'll just call it kanna for uh by Um but I'll just call it kanna for uh by Um but I'll just call it kanna for uh by its other name for short. It's an herb its other name for short. It's an herb its other name for short. It's an herb that um is traditionally chewed uh prior that um is traditionally chewed uh prior that um is traditionally chewed uh prior to stressing endeavors is how it's to stressing endeavors is how it's to stressing endeavors is how it's described on examine.com. But I looked described on examine.com. But I looked described on examine.com. But I looked at some of the studies on this. It's at some of the studies on this. It's at some of the studies on this. It's kind of interesting. It um very likely kind of interesting. It um very likely kind of interesting. It um very likely increases the amount of serotonin in the increases the amount of serotonin in the increases the amount of serotonin in the body and pretty potently. Um it is body and pretty potently. Um it is body and pretty potently. Um it is generally taken in dosages of anywhere generally taken in dosages of anywhere generally taken in dosages of anywhere from 25 to 50 mg and it creates from 25 to 50 mg and it creates from 25 to 50 mg and it creates a kind of a prosocial a kind of a prosocial a kind of a prosocial gratitude enhancing or I should say gratitude enhancing or I should say gratitude enhancing or I should say gratitude circuitry prosocial neural gratitude circuitry prosocial neural gratitude circuitry prosocial neural circuitry enhancing circuitry enhancing circuitry enhancing effect because of the ways that it effect because of the ways that it effect because of the ways that it interacts with the serotonergic pathways interacts with the serotonergic pathways interacts with the serotonergic pathways of the brain. of the brain. of the brain. So, it also has another name. It's So, it also has another name. It's So, it also has another name. It's sometimes called Zembrin, z e m b r i n. sometimes called Zembrin, z e m b r i n. sometimes called Zembrin, z e m b r i n. Again, I'm not suggesting that people Again, I'm not suggesting that people Again, I'm not suggesting that people run out and take this stuff. It's but run out and take this stuff. It's but run out and take this stuff. It's but there is an emerging practice there is an emerging practice there is an emerging practice of people using Zembrin, Sceletium of people using Zembrin, Sceletium of people using Zembrin, Sceletium tortuosum, also called kanna, k a n a, tortuosum, also called kanna, k a n a, tortuosum, also called kanna, k a n a, in order to enhance the states that are in order to enhance the states that are in order to enhance the states that are about comfort and pleasure with what one has comfort and pleasure with what one has comfort and pleasure with what one has in their immediate sphere of experience. in their immediate sphere of experience. in their immediate sphere of experience. And so, one could imagine, And so, one could imagine, And so, one could imagine, if it's safe for you and right for you if it's safe for you and right for you if it's safe for you and right for you and legal where you live, and legal where you live, and legal where you live, in enhancing serotonin by taking kanna in enhancing serotonin by taking kanna in enhancing serotonin by taking kanna and then doing your gratitude practice. and then doing your gratitude practice. and then doing your gratitude practice. What's the logic behind that? Well, it What's the logic behind that? Well, it What's the logic behind that? Well, it you know, it you know, it you know, it often times we hear about supplements often times we hear about supplements often times we hear about supplements and pharmacology for quote unquote and pharmacology for quote unquote and pharmacology for quote unquote increasing plasticity or opening increasing plasticity or opening increasing plasticity or opening plasticity. You know, if I had a dollar plasticity. You know, if I had a dollar plasticity. You know, if I had a dollar for every time someone said, "I hear for every time someone said, "I hear for every time someone said, "I hear that such and such opens plasticity." that such and such opens plasticity." that such and such opens plasticity." Well, indeed there are molecules Well, indeed there are molecules Well, indeed there are molecules associated with the thing that we call associated with the thing that we call associated with the thing that we call neuroplasticity, but neuroplasticity is neuroplasticity, but neuroplasticity is neuroplasticity, but neuroplasticity is not an event. It's a process. Meaning it not an event. It's a process. Meaning it not an event. It's a process. Meaning it has many, many steps. It occurs during has many, many steps. It occurs during has many, many steps. It occurs during wakefulness. It's consolidated during wakefulness. It's consolidated during wakefulness. It's consolidated during sleep and so forth. sleep and so forth. sleep and so forth. Taking a substance that increases a Taking a substance that increases a Taking a substance that increases a neurochemical in your brain will likely, neurochemical in your brain will likely, neurochemical in your brain will likely, provided it's the right substance and provided it's the right substance and provided it's the right substance and it's the right it's the right it's the right practice, will likely enhance the practice, will likely enhance the practice, will likely enhance the amplitude or the intensity of that amplitude or the intensity of that amplitude or the intensity of that practice and make it a more potent form practice and make it a more potent form practice and make it a more potent form of inducing neuroplasticity. Meaning it of inducing neuroplasticity. Meaning it of inducing neuroplasticity. Meaning it will create longer lasting or more robust create longer lasting or more robust create longer lasting or more robust brain changes than if one hadn't brain changes than if one hadn't brain changes than if one hadn't increased their chemistry in this pharma increased their chemistry in this pharma increased their chemistry in this pharma way, this way of taking something. But way, this way of taking something. But way, this way of taking something. But that doesn't necessarily mean that you that doesn't necessarily mean that you that doesn't necessarily mean that you couldn't get to the very same place couldn't get to the very same place couldn't get to the very same place without it with by simply doing without it with by simply doing without it with by simply doing a slightly longer gratitude practice or a slightly longer gratitude practice or a slightly longer gratitude practice or putting a little bit more mental effort putting a little bit more mental effort putting a little bit more mental effort into it. That said, into it. That said, into it. That said, I think the future of neuroplasticity I think the future of neuroplasticity I think the future of neuroplasticity really resides in not just one approach, really resides in not just one approach, really resides in not just one approach, not just neurochemistry and taking not just neurochemistry and taking not just neurochemistry and taking substances to increase neuroplasticity, substances to increase neuroplasticity, substances to increase neuroplasticity, not just behavioral practices to try and not just behavioral practices to try and not just behavioral practices to try and increase neuroplasticity, not just brain increase neuroplasticity, not just brain increase neuroplasticity, not just brain machine interfaces or devices to machine interfaces or devices to machine interfaces or devices to increase neuroplasticity, but rather the increase neuroplasticity, but rather the increase neuroplasticity, but rather the convergence of multiple tools. So, you convergence of multiple tools. So, you convergence of multiple tools. So, you could imagine enhancing serotonergic could imagine enhancing serotonergic could imagine enhancing serotonergic transmission as we say in the brain transmission as we say in the brain transmission as we say in the brain using something like Kanna combined with using something like Kanna combined with using something like Kanna combined with a gratitude practice in the not too a gratitude practice in the not too a gratitude practice in the not too distant future. This will probably also distant future. This will probably also distant future. This will probably also be combined with some sort of be combined with some sort of be combined with some sort of non-invasive device to stimulate the non-invasive device to stimulate the non-invasive device to stimulate the prefrontal cortex at the same time. prefrontal cortex at the same time. prefrontal cortex at the same time. Please don't do that recreationally. Please don't do that recreationally. Please don't do that recreationally. Those devices are for clinical use only Those devices are for clinical use only Those devices are for clinical use only currently. But I think you start to get the idea. But I think you start to get the idea. But I think you start to get the idea. So, for those of you that are a little So, for those of you that are a little So, for those of you that are a little bit more exploratory and you want to go bit more exploratory and you want to go bit more exploratory and you want to go and do some reading on this, I thought and do some reading on this, I thought and do some reading on this, I thought you might find uh Kanna interesting. I you might find uh Kanna interesting. I you might find uh Kanna interesting. I certainly did. There are a number of certainly did. There are a number of certainly did. There are a number of studies that will pop up on PubMed. I studies that will pop up on PubMed. I studies that will pop up on PubMed. I recommend using examine.com as your jumping off using examine.com as your jumping off using examine.com as your jumping off point. There are some decent studies point. There are some decent studies point. There are some decent studies that they describe in their so-called that they describe in their so-called that they describe in their so-called human effect matrix. So, those are human effect matrix. So, those are human effect matrix. So, those are studies done on humans. And the main studies done on humans. And the main studies done on humans. And the main effects that have been documented effects that have been documented effects that have been documented in the scientific literature are in the scientific literature are in the scientific literature are minor but significant increases in minor but significant increases in minor but significant increases in cognition, executive function. Executive cognition, executive function. Executive cognition, executive function. Executive function is something that's also function is something that's also function is something that's also associated with prefrontal cortex and associated with prefrontal cortex and associated with prefrontal cortex and reductions in anxiety. And that seems to reductions in anxiety. And that seems to reductions in anxiety. And that seems to be a common theme that we're seeing be a common theme that we're seeing be a common theme that we're seeing again and again. You saw this in the again and again. You saw this in the again and again. You saw this in the study uh the trial where we saw reductions uh the trial where we saw reductions uh the trial where we saw reductions in TNF alpha and reductions in amygdala in TNF alpha and reductions in amygdala in TNF alpha and reductions in amygdala activation. So, which would ostensibly activation. So, which would ostensibly activation. So, which would ostensibly lead to lead to lead to reductions in anxiety. You're seeing reductions in anxiety. You're seeing reductions in anxiety. You're seeing increases in activity in brain networks increases in activity in brain networks increases in activity in brain networks that are associated with feelings of that are associated with feelings of that are associated with feelings of well-being. So, again, back to that kind well-being. So, again, back to that kind well-being. So, again, back to that kind of push-pull of defensive anxiety and of push-pull of defensive anxiety and of push-pull of defensive anxiety and fear-like circuitry in the brain being fear-like circuitry in the brain being fear-like circuitry in the brain being antagonistic, as we say, to the circuits that are as we say, to the circuits that are as we say, to the circuits that are associated with prosocial, feeling good, associated with prosocial, feeling good, associated with prosocial, feeling good, receiving good feelings type circuitry receiving good feelings type circuitry receiving good feelings type circuitry and events in life. and events in life. and events in life. So, as you now know, there is a lot of So, as you now know, there is a lot of So, as you now know, there is a lot of science about how gratitude can science about how gratitude can science about how gratitude can positively impact neural circuits in the positively impact neural circuits in the positively impact neural circuits in the brain, anti-inflammatory markers in the brain, anti-inflammatory markers in the brain, anti-inflammatory markers in the body, brain, heart, breathing coordination, brain, heart, breathing coordination, brain, heart, breathing coordination, and on and on and on. and on and on and on. and on and on and on. I'd like to just highlight the key I'd like to just highlight the key I'd like to just highlight the key elements of the most effective, at least elements of the most effective, at least elements of the most effective, at least to my knowledge, gratitude practice. to my knowledge, gratitude practice. to my knowledge, gratitude practice. And when I say the most effective, what And when I say the most effective, what And when I say the most effective, what I'm doing is I'm gleaning from the I'm doing is I'm gleaning from the I'm doing is I'm gleaning from the scientific studies I was able to find scientific studies I was able to find scientific studies I was able to find and combining the various findings of and combining the various findings of and combining the various findings of those studies into what I think is a those studies into what I think is a those studies into what I think is a very practical and what should certainly very practical and what should certainly very practical and what should certainly be a very effective gratitude practice be a very effective gratitude practice be a very effective gratitude practice for all the positive effects that we for all the positive effects that we for all the positive effects that we described. First of all, First of all, First of all, that gratitude practice has to be that gratitude practice has to be that gratitude practice has to be grounded in a narrative, meaning a grounded in a narrative, meaning a grounded in a narrative, meaning a story. You don't have to recite or hear that You don't have to recite or hear that You don't have to recite or hear that story every single time you do the story every single time you do the story every single time you do the gratitude practice, gratitude practice, gratitude practice, but you have to know what that story was but you have to know what that story was but you have to know what that story was and what the gratitude practice and what the gratitude practice and what the gratitude practice references back to. references back to. references back to. Second of all, that story can be one of Second of all, that story can be one of Second of all, that story can be one of you receiving genuine thanks. And the key receiving genuine thanks. And the key receiving genuine thanks. And the key elements there are that you are the one elements there are that you are the one elements there are that you are the one receiving the thanks, the gratitude, and receiving the thanks, the gratitude, and receiving the thanks, the gratitude, and that it's being given to you genuinely, it's being given to you genuinely, it's being given to you genuinely, wholeheartedly. Or it can be a story of Or it can be a story of Or it can be a story of you observing someone else receiving you observing someone else receiving you observing someone else receiving thanks or expressing thanks. thanks or expressing thanks. thanks or expressing thanks. And that has to be a genuine interaction And that has to be a genuine interaction And that has to be a genuine interaction as well, both as well, both as well, both between the giver and the receiver. between the giver and the receiver. between the giver and the receiver. So, those are the first three elements. So, those are the first three elements. So, those are the first three elements. What I recommend would be after you've What I recommend would be after you've What I recommend would be after you've established the story that you want to established the story that you want to established the story that you want to use for your gratitude practice, use for your gratitude practice, use for your gratitude practice, that you write down three or four simple that you write down three or four simple that you write down three or four simple bullet points that can serve as salient bullet points that can serve as salient bullet points that can serve as salient reminders of that story for you. It will reminders of that story for you. It will reminders of that story for you. It will serve as kind of a cue for that story serve as kind of a cue for that story serve as kind of a cue for that story without having to listen to or without having to listen to or without having to listen to or talk out the entire story. talk out the entire story. talk out the entire story. I would recommend I would recommend I would recommend writing down something about writing down something about writing down something about the state that you or the other person the state that you or the other person the state that you or the other person were in before they received the were in before they received the were in before they received the gratitude, the state that you were in or that the state that you were in or that the state that you were in or that the person was in after they received the person was in after they received the person was in after they received the gratitude, and gratitude, and gratitude, and any other elements that lend some sort any other elements that lend some sort any other elements that lend some sort of emotional weight or tone to the of emotional weight or tone to the of emotional weight or tone to the story. This could be three pages of text story. This could be three pages of text story. This could be three pages of text if you like, or it could just be a if you like, or it could just be a if you like, or it could just be a couple of bullet points. I don't think couple of bullet points. I don't think couple of bullet points. I don't think it really matters. The important thing it really matters. The important thing it really matters. The important thing is that it's embedded in your memory and is that it's embedded in your memory and is that it's embedded in your memory and that it's really associated with this that it's really associated with this that it's really associated with this genuine exchange of thanks and the genuine exchange of thanks and the genuine exchange of thanks and the retrieval of thanks. I think those are retrieval of thanks. I think those are retrieval of thanks. I think those are the key elements. the key elements. the key elements. And then it's very simple. The entire And then it's very simple. The entire And then it's very simple. The entire practice involves practice involves practice involves reading off these bullet points as a cue reading off these bullet points as a cue reading off these bullet points as a cue to your nervous system of the sense of to your nervous system of the sense of to your nervous system of the sense of gratitude, and then and then and then for about 1 minute, which is a trivial for about 1 minute, which is a trivial for about 1 minute, which is a trivial amount of time if you really think about amount of time if you really think about amount of time if you really think about it, or maybe 2 minutes, or if you're it, or maybe 2 minutes, or if you're it, or maybe 2 minutes, or if you're really ambitious up to 5 minutes, of really ambitious up to 5 minutes, of really ambitious up to 5 minutes, of just really feeling into that genuine just really feeling into that genuine just really feeling into that genuine experience of having received gratitude experience of having received gratitude experience of having received gratitude or observed or observed or observed someone else receiving gratitude. someone else receiving gratitude. someone else receiving gratitude. And then, in terms of frequency, And then, in terms of frequency, And then, in terms of frequency, I think a good rule of thumb would be I think a good rule of thumb would be I think a good rule of thumb would be to do that about three times a week and to do that about three times a week and to do that about three times a week and the time of day doesn't really matter. I the time of day doesn't really matter. I the time of day doesn't really matter. I can't see why there would be any can't see why there would be any can't see why there would be any so-called circadian effects of this. I so-called circadian effects of this. I so-called circadian effects of this. I know some people like to do a gratitude know some people like to do a gratitude know some people like to do a gratitude practice before they go to sleep at practice before they go to sleep at practice before they go to sleep at night. I don't see any problem with night. I don't see any problem with night. I don't see any problem with doing this before you go to sleep at doing this before you go to sleep at doing this before you go to sleep at night. I also don't see any problem with night. I also don't see any problem with night. I also don't see any problem with you doing this on your lunch break or you doing this on your lunch break or you doing this on your lunch break or mid-morning or first thing in the mid-morning or first thing in the mid-morning or first thing in the morning. I can't see any logic for morning. I can't see any logic for morning. I can't see any logic for placing it any one time of day and not placing it any one time of day and not placing it any one time of day and not another. So, I think the most important another. So, I think the most important another. So, I think the most important thing is that you do it at least three thing is that you do it at least three thing is that you do it at least three times a week. times a week. times a week. And as mentioned before, it's very, very And as mentioned before, it's very, very And as mentioned before, it's very, very brief, so there are very few barriers of brief, so there are very few barriers of brief, so there are very few barriers of to entry for doing this. to entry for doing this. to entry for doing this. So, if we just take a step back from So, if we just take a step back from So, if we just take a step back from this protocol and compare it to what's this protocol and compare it to what's this protocol and compare it to what's typically out there in the literature, typically out there in the literature, typically out there in the literature, which is which is which is you know, make a list of all the things you know, make a list of all the things you know, make a list of all the things you're thankful for, recite in your mind you're thankful for, recite in your mind you're thankful for, recite in your mind all the things you're thankful for, all the things you're thankful for, all the things you're thankful for, count your blessings. I think everybody count your blessings. I think everybody count your blessings. I think everybody should be counting their blessings all should be counting their blessings all should be counting their blessings all the time. There's always something to be the time. There's always something to be the time. There's always something to be thankful for. But in terms of a thankful for. But in terms of a thankful for. But in terms of a scientifically grounded gratitude scientifically grounded gratitude scientifically grounded gratitude practice that is also scientifically practice that is also scientifically practice that is also scientifically demonstrated to shift your physiology at demonstrated to shift your physiology at demonstrated to shift your physiology at the level of your immune system and your the level of your immune system and your the level of your immune system and your neural circuitry, reducing anxiety, neural circuitry, reducing anxiety, neural circuitry, reducing anxiety, increasing motivation, all these increasing motivation, all these increasing motivation, all these wonderful things that so many of us wonderful things that so many of us wonderful things that so many of us are chasing all the time as goals. I are chasing all the time as goals. I are chasing all the time as goals. I think a gratitude practice reveals think a gratitude practice reveals think a gratitude practice reveals itself to be an immensely powerful tool itself to be an immensely powerful tool itself to be an immensely powerful tool for any and all of us to use. And that for any and all of us to use. And that for any and all of us to use. And that should come as no surprise because these should come as no surprise because these should come as no surprise because these prosocial circuits, these circuits for prosocial circuits, these circuits for prosocial circuits, these circuits for gratitude are not a recent phenomenon. gratitude are not a recent phenomenon. gratitude are not a recent phenomenon. Discussions about gratitude date back Discussions about gratitude date back Discussions about gratitude date back hundreds if not thousands of years. What hundreds if not thousands of years. What hundreds if not thousands of years. What we've done today is to take the modern we've done today is to take the modern we've done today is to take the modern science right up until 2021 science right up until 2021 science right up until 2021 and to really distill from that the and to really distill from that the and to really distill from that the neuroimaging data, the neurochemistry, neuroimaging data, the neurochemistry, neuroimaging data, the neurochemistry, the various aspects of brain-body the various aspects of brain-body the various aspects of brain-body connectivity, look at the protocols, connectivity, look at the protocols, connectivity, look at the protocols, take various subject groups. Some were take various subject groups. Some were take various subject groups. Some were done in women, some were done in between done in women, some were done in between done in women, some were done in between two individuals, some were done with two individuals, some were done with two individuals, some were done with brain imaging, all the all the very brain imaging, all the all the very brain imaging, all the all the very various uh various uh various uh changes on a theme changes on a theme changes on a theme that allow us to point to a simple but that allow us to point to a simple but that allow us to point to a simple but very effective protocol that certainly very effective protocol that certainly very effective protocol that certainly we could all use around Thanksgiving. we could all use around Thanksgiving. we could all use around Thanksgiving. But uh you know, Thanksgiving is just But uh you know, Thanksgiving is just But uh you know, Thanksgiving is just but one day throughout the entire year, but one day throughout the entire year, but one day throughout the entire year, of course. I personally have been using of course. I personally have been using of course. I personally have been using a gratitude protocol for the last a gratitude protocol for the last a gratitude protocol for the last several years. But that protocol was several years. But that protocol was several years. But that protocol was based on my um ignorance, really, about based on my um ignorance, really, about based on my um ignorance, really, about the scientific literature uh and was the scientific literature uh and was the scientific literature uh and was mainly based on what I'd heard out there mainly based on what I'd heard out there mainly based on what I'd heard out there on the internet, which is that I should on the internet, which is that I should on the internet, which is that I should uh list out or think about or uh list out or think about or uh list out or think about or verbally recite the things that I'm verbally recite the things that I'm verbally recite the things that I'm grateful for. Uh grateful for. Uh grateful for. Uh the sort of protocol that we arrived at the sort of protocol that we arrived at the sort of protocol that we arrived at today based on the scientific literature today based on the scientific literature today based on the scientific literature is distinctly different from that. Um is distinctly different from that. Um is distinctly different from that. Um and as a consequence, I've started to and as a consequence, I've started to and as a consequence, I've started to script out a protocol identical to the script out a protocol identical to the script out a protocol identical to the one I just described, and I intend to one I just described, and I intend to one I just described, and I intend to use that going forward. If you're use that going forward. If you're use that going forward. If you're learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way channel. That's a terrific zero cost way channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify and subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify and subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify and on Apple you have the opportunity to on Apple you have the opportunity to on Apple you have the opportunity to leave us a comment and up to a five-star leave us a comment and up to a five-star leave us a comment and up to a five-star review. Also, please check out our review. Also, please check out our review. Also, please check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of sponsors mentioned at the beginning of sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this episode. That's the best way to this episode. That's the best way to this episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. In addition, we support this podcast. In addition, we support this podcast. In addition, we have a Patreon. It's have a Patreon. It's have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman and there you can support this podcast and there you can support this podcast and there you can support this podcast at any level that you like. During at any level that you like. During at any level that you like. During today's episode and in many previous today's episode and in many previous today's episode and in many previous episodes, I mentioned supplements. episodes, I mentioned supplements. episodes, I mentioned supplements. Supplements aren't for everybody, but if Supplements aren't for everybody, but if Supplements aren't for everybody, but if you are going to use supplements, it's you are going to use supplements, it's you are going to use supplements, it's imperative that the supplements be of imperative that the supplements be of imperative that the supplements be of the very highest quality. For that the very highest quality. For that the very highest quality. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, reason, we've partnered with Thorne, reason, we've partnered with Thorne, that's t h o r n e because Thorne that's t h o r n e because Thorne that's t h o r n e because Thorne supplements have the highest levels of supplements have the highest levels of supplements have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of stringency in terms of the quality of stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients they include and the ingredients they include and the ingredients they include and the precision of the amounts of the precision of the amounts of the precision of the amounts of the ingredients they include in their ingredients they include in their ingredients they include in their products. They partnered with every products. They partnered with every products. They partnered with every major sports team as well as the Mayo major sports team as well as the Mayo major sports team as well as the Mayo Clinic, so we're delighted to be Clinic, so we're delighted to be Clinic, so we're delighted to be partnered with them as well. If you want partnered with them as well. If you want partnered with them as well. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you to see the supplements that I take, you to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/theletteru/huberman and there you can see all the and there you can see all the and there you can see all the supplements that I take and you can get supplements that I take and you can get supplements that I take and you can get 20% off any of those supplements or if 20% off any of those supplements or if 20% off any of those supplements or if you navigate into the site through that you navigate into the site through that you navigate into the site through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the you can also get 20% off any of the you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. other supplements that Thorne makes. other supplements that Thorne makes. Thank you for your time and attention Thank you for your time and attention Thank you for your time and attention today learning about the science of today learning about the science of today learning about the science of gratitude and last but certainly not gratitude and last but certainly not gratitude and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science.