Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Charles for my discussion with Dr. Charles for my discussion with Dr. Charles Zucker. Charles, thank you so much for Zucker. Charles, thank you so much for Zucker. Charles, thank you so much for joining me today. My pleasure. I want to joining me today. My pleasure. I want to joining me today. My pleasure. I want to ask you about many things related to ask you about many things related to ask you about many things related to taste and gustatory perception, but taste and gustatory perception, but taste and gustatory perception, but maybe to start off, and because you've maybe to start off, and because you've maybe to start off, and because you've worked on a number of different topics worked on a number of different topics worked on a number of different topics in neuroscience, not just taste, how in neuroscience, not just taste, how in neuroscience, not just taste, how should the world and people think about should the world and people think about should the world and people think about perception, how it's different from perception, how it's different from perception, how it's different from sensation, and sensation, and sensation, and what leads to our experience of life in what leads to our experience of life in what leads to our experience of life in terms of vision, hearing, taste, et terms of vision, hearing, taste, et terms of vision, hearing, taste, et cetera? The world is made of real cetera? The world is made of real cetera? The world is made of real things. You know, this here is a glass. You know, this here is a glass. You know, this here is a glass. And this is a cord, and this is a And this is a cord, and this is a And this is a cord, and this is a microphone. But the brain is only made of neurons But the brain is only made of neurons But the brain is only made of neurons that only understand electrical signals. that only understand electrical signals. that only understand electrical signals. So, how do you transform that reality So, how do you transform that reality So, how do you transform that reality into nothing but electrical signals that into nothing but electrical signals that into nothing but electrical signals that now need to represent the world? now need to represent the world? now need to represent the world? And that process is we can is what we And that process is we can is what we And that process is we can is what we can operationally define as perception. can operationally define as perception. can operationally define as perception. In the senses, In the senses, In the senses, let's say olfactory, odor, taste, let's say olfactory, odor, taste, let's say olfactory, odor, taste, vision, you know, we can very vision, you know, we can very vision, you know, we can very straightforwardly separate detection straightforwardly separate detection straightforwardly separate detection from perception. Detection is what from perception. Detection is what from perception. Detection is what happens when you take a sugar molecule, happens when you take a sugar molecule, happens when you take a sugar molecule, you put it in your tongue, and then a you put it in your tongue, and then a you put it in your tongue, and then a set of specific cells now sense that set of specific cells now sense that set of specific cells now sense that sugar molecule. That's detection. You sugar molecule. That's detection. You sugar molecule. That's detection. You haven't perceived anything yet. That is haven't perceived anything yet. That is haven't perceived anything yet. That is just your cells in your tongue just your cells in your tongue just your cells in your tongue interacting with this chemical. But now interacting with this chemical. But now interacting with this chemical. But now that cell gets activated and sends a that cell gets activated and sends a that cell gets activated and sends a signal to the brain. signal to the brain. signal to the brain. And now detection gets transformed into And now detection gets transformed into And now detection gets transformed into perception. And it's trying to understand how that And it's trying to understand how that And it's trying to understand how that happens. That's been the That's been the That's been the maniacal the maniacal the maniacal drive of the drive of the drive of the of my entire career in neuroscience. of my entire career in neuroscience. of my entire career in neuroscience. How does the brain ultimately transform How does the brain ultimately transform How does the brain ultimately transform detection into perception so that it can detection into perception so that it can detection into perception so that it can guide actions and behaviors? So if I guide actions and behaviors? So if I guide actions and behaviors? So if I want to begin to explore all of these want to begin to explore all of these want to begin to explore all of these things that the brain does, things that the brain does, things that the brain does, I felt I have to choose a sensory system I felt I have to choose a sensory system I felt I have to choose a sensory system that affords that affords that affords some degree of simplicity some degree of simplicity some degree of simplicity in the way that the input in the way that the input in the way that the input output relationships are put together. output relationships are put together. output relationships are put together. And in a way that still can be used to And in a way that still can be used to And in a way that still can be used to ask every one of these problems that the ask every one of these problems that the ask every one of these problems that the brain has to ultimately compute, encode, brain has to ultimately compute, encode, brain has to ultimately compute, encode, and decode. and decode. and decode. And what what's remarkable about the And what what's remarkable about the And what what's remarkable about the taste system at the time that I began taste system at the time that I began taste system at the time that I began working on this, working on this, working on this, is that nothing was known about the is that nothing was known about the is that nothing was known about the molecular basis molecular basis molecular basis of taste. of taste. of taste. You know, we knew that we could taste You know, we knew that we could taste You know, we knew that we could taste what has been usually defined as the what has been usually defined as the what has been usually defined as the five basic taste qualities, sweet, the five basic taste qualities, sweet, the five basic taste qualities, sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami. sour, bitter, salty, and umami. sour, bitter, salty, and umami. Umami is a Japanese word that means Umami is a Japanese word that means Umami is a Japanese word that means yummy, delicious. yummy, delicious. yummy, delicious. And that's the and nearly every animal And that's the and nearly every animal And that's the and nearly every animal species the taste of amino acids. species the taste of amino acids. species the taste of amino acids. And in humans, And in humans, And in humans, it's mostly associated with the taste of it's mostly associated with the taste of it's mostly associated with the taste of MSG, monosodium glutamate, one amino MSG, monosodium glutamate, one amino MSG, monosodium glutamate, one amino acid in particular. And so the beautiful acid in particular. And so the beautiful acid in particular. And so the beautiful thing of the system is that the lines of thing of the system is that the lines of thing of the system is that the lines of input are limited to five. input are limited to five. input are limited to five. and each of them has a predetermined and each of them has a predetermined and each of them has a predetermined meaning. You're born with that specific meaning. You're born with that specific meaning. You're born with that specific valence value for each taste of sweet, valence value for each taste of sweet, valence value for each taste of sweet, umami, and low salt are attractive taste umami, and low salt are attractive taste umami, and low salt are attractive taste qualities. They evoke appetitive qualities. They evoke appetitive qualities. They evoke appetitive responses. I want to consume them. responses. I want to consume them. responses. I want to consume them. And bitter and sour And bitter and sour And bitter and sour are innately are innately are innately predetermined to be aversive. predetermined to be aversive. predetermined to be aversive. In the case of bitter, it's very easy to In the case of bitter, it's very easy to In the case of bitter, it's very easy to actually look at see them happening in actually look at see them happening in actually look at see them happening in animals because the first thing you do animals because the first thing you do animals because the first thing you do is you stop licking. is you stop licking. is you stop licking. Then you put Then you put Then you put an unhappy face. an unhappy face. an unhappy face. Then you squint your eyes and then you Then you squint your eyes and then you Then you squint your eyes and then you start gagging. start gagging. start gagging. Okay? And that entire thing happens by Okay? And that entire thing happens by Okay? And that entire thing happens by the activation of a bitter molecule in a the activation of a bitter molecule in a the activation of a bitter molecule in a bitter sensing cell in your tongue. It's bitter sensing cell in your tongue. It's bitter sensing cell in your tongue. It's incredible. It's again the magic of the brain. It's again the magic of the brain. It's again the magic of the brain. You know how [clears throat] it it's You know how [clears throat] it it's You know how [clears throat] it it's able to encode and decode these able to encode and decode these able to encode and decode these extraordinary actions and behaviors in extraordinary actions and behaviors in extraordinary actions and behaviors in response of nothing but a simple very, response of nothing but a simple very, response of nothing but a simple very, you know, you know, you know, unique sensory stimuli. This palette of unique sensory stimuli. This palette of unique sensory stimuli. This palette of five basic tastes accommodates all the five basic tastes accommodates all the five basic tastes accommodates all the dietary needs of the organism. dietary needs of the organism. dietary needs of the organism. Sweet to ensure that we get the right Sweet to ensure that we get the right Sweet to ensure that we get the right amount of energy. Umami to ensure that amount of energy. Umami to ensure that amount of energy. Umami to ensure that we get proteins and other essential we get proteins and other essential we get proteins and other essential nutrients. Salt, the three appetitive ones to Salt, the three appetitive ones to Salt, the three appetitive ones to ensure that we maintain our electrolyte ensure that we maintain our electrolyte ensure that we maintain our electrolyte balance. Bitter to prevent the ingestion balance. Bitter to prevent the ingestion balance. Bitter to prevent the ingestion of toxic noxious chemicals. Nearly all of toxic noxious chemicals. Nearly all of toxic noxious chemicals. Nearly all bitter tasting, you know, things out in bitter tasting, you know, things out in bitter tasting, you know, things out in the wild are bad for you. the wild are bad for you. the wild are bad for you. And sour most likely to prevent the And sour most likely to prevent the And sour most likely to prevent the ingestion of spoil ingestion of spoil ingestion of spoil acid. Yeah? acid. Yeah? acid. Yeah? Fermented foods. And that's it. That is Fermented foods. And that's it. That is Fermented foods. And that's it. That is the palate that we deal with. the palate that we deal with. the palate that we deal with. Now, of course, there's a difference Now, of course, there's a difference Now, of course, there's a difference between basic taste and flavor. Flavor between basic taste and flavor. Flavor between basic taste and flavor. Flavor is the whole experience. Flavor is the is the whole experience. Flavor is the is the whole experience. Flavor is the combination of multiple tastes coming combination of multiple tastes coming combination of multiple tastes coming together with smell, with texture, with together with smell, with texture, with together with smell, with texture, with temperature, with the look of it, with the look of it, with the look of it, that gives you what you and I would call that gives you what you and I would call that gives you what you and I would call the full sensory experience, eh? But but the full sensory experience, eh? But but the full sensory experience, eh? But but we scientists we scientists we scientists need to reduce the problem into its need to reduce the problem into its need to reduce the problem into its basic elements so we can begin to break basic elements so we can begin to break basic elements so we can begin to break it apart before we put it back together. it apart before we put it back together. it apart before we put it back together. So, when we think about the sense of So, when we think about the sense of So, when we think about the sense of taste, and we try to figure out how these lines and we try to figure out how these lines and we try to figure out how these lines of information go from your tongue to of information go from your tongue to of information go from your tongue to your brain, and how they signal, and how your brain, and how they signal, and how your brain, and how they signal, and how they get integrated, and how they get integrated, and how they get integrated, and how they trigger all these different behaviors, trigger all these different behaviors, trigger all these different behaviors, we look at them as individual qualities, we look at them as individual qualities, we look at them as individual qualities, eh? So, we give the animal sweet, or we eh? So, we give the animal sweet, or we eh? So, we give the animal sweet, or we give them a bitter, we give them sour. give them a bitter, we give them sour. give them a bitter, we give them sour. We avoid mixes. We avoid mixes. We avoid mixes. Think of it as lines of information, Think of it as lines of information, Think of it as lines of information, yeah? Separate lines, like the keys of a yeah? Separate lines, like the keys of a yeah? Separate lines, like the keys of a piano, yeah? piano, yeah? piano, yeah? Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, umami. You Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, umami. You Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, umami. You play that key and you activate that one play that key and you activate that one play that key and you activate that one chord. And that one chord, in the case of a And that one chord, in the case of a And that one chord, in the case of a piano, leads to a note, you know, a piano, leads to a note, you know, a piano, leads to a note, you know, a tune. And in the case of taste, leads to tune. And in the case of taste, leads to tune. And in the case of taste, leads to an action and a behavior. an action and a behavior. an action and a behavior. If you would describe the sequence of If you would describe the sequence of If you would describe the sequence of neural events leading to a perceptual neural events leading to a perceptual neural events leading to a perceptual event of taste, We have taste buds event of taste, We have taste buds event of taste, We have taste buds distributed in distributed in distributed in various parts of the tongue. So, there various parts of the tongue. So, there various parts of the tongue. So, there is a map on the distribution of taste is a map on the distribution of taste is a map on the distribution of taste buds. But each taste bud has around 100 taste But each taste bud has around 100 taste But each taste bud has around 100 taste receptor cells. receptor cells. receptor cells. And those taste receptor cells can be of And those taste receptor cells can be of And those taste receptor cells can be of five types, yeah? Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, types, yeah? Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, types, yeah? Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, or umami. or umami. or umami. And for the most part, for the most part, for the most part, all taste buds all taste buds all taste buds have the representation of all five have the representation of all five have the representation of all five taste qualities. taste qualities. taste qualities. Now, there's no question that there is a Now, there's no question that there is a Now, there's no question that there is a slight bias for some taste. Like bitter slight bias for some taste. Like bitter slight bias for some taste. Like bitter is particularly enriched at the very is particularly enriched at the very is particularly enriched at the very back of your tongue. back of your tongue. back of your tongue. And there is a teleological basis for And there is a teleological basis for And there is a teleological basis for that, actually a biological basis for that, actually a biological basis for that, actually a biological basis for that. That's the last line of defense before That's the last line of defense before That's the last line of defense before you swallow something bad. you swallow something bad. you swallow something bad. And so let's make sure that the very And so let's make sure that the very And so let's make sure that the very back of your tongue has plenty of these back of your tongue has plenty of these back of your tongue has plenty of these bad news receptors. bad news receptors. bad news receptors. So that if they get activated, you can So that if they get activated, you can So that if they get activated, you can trigger a gagging reflex and get rid of trigger a gagging reflex and get rid of trigger a gagging reflex and get rid of these that otherwise may kill you. The these that otherwise may kill you. The these that otherwise may kill you. The important thing is that, you know, after important thing is that, you know, after important thing is that, you know, after the receptors for these five the receptors for these five the receptors for these five the detectors, the molecules that sense detectors, the molecules that sense detectors, the molecules that sense sweet, sour, bitter, salt, umami, sweet, sour, bitter, salt, umami, sweet, sour, bitter, salt, umami, these are receptors, proteins found on these are receptors, proteins found on these are receptors, proteins found on the surface of taste receptor cells that the surface of taste receptor cells that the surface of taste receptor cells that interact with these chemicals. interact with these chemicals. interact with these chemicals. And once they interact, then they And once they interact, then they And once they interact, then they trigger the cascade of events, trigger the cascade of events, trigger the cascade of events, biochemical events inside the cell, that biochemical events inside the cell, that biochemical events inside the cell, that now sends an electrical signal that says now sends an electrical signal that says now sends an electrical signal that says there is sweet here or there is salt there is sweet here or there is salt there is sweet here or there is salt here. Let's compare and contrast sweet here. Let's compare and contrast sweet here. Let's compare and contrast sweet and bitter and bitter and bitter as we follow their lines from the tongue as we follow their lines from the tongue as we follow their lines from the tongue to the brain. So the first thing is that to the brain. So the first thing is that to the brain. So the first thing is that the two evoke diametrically opposed the two evoke diametrically opposed the two evoke diametrically opposed behaviors. If we have to come up with two sensory If we have to come up with two sensory If we have to come up with two sensory experience that represent polar experience that represent polar experience that represent polar opposites, it would be sweet and bitter. opposites, it would be sweet and bitter. opposites, it would be sweet and bitter. So then the signals, if we follow now So then the signals, if we follow now So then the signals, if we follow now these two lines, they're really like two these two lines, they're really like two these two lines, they're really like two separate keys at the two ends of this separate keys at the two ends of this separate keys at the two ends of this keyboard. And you press one key and you keyboard. And you press one key and you keyboard. And you press one key and you activate this chord, so you activate the activate this chord, so you activate the activate this chord, so you activate the sweet cells throughout your oral cavity. sweet cells throughout your oral cavity. sweet cells throughout your oral cavity. And they all converge into And they all converge into And they all converge into a group of sweet neurons in the next a group of sweet neurons in the next a group of sweet neurons in the next station, which is still outside the station, which is still outside the station, which is still outside the brain. It's one of the taste ganglia. It's one of the taste ganglia. It's one of the taste ganglia. These are the neurons that innervate These are the neurons that innervate These are the neurons that innervate your tongue and the oral cavity. Where your tongue and the oral cavity. Where your tongue and the oral cavity. Where do they sit approximately? Are there do they sit approximately? Are there do they sit approximately? Are there some &gt;&gt; Around there, yeah. Right here around &gt;&gt; Around there, yeah. Right here around &gt;&gt; Around there, yeah. Right here around the lymph nodes, more or less? the lymph nodes, more or less? the lymph nodes, more or less? &gt;&gt; You got it. And there are two main &gt;&gt; You got it. And there are two main &gt;&gt; You got it. And there are two main ganglia that innervate that innervate that innervate the vast majority of all taste buds in the vast majority of all taste buds in the vast majority of all taste buds in the oral cavity. the oral cavity. the oral cavity. And then And then And then from there, that sweet signal goes onto from there, that sweet signal goes onto from there, that sweet signal goes onto the brain stem. the brain stem. the brain stem. The brain stem is the entry of the body The brain stem is the entry of the body The brain stem is the entry of the body into the brain. And there are different into the brain. And there are different into the brain. And there are different areas of the brain stem, and there are areas of the brain stem, and there are areas of the brain stem, and there are different groups of neurons in the brain different groups of neurons in the brain different groups of neurons in the brain stem, and this is a unique area in a stem, and this is a unique area in a stem, and this is a unique area in a unique topographically defined unique topographically defined unique topographically defined location in the rostral side of the brain stem in the rostral side of the brain stem in the rostral side of the brain stem that receives all of the taste input. A that receives all of the taste input. A that receives all of the taste input. A very dense area of the brain. A very dense area of the brain. A very dense area of the brain. A very rich area rich area rich area of the brain, exactly. of the brain, exactly. of the brain, exactly. And from there, the sweet signal goes to And from there, the sweet signal goes to And from there, the sweet signal goes to this other area, higher up on the brain this other area, higher up on the brain this other area, higher up on the brain stem, and then it goes through stem, and then it goes through stem, and then it goes through a number of stations a number of stations a number of stations where that sweet signal goes from sweet where that sweet signal goes from sweet where that sweet signal goes from sweet neuron to sweet neuron to sweet neuron to sweet neuron to sweet neuron to sweet neuron to sweet neuron to eventually get to your cortex. to eventually get to your cortex. to eventually get to your cortex. And once it gets to your taste cortex, And once it gets to your taste cortex, And once it gets to your taste cortex, that's where meaning is imposed into that's where meaning is imposed into that's where meaning is imposed into that signal. It's then, this is what the that signal. It's then, this is what the that signal. It's then, this is what the data suggests, data suggests, data suggests, that now you can identify this as a that now you can identify this as a that now you can identify this as a sweet stimuli. And how quickly does that sweet stimuli. And how quickly does that sweet stimuli. And how quickly does that all happen? You know, the time scale of all happen? You know, the time scale of all happen? You know, the time scale of the nervous system, it's the nervous system, it's the nervous system, it's fast, yeah? And so fast, yeah? And so fast, yeah? And so &gt;&gt; less than a second. Yeah. And then, in &gt;&gt; less than a second. Yeah. And then, in &gt;&gt; less than a second. Yeah. And then, in fact, we can demonstrate this because we fact, we can demonstrate this because we fact, we can demonstrate this because we can stick electrodes at each of these can stick electrodes at each of these can stick electrodes at each of these stations. You deliver the stimuli, and within a You deliver the stimuli, and within a You deliver the stimuli, and within a fraction of a second, you see now the fraction of a second, you see now the fraction of a second, you see now the response in these following stations. response in these following stations. response in these following stations. Now it gets to the cortex, yeah? Now it gets to the cortex, yeah? Now it gets to the cortex, yeah? And now, in there, you impose meaning to And now, in there, you impose meaning to And now, in there, you impose meaning to that taste. that taste. that taste. There's an area of your brain There's an area of your brain There's an area of your brain that represents the taste of sweet that represents the taste of sweet that represents the taste of sweet in taste cortex, and a different area in taste cortex, and a different area in taste cortex, and a different area that represents the taste of bitter. In that represents the taste of bitter. In that represents the taste of bitter. In essence, there is a topographic map essence, there is a topographic map essence, there is a topographic map of these taste qualities inside your of these taste qualities inside your of these taste qualities inside your brain. How much plasticity do you think brain. How much plasticity do you think brain. How much plasticity do you think there is there, and in particular across there is there, and in particular across there is there, and in particular across the lifespan? Because I think one of the lifespan? Because I think one of the lifespan? Because I think one of the most salient examples of this is that most salient examples of this is that most salient examples of this is that kids don't seem to like certain kids don't seem to like certain kids don't seem to like certain vegetables, but they all are hardwired vegetables, but they all are hardwired vegetables, but they all are hardwired to like sweet tastes. And yet, you could to like sweet tastes. And yet, you could to like sweet tastes. And yet, you could also imagine that one of the reasons why also imagine that one of the reasons why also imagine that one of the reasons why they may eventually grow to incorporate they may eventually grow to incorporate they may eventually grow to incorporate vegetables is because of some knowledge vegetables is because of some knowledge vegetables is because of some knowledge that vegetables might be good for you. that vegetables might be good for you. that vegetables might be good for you. &gt;&gt; better for them. Is there a change in &gt;&gt; better for them. Is there a change in &gt;&gt; better for them. Is there a change in the receptors that can explain the receptors that can explain the receptors that can explain the transition from wanting to avoid transition from wanting to avoid transition from wanting to avoid vegetables to being willing to eat vegetables to being willing to eat vegetables to being willing to eat vegetables simply in childhood to early simply in childhood to early simply in childhood to early development? &gt;&gt; taste, we just told you that's, you &gt;&gt; taste, we just told you that's, you &gt;&gt; taste, we just told you that's, you know, predetermined, hardwired. But, know, predetermined, hardwired. But, know, predetermined, hardwired. But, predetermined hardwired doesn't mean predetermined hardwired doesn't mean predetermined hardwired doesn't mean that's not that's not that's not modulated by learning or experience. It modulated by learning or experience. It modulated by learning or experience. It only means that you're born only means that you're born only means that you're born liking sweet and disliking bitter. And liking sweet and disliking bitter. And liking sweet and disliking bitter. And we have many examples of plasticity. we have many examples of plasticity. we have many examples of plasticity. Coffee, it has an associated gain to the Coffee, it has an associated gain to the Coffee, it has an associated gain to the system. And that gain to the system, system. And that gain to the system, system. And that gain to the system, that positive valence that emerges out that positive valence that emerges out that positive valence that emerges out of that negative signal is sufficient to of that negative signal is sufficient to of that negative signal is sufficient to create that positive association. create that positive association. create that positive association. And in the case of coffee, of course, And in the case of coffee, of course, And in the case of coffee, of course, it's caffeine activating a whole group it's caffeine activating a whole group it's caffeine activating a whole group of neurotransmitter systems that give of neurotransmitter systems that give of neurotransmitter systems that give you that high associated with you that high associated with you that high associated with coffee. So, yes, this taste system is coffee. So, yes, this taste system is coffee. So, yes, this taste system is changeable, it's malleable, and it's changeable, it's malleable, and it's changeable, it's malleable, and it's subjected to learning and experience. subjected to learning and experience. subjected to learning and experience. Can you imagine a sort of Can you imagine a sort of Can you imagine a sort of system by which people could leverage system by which people could leverage system by which people could leverage that. Where does this desensitizing that. Where does this desensitizing that. Where does this desensitizing happens? That's the term that we use, happens? That's the term that we use, happens? That's the term that we use, eh? I think it's happening at multiple I think it's happening at multiple I think it's happening at multiple stations. It's happening at the receptor level. It's happening at the receptor level. It's happening at the receptor level. I.E. the cells in your tongue that are the cells in your tongue that are the cells in your tongue that are sensing that sugar. sensing that sugar. sensing that sugar. As you activate this receptor and it's As you activate this receptor and it's As you activate this receptor and it's triggering activity after activity after triggering activity after activity after triggering activity after activity after activity, eventually you exhaust activity, eventually you exhaust activity, eventually you exhaust the receptor. Again, I'm using terms the receptor. Again, I'm using terms the receptor. Again, I'm using terms which are extraordinarily loose. The which are extraordinarily loose. The which are extraordinarily loose. The receptor gets to a point where it receptor gets to a point where it receptor gets to a point where it undergoes a set of changes, chemical undergoes a set of changes, chemical undergoes a set of changes, chemical changes, where it now signals far less where it now signals far less where it now signals far less efficiently or it even gets removed from the surface or it even gets removed from the surface or it even gets removed from the surface of the cell. of the cell. of the cell. And that is a huge side of this And that is a huge side of this And that is a huge side of this modulation. And then the next, I believe, is the And then the next, I believe, is the And then the next, I believe, is the integrated, again, loss of signaling integrated, again, loss of signaling integrated, again, loss of signaling that happens by continuous activation of that happens by continuous activation of that happens by continuous activation of the circuit at each of these different the circuit at each of these different the circuit at each of these different neural stations. From the tongue to the neural stations. From the tongue to the neural stations. From the tongue to the ganglia, from the ganglia to the first ganglia, from the ganglia to the first ganglia, from the ganglia to the first station in the brain stem, a second station in the brain stem, a second station in the brain stem, a second station in the brain stem, to the station in the brain stem, to the station in the brain stem, to the thalamus, then to the cortex. thalamus, then to the cortex. thalamus, then to the cortex. So, there are multiple steps that this So, there are multiple steps that this So, there are multiple steps that this signal is traveling. Now, you might say, signal is traveling. Now, you might say, signal is traveling. Now, you might say, "Why, if this is a labeled line, why do "Why, if this is a labeled line, why do "Why, if this is a labeled line, why do you need to have so many stations?" you need to have so many stations?" you need to have so many stations?" And that's because the taste system is And that's because the taste system is And that's because the taste system is so important to ensure so important to ensure so important to ensure that you get what you need to survive, that you get what you need to survive, that you get what you need to survive, that it has to be subjected to that it has to be subjected to that it has to be subjected to modulation by the internal state. And modulation by the internal state. And modulation by the internal state. And each of these nodes provides a new site each of these nodes provides a new site each of these nodes provides a new site to give it plasticity and modulation. to give it plasticity and modulation. to give it plasticity and modulation. I'm going to give you one example of I'm going to give you one example of I'm going to give you one example of how the internal state changes the way how the internal state changes the way how the internal state changes the way the taste system works. the taste system works. the taste system works. Salt is very appetitive at low is very appetitive at low is very appetitive at low concentrations. And that's because we need it. It's our And that's because we need it. It's our And that's because we need it. It's our electrolyte balance requires salt. Every electrolyte balance requires salt. Every electrolyte balance requires salt. Every one of their neurons uses salt as the one of their neurons uses salt as the one of their neurons uses salt as the most important of the ions, you know, most important of the ions, you know, most important of the ions, you know, with potassium to ensure that you can with potassium to ensure that you can with potassium to ensure that you can transfer these electrical signals within transfer these electrical signals within transfer these electrical signals within and between neurons. But at high and between neurons. But at high and between neurons. But at high concentrations, let's say concentrations, let's say concentrations, let's say ocean water is incredibly aversive. And ocean water is incredibly aversive. And ocean water is incredibly aversive. And we all know this because we go into the we all know this because we go into the we all know this because we go into the ocean and then when you get it in your ocean and then when you get it in your ocean and then when you get it in your mouth, it's not that great. However, if mouth, it's not that great. However, if mouth, it's not that great. However, if I salt deprive you, now this incredibly I salt deprive you, now this incredibly I salt deprive you, now this incredibly high concentration of salt, 1 molar high concentration of salt, 1 molar high concentration of salt, 1 molar sodium chloride, sodium chloride, sodium chloride, becomes amazingly appetitive and becomes amazingly appetitive and becomes amazingly appetitive and attractive. What's going on in here? Your tongue is What's going on in here? Your tongue is What's going on in here? Your tongue is telling you this is horrible, but your telling you this is horrible, but your telling you this is horrible, but your brain is telling you need it. And brain is telling you need it. And brain is telling you need it. And this is what we call the modulation of this is what we call the modulation of this is what we call the modulation of the taste system by the internal state. the taste system by the internal state. the taste system by the internal state. I'd love you to talk about the aspects I'd love you to talk about the aspects I'd love you to talk about the aspects of gut-brain signaling that drive our or of gut-brain signaling that drive our or of gut-brain signaling that drive our or change our perceptions and behaviors change our perceptions and behaviors change our perceptions and behaviors that are completely beneath our that are completely beneath our that are completely beneath our awareness. &gt;&gt; Yes. You know, the brain &gt;&gt; Yes. You know, the brain &gt;&gt; Yes. You know, the brain needs to monitor the state of every one needs to monitor the state of every one needs to monitor the state of every one of our organs. It has to do it. This is of our organs. It has to do it. This is of our organs. It has to do it. This is the only way that the brain can ensure the only way that the brain can ensure the only way that the brain can ensure that every one of those organs are that every one of those organs are that every one of those organs are working together working together working together in a way that we have healthy in a way that we have healthy in a way that we have healthy physiology. That this is a two-way physiology. That this is a two-way physiology. That this is a two-way highway where the brain is not only monitoring, where the brain is not only monitoring, where the brain is not only monitoring, but is now modulating back but is now modulating back but is now modulating back what the body needs to do. And that what the body needs to do. And that what the body needs to do. And that includes all the way from monitoring the includes all the way from monitoring the includes all the way from monitoring the frequency of heartbeats frequency of heartbeats frequency of heartbeats and the way that inspiration and the way that inspiration and the way that inspiration and aspirations in the breathing cycle aspirations in the breathing cycle aspirations in the breathing cycle operate to what happens when you ingest operate to what happens when you ingest operate to what happens when you ingest sugar and fat. Let me give you a an sugar and fat. Let me give you a an sugar and fat. Let me give you a an example. So, Pavlov in his classical example. So, Pavlov in his classical example. So, Pavlov in his classical experiments in conditioning, you know, experiments in conditioning, you know, experiments in conditioning, you know, associative conditioning, associative conditioning, associative conditioning, he would he would he would take a bell, he would ring the bell take a bell, he would ring the bell take a bell, he would ring the bell every time he was going to feed the dog. every time he was going to feed the dog. every time he was going to feed the dog. Eventually, the dog learned to associate Eventually, the dog learned to associate Eventually, the dog learned to associate the ringing of the bell with food the ringing of the bell with food the ringing of the bell with food coming. The dog now, in the presence of coming. The dog now, in the presence of coming. The dog now, in the presence of the bell alone, will start to salivate. the bell alone, will start to salivate. the bell alone, will start to salivate. And we will call that, you know, And we will call that, you know, And we will call that, you know, neurologically speaking, an anticipatory neurologically speaking, an anticipatory neurologically speaking, an anticipatory response. Neurons in the brain that form response. Neurons in the brain that form response. Neurons in the brain that form that association now represent food is that association now represent food is that association now represent food is coming, and they're sending a signal to coming, and they're sending a signal to coming, and they're sending a signal to motor neurons to go into your salivary motor neurons to go into your salivary motor neurons to go into your salivary glands to squeeze them so you release, glands to squeeze them so you release, glands to squeeze them so you release, you know, you know, saliva because, you know, you know, saliva because, you know, you know, saliva because, you know, food is coming. know, food is coming. know, food is coming. But what's even more remarkable is that But what's even more remarkable is that But what's even more remarkable is that those animals are also releasing insulin those animals are also releasing insulin those animals are also releasing insulin in response to a bell. Somehow, the in response to a bell. Somehow, the in response to a bell. Somehow, the brain created these associations, and brain created these associations, and brain created these associations, and there are neurons in your brain now there are neurons in your brain now there are neurons in your brain now that know food is coming that know food is coming that know food is coming and send a signal somehow all the way and send a signal somehow all the way and send a signal somehow all the way down to your pancreas that now it says down to your pancreas that now it says down to your pancreas that now it says release insulin because sugar release insulin because sugar release insulin because sugar is coming down. Now, the main highway is coming down. Now, the main highway is coming down. Now, the main highway that is communicating the state of the that is communicating the state of the that is communicating the state of the body with the brain is a specific bundle of with the brain is a specific bundle of with the brain is a specific bundle of nerves, which emerge from the vagal nerves, which emerge from the vagal nerves, which emerge from the vagal ganglia, the nodose ganglia. And so is ganglia, the nodose ganglia. And so is ganglia, the nodose ganglia. And so is the vagus nerve that is innervating the vagus nerve that is innervating the vagus nerve that is innervating the majority of the organs in your body. majority of the organs in your body. majority of the organs in your body. It's monitoring their function, sending It's monitoring their function, sending It's monitoring their function, sending a signal to the brain, and now the brain a signal to the brain, and now the brain a signal to the brain, and now the brain going back down and saying, going back down and saying, going back down and saying, "This is going all right, do this, or "This is going all right, do this, or "This is going all right, do this, or this is not going so well, do that." And this is not going so well, do that." And this is not going so well, do that." And I should point out, as you well know, I should point out, as you well know, I should point out, as you well know, every organ, spleen, every organ, spleen, every organ, spleen, pancreas, lung, pancreas, lung, pancreas, lung, &gt;&gt; They all must be monitored. I have no &gt;&gt; They all must be monitored. I have no &gt;&gt; They all must be monitored. I have no doubt that diseases that we have doubt that diseases that we have doubt that diseases that we have normally associated with metabolism, normally associated with metabolism, normally associated with metabolism, physiology, and even immunity are likely physiology, and even immunity are likely physiology, and even immunity are likely to emerge as diseases, conditions, to emerge as diseases, conditions, to emerge as diseases, conditions, states of the brain. I don't think states of the brain. I don't think states of the brain. I don't think obesity is a disease of metabolism. I obesity is a disease of metabolism. I obesity is a disease of metabolism. I believe obesity is a disease of brain believe obesity is a disease of brain believe obesity is a disease of brain circuits. I do as well. circuits. I do as well. circuits. I do as well. &gt;&gt; Yeah? And so this view that we have &gt;&gt; Yeah? And so this view that we have &gt;&gt; Yeah? And so this view that we have you know been working on for the longest you know been working on for the longest you know been working on for the longest time because time because time because you know, the molecules that we're you know, the molecules that we're you know, the molecules that we're dealing with are in the body, not in the dealing with are in the body, not in the dealing with are in the body, not in the head. You know, let us to you know, to head. You know, let us to you know, to head. You know, let us to you know, to view of course these issues and problems view of course these issues and problems view of course these issues and problems as being one of metabolism, physiology, as being one of metabolism, physiology, as being one of metabolism, physiology, and so forth. They remain to be and so forth. They remain to be and so forth. They remain to be the carriers of the ultimate signal. the carriers of the ultimate signal. the carriers of the ultimate signal. But the brain But the brain But the brain ultimately appears to be the conductor ultimately appears to be the conductor ultimately appears to be the conductor of this orchestra of physiology and of this orchestra of physiology and of this orchestra of physiology and metabolism. Now let's go to the gut-brain and sugar. Now let's go to the gut-brain and sugar. Now let's go to the gut-brain and sugar. The vagus nerve is made out of many The vagus nerve is made out of many The vagus nerve is made out of many thousands of fibers that make this thousands of fibers that make this thousands of fibers that make this gigantic bundle. And it's likely as gigantic bundle. And it's likely as gigantic bundle. And it's likely as we're speaking that each of these fibers we're speaking that each of these fibers we're speaking that each of these fibers they carry meaning that's associated they carry meaning that's associated they carry meaning that's associated with their specific task. This group of with their specific task. This group of with their specific task. This group of fibers is telling the brain about the fibers is telling the brain about the fibers is telling the brain about the state of your heart. This group of state of your heart. This group of state of your heart. This group of fibers is telling the brain about the fibers is telling the brain about the fibers is telling the brain about the state of your gut. state of your gut. state of your gut. This is telling your brain about its This is telling your brain about its This is telling your brain about its nutritional state. They are again to nutritional state. They are again to nutritional state. They are again to make the same simple example, the keys make the same simple example, the keys make the same simple example, the keys of this piano. Now, the reason this is of this piano. Now, the reason this is of this piano. Now, the reason this is relevant because the magic of this relevant because the magic of this relevant because the magic of this gut-brain axis gut-brain axis gut-brain axis is the fact that you have these is the fact that you have these is the fact that you have these thousands of fibers thousands of fibers thousands of fibers really doing different functions. Okay, really doing different functions. Okay, really doing different functions. Okay, let me tell you about the gut-brain axis let me tell you about the gut-brain axis let me tell you about the gut-brain axis and our insatiable appetite for sugar. and our insatiable appetite for sugar. and our insatiable appetite for sugar. This is work of my own laboratory. This is work of my own laboratory. This is work of my own laboratory. You know, that began long ago You know, that began long ago You know, that began long ago when we discovered the sweet receptors. when we discovered the sweet receptors. when we discovered the sweet receptors. You can now engineer mice that lack You can now engineer mice that lack You can now engineer mice that lack these receptors. So, in essence, these receptors. So, in essence, these receptors. So, in essence, these animals will be unable to taste sweet. animals will be unable to taste sweet. animals will be unable to taste sweet. And if you give a normal mouse And if you give a normal mouse And if you give a normal mouse a bottle containing sweet, a bottle containing sweet, a bottle containing sweet, and we're going to put either sugar or and we're going to put either sugar or and we're going to put either sugar or an artificial sweetener. an artificial sweetener. an artificial sweetener. All right? They both are sweet. All right? They both are sweet. All right? They both are sweet. They have slightly different tastes, They have slightly different tastes, They have slightly different tastes, but that's simply because but that's simply because but that's simply because artificial sweeteners artificial sweeteners artificial sweeteners have some off tastes. have some off tastes. have some off tastes. But as far as the sweet receptor is But as far as the sweet receptor is But as far as the sweet receptor is concerned, they both activate the same concerned, they both activate the same concerned, they both activate the same receptor, trigger the same signal. And receptor, trigger the same signal. And receptor, trigger the same signal. And if you give an animal an option of a if you give an animal an option of a if you give an animal an option of a bottle containing sugar or a sweetener bottle containing sugar or a sweetener bottle containing sugar or a sweetener versus water, versus water, versus water, this animal will drink 10 to 1 from the this animal will drink 10 to 1 from the this animal will drink 10 to 1 from the bottle containing sweet. bottle containing sweet. bottle containing sweet. That's the taste system. It Animal goes, That's the taste system. It Animal goes, That's the taste system. It Animal goes, samples each one, licks a couple of samples each one, licks a couple of samples each one, licks a couple of licks, and then says, "Uh-uh, that's the licks, and then says, "Uh-uh, that's the licks, and then says, "Uh-uh, that's the one I want because it's appetitive and one I want because it's appetitive and one I want because it's appetitive and because I love it." because I love it." because I love it." Now, we're going to take the mice, and Now, we're going to take the mice, and Now, we're going to take the mice, and we're going to genetically engineer it we're going to genetically engineer it we're going to genetically engineer it to remove the sweet receptors. So, these to remove the sweet receptors. So, these to remove the sweet receptors. So, these mice no longer have in their oral cavity mice no longer have in their oral cavity mice no longer have in their oral cavity any sensors that can detect sweetness. any sensors that can detect sweetness. any sensors that can detect sweetness. Be that sugar molecule, be it an Be that sugar molecule, be it an Be that sugar molecule, be it an artificial sweetener, be it anything artificial sweetener, be it anything artificial sweetener, be it anything else that tastes sweet. And if you give else that tastes sweet. And if you give else that tastes sweet. And if you give these mice an option between these mice an option between these mice an option between sweet versus water, it will drink sweet versus water, it will drink sweet versus water, it will drink equally well from both because it cannot equally well from both because it cannot equally well from both because it cannot tell them apart. tell them apart. tell them apart. Because it doesn't have the receptors Because it doesn't have the receptors Because it doesn't have the receptors for sweet, so that sweet bottle tastes for sweet, so that sweet bottle tastes for sweet, so that sweet bottle tastes just like water. just like water. just like water. But if I keep the mouse in that cage for But if I keep the mouse in that cage for But if I keep the mouse in that cage for the next 48 hours, something the next 48 hours, something the next 48 hours, something extraordinary happens when I come 48 extraordinary happens when I come 48 extraordinary happens when I come 48 hours later. That mouse is drinking hours later. That mouse is drinking hours later. That mouse is drinking almost exclusively almost exclusively almost exclusively from the sugar bottle. from the sugar bottle. from the sugar bottle. During those 48 hours, During those 48 hours, During those 48 hours, the mouse learned the mouse learned the mouse learned that there is something in that bottle that there is something in that bottle that there is something in that bottle that makes me feel good, and that is the that makes me feel good, and that is the that makes me feel good, and that is the bottle I want to consume. And that is bottle I want to consume. And that is bottle I want to consume. And that is the fundamental basis the fundamental basis the fundamental basis of our unquenchable desire and our of our unquenchable desire and our of our unquenchable desire and our craving for sugar and is mediated by the craving for sugar and is mediated by the craving for sugar and is mediated by the gut-brain axis. gut-brain axis. gut-brain axis. So, we reason So, we reason So, we reason if this is true and it's the gut-brain if this is true and it's the gut-brain if this is true and it's the gut-brain axis that's axis that's axis that's driving sugar preference, then there driving sugar preference, then there driving sugar preference, then there should be a group of neurons in the should be a group of neurons in the should be a group of neurons in the brain that brain that brain that are responding to post-ingestive sugar. are responding to post-ingestive sugar. are responding to post-ingestive sugar. And lo and behold, we identify a group And lo and behold, we identify a group And lo and behold, we identify a group of neurons in the brain that does this of neurons in the brain that does this of neurons in the brain that does this and these neurons receive their input and these neurons receive their input and these neurons receive their input directly from the gut-brain axis. And directly from the gut-brain axis. And directly from the gut-brain axis. And so, what's happening is that sugar is so, what's happening is that sugar is so, what's happening is that sugar is recognized normally by the tongue, recognized normally by the tongue, recognized normally by the tongue, activates an appetitive response. Now activates an appetitive response. Now activates an appetitive response. Now you ingest it and now it activates a you ingest it and now it activates a you ingest it and now it activates a selective group of cells in your selective group of cells in your selective group of cells in your intestines that now send a signal to the brain via that now send a signal to the brain via that now send a signal to the brain via the vagal ganglia that says, "I got what the vagal ganglia that says, "I got what the vagal ganglia that says, "I got what I need." I need." I need." The tongue doesn't know that you got The tongue doesn't know that you got The tongue doesn't know that you got what you need. It only knows that you what you need. It only knows that you what you need. It only knows that you tasted it. This knows that it got tasted it. This knows that it got tasted it. This knows that it got to the point that it's going to be used, to the point that it's going to be used, to the point that it's going to be used, which is the gut. which is the gut. which is the gut. And now it sends the signal to now And now it sends the signal to now And now it sends the signal to now reinforce the consumption of this thing because the consumption of this thing because the consumption of this thing because this is the one that I needed, sugar, this is the one that I needed, sugar, this is the one that I needed, sugar, source of energy. So, these are gut source of energy. So, these are gut source of energy. So, these are gut cells that recognize the sugar molecule, I that recognize the sugar molecule, I that recognize the sugar molecule, I see, send a signal and that signal is see, send a signal and that signal is see, send a signal and that signal is received by the vagal neuron directly. received by the vagal neuron directly. received by the vagal neuron directly. Got it. And this sends a signal through Got it. And this sends a signal through Got it. And this sends a signal through the gut-brain the gut-brain the gut-brain axis to the cell bodies of these neurons in to the cell bodies of these neurons in to the cell bodies of these neurons in the vagal ganglia and from there to the vagal ganglia and from there to the vagal ganglia and from there to the brainstem to now trigger the preference for sugar. to now trigger the preference for sugar. to now trigger the preference for sugar. You see, you want the brain to know that You see, you want the brain to know that You see, you want the brain to know that you had successful you had successful you had successful ingestion and breakdown of whatever you ingestion and breakdown of whatever you ingestion and breakdown of whatever you consume into the building blocks of consume into the building blocks of consume into the building blocks of life. And you know, glucose, amino acids, And you know, glucose, amino acids, And you know, glucose, amino acids, fatty and so you want to make sure that fatty and so you want to make sure that fatty and so you want to make sure that once they are in the form that once they are in the form that once they are in the form that intestines can now absorb them intestines can now absorb them intestines can now absorb them is where you get the signal back saying, is where you get the signal back saying, is where you get the signal back saying, this is what I want. Okay? Now, let me this is what I want. Okay? Now, let me this is what I want. Okay? Now, let me just take it one step further. This now just take it one step further. This now just take it one step further. This now sugar molecules activates this unique sugar molecules activates this unique sugar molecules activates this unique gut brain circuit gut brain circuit gut brain circuit that now drives the development that now drives the development that now drives the development of our preference for sugar. A key of our preference for sugar. A key of our preference for sugar. A key element of this circuit element of this circuit element of this circuit is that the sensors in the gut that is that the sensors in the gut that is that the sensors in the gut that recognize the sugar recognize the sugar recognize the sugar do not recognize artificial sweeteners. do not recognize artificial sweeteners. do not recognize artificial sweeteners. It's a completely different molecule It's a completely different molecule It's a completely different molecule that only recognizes the glucose that only recognizes the glucose that only recognizes the glucose molecule not artificial sweeteners. not artificial sweeteners. not artificial sweeteners. This has a profound This has a profound This has a profound impact on the effect of ultimately impact on the effect of ultimately impact on the effect of ultimately artificial sweeteners in curbing our artificial sweeteners in curbing our artificial sweeteners in curbing our appetite our craving, our insatiable desire for our craving, our insatiable desire for our craving, our insatiable desire for sugar. Since they don't activate the gut sugar. Since they don't activate the gut sugar. Since they don't activate the gut brain axis, they'll never satisfy the brain axis, they'll never satisfy the brain axis, they'll never satisfy the craving for sugar like sugar does. We craving for sugar like sugar does. We craving for sugar like sugar does. We have a have a have a mega problem with overconsumption of mega problem with overconsumption of mega problem with overconsumption of sugar and fat. You know, we're facing a sugar and fat. You know, we're facing a sugar and fat. You know, we're facing a unique time in our evolution where unique time in our evolution where unique time in our evolution where diseases of malnutrition diseases of malnutrition diseases of malnutrition are due to overnutrition. Historically, are due to overnutrition. Historically, are due to overnutrition. Historically, diseases of malnutritions have always diseases of malnutritions have always diseases of malnutritions have always been linked to undernutrition. been linked to undernutrition. been linked to undernutrition. But I want to just go back to the notion But I want to just go back to the notion But I want to just go back to the notion of, you know, these brain centers that of, you know, these brain centers that of, you know, these brain centers that are ultimately are ultimately are ultimately the ones that are being activated by the ones that are being activated by the ones that are being activated by these essential nutrients. So, sugar, these essential nutrients. So, sugar, these essential nutrients. So, sugar, fat, and amino acids are building blocks fat, and amino acids are building blocks fat, and amino acids are building blocks of our diets. our diets. our diets. And this is across all animal species. And this is across all animal species. And this is across all animal species. So, it's not unreasonable then to assume So, it's not unreasonable then to assume So, it's not unreasonable then to assume that dedicated brain circuits would have that dedicated brain circuits would have that dedicated brain circuits would have evolved to ensure their recognition, evolved to ensure their recognition, evolved to ensure their recognition, their ingestion, and their reinforcement their ingestion, and their reinforcement their ingestion, and their reinforcement that is what I need. And indeed, that is what I need. And indeed, that is what I need. And indeed, you know, animals evolved these two you know, animals evolved these two you know, animals evolved these two systems. One is the taste system that systems. One is the taste system that systems. One is the taste system that allows you to recognize them and trigger allows you to recognize them and trigger allows you to recognize them and trigger this predetermined hardwired immediate this predetermined hardwired immediate this predetermined hardwired immediate responses, yes? You know, "Oh my god, responses, yes? You know, "Oh my god, responses, yes? You know, "Oh my god, this is so delicious. It's fatty." Or this is so delicious. It's fatty." Or this is so delicious. It's fatty." Or umami, recognizing amino acids. umami, recognizing amino acids. umami, recognizing amino acids. So, that's So, that's So, that's the liking pathway, yeah? But in the liking pathway, yeah? But in the liking pathway, yeah? But in the wisdom of evolution, that's good, but wisdom of evolution, that's good, but wisdom of evolution, that's good, but doesn't quite do it. You want to make doesn't quite do it. You want to make doesn't quite do it. You want to make sure that these things get to the place sure that these things get to the place sure that these things get to the place where they're needed. They're needed in where they're needed. They're needed in where they're needed. They're needed in your intestines where they're going to your intestines where they're going to your intestines where they're going to be absorbed as the nutrients that will be absorbed as the nutrients that will be absorbed as the nutrients that will support life. And the brain wants to support life. And the brain wants to support life. And the brain wants to know this. Highly processed foods are know this. Highly processed foods are know this. Highly processed foods are hijacking, you know, co-opting the hijacking, you know, co-opting the hijacking, you know, co-opting the circuits in a way circuits in a way circuits in a way that we would have never happened in that we would have never happened in that we would have never happened in nature. And then nature. And then nature. And then we not only find these things up we not only find these things up we not only find these things up appetitive and palatable, but in appetitive and palatable, but in appetitive and palatable, but in addition, we are continuously addition, we are continuously addition, we are continuously reinforcing, you know, the wanting in a way that, "Oh you know, the wanting in a way that, "Oh you know, the wanting in a way that, "Oh my god, this is so great. What do I feel my god, this is so great. What do I feel my god, this is so great. What do I feel like eating? Let me have more of this." like eating? Let me have more of this." like eating? Let me have more of this." Well, this is why I think a lot of data Well, this is why I think a lot of data Well, this is why I think a lot of data are now starting to support the idea are now starting to support the idea are now starting to support the idea that while indeed the laws of that while indeed the laws of that while indeed the laws of thermodynamics apply, calories ingested thermodynamics apply, calories ingested thermodynamics apply, calories ingested versus calories burned is a very real versus calories burned is a very real versus calories burned is a very real thing, right? The appetite for certain thing, right? The appetite for certain thing, right? The appetite for certain foods and the wanting and the liking are and the wanting and the liking are and the wanting and the liking are phenomena of the nervous system. phenomena of the nervous system. phenomena of the nervous system. Brain and gut, as you've beautifully Brain and gut, as you've beautifully Brain and gut, as you've beautifully described. And that described. And that described. And that changes over time depending on how that changes over time depending on how that changes over time depending on how we are receiving these nutrients. we are receiving these nutrients. we are receiving these nutrients. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Understanding the circuits &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Understanding the circuits &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Understanding the circuits is giving us important insights is giving us important insights is giving us important insights and how ultimately, hopefully, we can and how ultimately, hopefully, we can and how ultimately, hopefully, we can improve human health improve human health improve human health and make a meaningful difference. Now, it's very easy to try to, you know, Now, it's very easy to try to, you know, Now, it's very easy to try to, you know, connect the dots, A to B, B to C, C to connect the dots, A to B, B to C, C to connect the dots, A to B, B to C, C to D. And I think there's a lot more And I think there's a lot more And I think there's a lot more complexity to it. complexity to it. complexity to it. But I do think that the lessons that are But I do think that the lessons that are But I do think that the lessons that are emerging out of out of out of understanding how these circuits operate can how these circuits operate can how these circuits operate can ultimately inform ultimately inform ultimately inform how we deal with our diets in a way that how we deal with our diets in a way that how we deal with our diets in a way that we avoid what we're facing now, we avoid what we're facing now, we avoid what we're facing now, you know, as a society. I mean, it's you know, as a society. I mean, it's you know, as a society. I mean, it's nuts that the overnutrition nuts that the overnutrition nuts that the overnutrition happens to be such a prevalent problem. happens to be such a prevalent problem. happens to be such a prevalent problem. Yeah. And I also think the training of Yeah. And I also think the training of Yeah. And I also think the training of people who are thinking about metabolic people who are thinking about metabolic people who are thinking about metabolic science and metabolic disease is largely science and metabolic disease is largely science and metabolic disease is largely divorced from the training of the divorced from the training of the divorced from the training of the neuroscientists and vice versa. No one neuroscientists and vice versa. No one neuroscientists and vice versa. No one field is to blame, but I fully agree field is to blame, but I fully agree field is to blame, but I fully agree that the brain is the key over or that the brain is the key over or that the brain is the key over or the nervous system, to be more accurate, the nervous system, to be more accurate, the nervous system, to be more accurate, is the one of the key overlooked is the one of the key overlooked is the one of the key overlooked features. &gt;&gt; Is the arbiter. Ultimately, is the &gt;&gt; Is the arbiter. Ultimately, is the &gt;&gt; Is the arbiter. Ultimately, is the arbiter of many of these pathways. of many of these pathways. of many of these pathways. On behalf of myself uh On behalf of myself uh On behalf of myself uh and certainly on behalf of all the and certainly on behalf of all the and certainly on behalf of all the listeners, I want to thank you first of listeners, I want to thank you first of listeners, I want to thank you first of all for the incredible work that you've all for the incredible work that you've all for the incredible work that you've been doing now for decades in vision, in been doing now for decades in vision, in been doing now for decades in vision, in taste, and in this bigger issue of how taste, and in this bigger issue of how taste, and in this bigger issue of how we perceive and experience life. we perceive and experience life. we perceive and experience life. It's uh truly pioneering and incredible It's uh truly pioneering and incredible It's uh truly pioneering and incredible work and I feel quite lucky to have work and I feel quite lucky to have work and I feel quite lucky to have been on the sidelines seeing this over been on the sidelines seeing this over been on the sidelines seeing this over the years and hearing the talks and the years and hearing the talks and the years and hearing the talks and reading the countless beautiful papers, reading the countless beautiful papers, reading the countless beautiful papers, but also for your time today to come but also for your time today to come but also for your time today to come down here and talk to us about what down here and talk to us about what down here and talk to us about what drives you and the discoveries you've drives you and the discoveries you've drives you and the discoveries you've made. Thank you ever so much. made. Thank you ever so much. made. Thank you ever so much. It was great fun. It was great fun. It was great fun. Thank you for having me. Thank you for having me. Thank you for having me. We'll do it again. We'll do it again. We'll do it again. &gt;&gt; We [music] shall.