Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now for Stanford School of Medicine. And now for Stanford School of Medicine. And now for my discussion with Dr. Casey Halpern. my discussion with Dr. Casey Halpern. my discussion with Dr. Casey Halpern. Casey, I should say Dr. Halpern, Casey, I should say Dr. Halpern, Casey, I should say Dr. Halpern, welcome. Thank you. Great to be here. welcome. Thank you. Great to be here. welcome. Thank you. Great to be here. You're a neurosurgeon, which I consider You're a neurosurgeon, which I consider You're a neurosurgeon, which I consider the astronauts of neuroscience. For the astronauts of neuroscience. For the astronauts of neuroscience. For those that aren't familiar with the those that aren't familiar with the those that aren't familiar with the differences between neurosurgery, differences between neurosurgery, differences between neurosurgery, neurology, psychiatry, could you just neurology, psychiatry, could you just neurology, psychiatry, could you just educate us a bit? What does a educate us a bit? What does a educate us a bit? What does a neurosurgeon do and how do you think neurosurgeon do and how do you think neurosurgeon do and how do you think about and conceptualize the brain? Yeah, about and conceptualize the brain? Yeah, about and conceptualize the brain? Yeah, yeah, the scope of neurosurgery is quite yeah, the scope of neurosurgery is quite yeah, the scope of neurosurgery is quite broad. We take out brain tumors, we clip broad. We take out brain tumors, we clip broad. We take out brain tumors, we clip aneurysms in the brain, we take care of aneurysms in the brain, we take care of aneurysms in the brain, we take care of patients that have had traumatic brain patients that have had traumatic brain patients that have had traumatic brain injury, um concussion, injury, um concussion, injury, um concussion, uh spine surgeries. 90% of what uh spine surgeries. 90% of what uh spine surgeries. 90% of what neurosurgeons do around the country, uh neurosurgeons do around the country, uh neurosurgeons do around the country, uh you know, taking care of herniated discs you know, taking care of herniated discs you know, taking care of herniated discs and lumbar fusions. So, and lumbar fusions. So, and lumbar fusions. So, you know, the scope is you know, the scope is you know, the scope is the entire central nervous system, the entire central nervous system, the entire central nervous system, includ- including the peripheral nervous includ- including the peripheral nervous includ- including the peripheral nervous system. We take care of patients with system. We take care of patients with system. We take care of patients with carpal tunnel syndrome and nerve carpal tunnel syndrome and nerve carpal tunnel syndrome and nerve disorders. Historically, neurosurgeons disorders. Historically, neurosurgeons disorders. Historically, neurosurgeons did everything in that domain, but now did everything in that domain, but now did everything in that domain, but now we subspecialize and I I'm lucky to be we subspecialize and I I'm lucky to be we subspecialize and I I'm lucky to be at Penn Medicine where at Penn Medicine where at Penn Medicine where we can focus on one of these areas. So, we can focus on one of these areas. So, we can focus on one of these areas. So, I'm uh Chief of Stereotactic Functional I'm uh Chief of Stereotactic Functional I'm uh Chief of Stereotactic Functional Neurosurgery. All I do is deep brain stimulation All I do is deep brain stimulation All I do is deep brain stimulation surgery and a complement to that is surgery and a complement to that is surgery and a complement to that is focused ultrasound or transcranial focused ultrasound or transcranial focused ultrasound or transcranial focused ultrasound, which is a focused ultrasound, which is a focused ultrasound, which is a non-invasive way to do an ablation in non-invasive way to do an ablation in non-invasive way to do an ablation in the brain, recently FDA-approved, and the brain, recently FDA-approved, and the brain, recently FDA-approved, and it's FDA-approved for tremor at the it's FDA-approved for tremor at the it's FDA-approved for tremor at the moment. Deep brain stimulation is a moment. Deep brain stimulation is a moment. Deep brain stimulation is a procedure where we have to place a uh a procedure where we have to place a uh a procedure where we have to place a uh a very thin wire that's insulated deep very thin wire that's insulated deep very thin wire that's insulated deep into uh a part of the brain that's into uh a part of the brain that's into uh a part of the brain that's involved in Parkinson's disease, for involved in Parkinson's disease, for involved in Parkinson's disease, for example. Uh example. Uh example. Uh but that's actually not the therapy. The but that's actually not the therapy. The but that's actually not the therapy. The therapy is delivering electrical therapy is delivering electrical therapy is delivering electrical stimulation through the tip of that wire stimulation through the tip of that wire stimulation through the tip of that wire or one of the tips as there actually are or one of the tips as there actually are or one of the tips as there actually are multiple contacts at the bottom of the multiple contacts at the bottom of the multiple contacts at the bottom of the wire. They're very small. It's a bit wire. They're very small. It's a bit wire. They're very small. It's a bit more like I have to implant a tool to more like I have to implant a tool to more like I have to implant a tool to deliver you a medication. Uh but that to deliver you a medication. Uh but that to deliver you a medication. Uh but that medication is going to be in the form of medication is going to be in the form of medication is going to be in the form of electricity and it's going to be electricity and it's going to be electricity and it's going to be delivered into a very small region of delivered into a very small region of delivered into a very small region of the brain. I'm very privileged to be the brain. I'm very privileged to be the brain. I'm very privileged to be able to interact with the human brain in able to interact with the human brain in able to interact with the human brain in this way. It's always in the it with the this way. It's always in the it with the this way. It's always in the it with the goal of trying to provide somebody with goal of trying to provide somebody with goal of trying to provide somebody with a meaningful therapy. But when we a meaningful therapy. But when we a meaningful therapy. But when we deliver electrical stimulation, these deliver electrical stimulation, these deliver electrical stimulation, these electrodes, while they might be sitting electrodes, while they might be sitting electrodes, while they might be sitting in a very small region of the brain, in a very small region of the brain, in a very small region of the brain, there are regions there are regions there are regions within a few millimeters of where these within a few millimeters of where these within a few millimeters of where these electrodes are that if stimulated could electrodes are that if stimulated could electrodes are that if stimulated could cause a temporary very brief side cause a temporary very brief side cause a temporary very brief side effect, a moment of laughter like you effect, a moment of laughter like you effect, a moment of laughter like you said, or a moment of panic. And of said, or a moment of panic. And of said, or a moment of panic. And of course we can just shut that electrode course we can just shut that electrode course we can just shut that electrode off. But often these side effects could be But often these side effects could be But often these side effects could be therapeutic. And actually that's how we therapeutic. And actually that's how we therapeutic. And actually that's how we have discovered ways to use deep brain have discovered ways to use deep brain have discovered ways to use deep brain stimulation um not just for movement stimulation um not just for movement stimulation um not just for movement disorders like Parkinson's disease, but disorders like Parkinson's disease, but disorders like Parkinson's disease, but for example, patients with Parkinson's for example, patients with Parkinson's for example, patients with Parkinson's disease that have uh a psychiatric uh disease that have uh a psychiatric uh disease that have uh a psychiatric uh comorbidity like depression or comorbidity like depression or comorbidity like depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder. A lot of obsessive-compulsive disorder. A lot of obsessive-compulsive disorder. A lot of these patients are highly compulsive uh these patients are highly compulsive uh these patients are highly compulsive uh and impulsive um and impulsive um and impulsive um sometimes these problems actually melt sometimes these problems actually melt sometimes these problems actually melt away. And we're trying to help their away. And we're trying to help their away. And we're trying to help their tremor, but the patients also tell us tremor, but the patients also tell us tremor, but the patients also tell us that their gambling issue has gotten that their gambling issue has gotten that their gambling issue has gotten better or their mood has improved. And better or their mood has improved. And better or their mood has improved. And why is that? Well, why is that? Well, why is that? Well, you know, there's probably more than one you know, there's probably more than one you know, there's probably more than one reason. You know, you can help reason. You know, you can help reason. You know, you can help somebody's mood by making their tremor somebody's mood by making their tremor somebody's mood by making their tremor go away, of course. But we see laughter go away, of course. But we see laughter go away, of course. But we see laughter in the clinic sometimes. And and why is in the clinic sometimes. And and why is in the clinic sometimes. And and why is that? And that's because we're that? And that's because we're that? And that's because we're stimulating parts of the brain that are stimulating parts of the brain that are stimulating parts of the brain that are not just involved in these motor not just involved in these motor not just involved in these motor circuits, but they're also involved in circuits, but they're also involved in circuits, but they're also involved in what we call a limbic circuit or part what we call a limbic circuit or part what we call a limbic circuit or part of the brain involved in emotion. And if of the brain involved in emotion. And if of the brain involved in emotion. And if we learn how to we learn how to we learn how to modulate those areas therapeutically modulate those areas therapeutically modulate those areas therapeutically step by step, we can actually develop step by step, we can actually develop step by step, we can actually develop these therapies for other indications these therapies for other indications these therapies for other indications like depression. I would say like depression. I would say like depression. I would say the most impressive and consistent the most impressive and consistent the most impressive and consistent effect we have when we have a patient effect we have when we have a patient effect we have when we have a patient with tremor who has been trembling for with tremor who has been trembling for with tremor who has been trembling for the past 20 years, if we can deliver the past 20 years, if we can deliver the past 20 years, if we can deliver stimulation through that electrode in stimulation through that electrode in stimulation through that electrode in the clinic, we have immediate relief of the clinic, we have immediate relief of the clinic, we have immediate relief of tremor and tremor and tremor and that is the effect that inspired me to that is the effect that inspired me to that is the effect that inspired me to be a neurosurgeon when I was in college. be a neurosurgeon when I was in college. be a neurosurgeon when I was in college. I've never really wanted to do anything I've never really wanted to do anything I've never really wanted to do anything else except help develop that type of else except help develop that type of else except help develop that type of therapeutic for an other another kind of therapeutic for an other another kind of therapeutic for an other another kind of symptom. I'd love to learn more from you symptom. I'd love to learn more from you symptom. I'd love to learn more from you about OCD. Could you perhaps just tell about OCD. Could you perhaps just tell about OCD. Could you perhaps just tell us what is OCD? Sure. us what is OCD? Sure. us what is OCD? Sure. What are some brain areas involved? What are some brain areas involved? What are some brain areas involved? What are the current range of treatments? And are the current range of treatments? And are the current range of treatments? And what's the difference between someone what's the difference between someone what's the difference between someone who is obsessive and somebody who has who is obsessive and somebody who has who is obsessive and somebody who has true OCD? My perspective on OCD may be a true OCD? My perspective on OCD may be a true OCD? My perspective on OCD may be a little bit different than a psychiatrist little bit different than a psychiatrist little bit different than a psychiatrist who lives and breathes OCD and sees who lives and breathes OCD and sees who lives and breathes OCD and sees patients every single day with OCD. patients every single day with OCD. patients every single day with OCD. Uh I probably take care of a three to Uh I probably take care of a three to Uh I probably take care of a three to five patients a year with deep brain five patients a year with deep brain five patients a year with deep brain stimulation for obsessive-compulsive stimulation for obsessive-compulsive stimulation for obsessive-compulsive disorder. So I don't see these patients disorder. So I don't see these patients disorder. So I don't see these patients as routinely, but my laboratory is as routinely, but my laboratory is as routinely, but my laboratory is geared as a researcher. Uh I'm very geared as a researcher. Uh I'm very geared as a researcher. Uh I'm very focused on trying to focused on trying to focused on trying to improve outcomes of deep brain improve outcomes of deep brain improve outcomes of deep brain stimulation for OCD. So I do feel stimulation for OCD. So I do feel stimulation for OCD. So I do feel I have expertise and a perspective I have expertise and a perspective I have expertise and a perspective to share. I do feel that as a to share. I do feel that as a to share. I do feel that as a neurosurgeon, I am neurosurgeon, I am neurosurgeon, I am obligated to better understand where the obligated to better understand where the obligated to better understand where the obsessions in the brain come from and obsessions in the brain come from and obsessions in the brain come from and how we can interrupt them to stop the how we can interrupt them to stop the how we can interrupt them to stop the compulsion that's associated with the compulsion that's associated with the compulsion that's associated with the obsession better than we're actually obsession better than we're actually obsession better than we're actually doing it. I've been uh leading an doing it. I've been uh leading an doing it. I've been uh leading an endeavor with a number of collaborators endeavor with a number of collaborators endeavor with a number of collaborators around the country to try to around the country to try to around the country to try to better understand the circuits in the better understand the circuits in the better understand the circuits in the brain, uh study them in humans both brain, uh study them in humans both brain, uh study them in humans both invasively and non-invasively. That invasively and non-invasively. That invasively and non-invasively. That would be with an electrode-based would be with an electrode-based would be with an electrode-based surgery, uh sort of like we do in surgery, uh sort of like we do in surgery, uh sort of like we do in epilepsy to understand where seizures epilepsy to understand where seizures epilepsy to understand where seizures come from. We want to understand better come from. We want to understand better come from. We want to understand better where obsessions come from, but we're where obsessions come from, but we're where obsessions come from, but we're also working with imaging experts and also working with imaging experts and also working with imaging experts and geneticists to understand OCD geneticists to understand OCD geneticists to understand OCD at a broader level as well. I consider at a broader level as well. I consider at a broader level as well. I consider OCD to be a spectrum disorder in a OCD to be a spectrum disorder in a OCD to be a spectrum disorder in a way. And I way. And I way. And I apologize to those who might I apologize to those who might I apologize to those who might feel that I'm using that term feel that I'm using that term feel that I'm using that term incorrectly. I'm using it incorrectly. I'm using it incorrectly. I'm using it in a way to describe in a way to describe in a way to describe patients that have obsessions and even patients that have obsessions and even patients that have obsessions and even some related compulsions might not meet some related compulsions might not meet some related compulsions might not meet criteria for OCD. As a neurosurgeon, I'm criteria for OCD. As a neurosurgeon, I'm criteria for OCD. As a neurosurgeon, I'm really obsessive about safety and really obsessive about safety and really obsessive about safety and compulsive about my surgical procedures. compulsive about my surgical procedures. compulsive about my surgical procedures. So, you know, I think that some aspect So, you know, I think that some aspect So, you know, I think that some aspect of OCD, which we often joke about, but of OCD, which we often joke about, but of OCD, which we often joke about, but we should, you know, consider seriously we should, you know, consider seriously we should, you know, consider seriously cuz people do suffer from this. cuz people do suffer from this. cuz people do suffer from this. Uh some aspect of it helps us. Uh there Uh some aspect of it helps us. Uh there Uh some aspect of it helps us. Uh there are, you know, famous uh CEOs that are, you know, famous uh CEOs that are, you know, famous uh CEOs that probably have some level of OCD. Uh probably have some level of OCD. Uh probably have some level of OCD. Uh surgeons and scientists alike. So, surgeons and scientists alike. So, surgeons and scientists alike. So, uh perhaps if it can be controlled, it's uh perhaps if it can be controlled, it's uh perhaps if it can be controlled, it's an asset. And uh but if it goes awry, an asset. And uh but if it goes awry, an asset. And uh but if it goes awry, it's uncontrollable, then it becomes it's uncontrollable, then it becomes it's uncontrollable, then it becomes obsessive-compulsive disorder. And obsessive-compulsive disorder. And obsessive-compulsive disorder. And uh I tend to see the patients that are uh I tend to see the patients that are uh I tend to see the patients that are the most severe. So, they have failed the most severe. So, they have failed the most severe. So, they have failed medication. And there are multiple medication. And there are multiple medication. And there are multiple medications that are worth trying for medications that are worth trying for medications that are worth trying for OCD. Some can actually be very helpful. OCD. Some can actually be very helpful. OCD. Some can actually be very helpful. Which which neurotransmitter systems do Which which neurotransmitter systems do Which which neurotransmitter systems do they tend to poke at? they tend to poke at? they tend to poke at? &gt;&gt; Well, SSRIs are sort of the first uh &gt;&gt; Well, SSRIs are sort of the first uh &gt;&gt; Well, SSRIs are sort of the first uh line for OCD, but also tricyclics can be line for OCD, but also tricyclics can be line for OCD, but also tricyclics can be helpful. So, this is still the serotonin helpful. So, this is still the serotonin helpful. So, this is still the serotonin system. Um but as we know, the serotonin system. Um but as we know, the serotonin system. Um but as we know, the serotonin system interacts with the, you know, system interacts with the, you know, system interacts with the, you know, noradrenergic uh system and the dopamine noradrenergic uh system and the dopamine noradrenergic uh system and the dopamine system. So, it's hard to um system. So, it's hard to um system. So, it's hard to um be specific to one of these things. And be specific to one of these things. And be specific to one of these things. And I think that's also why it's hard for us I think that's also why it's hard for us I think that's also why it's hard for us to predict how these medications are to predict how these medications are to predict how these medications are going to work for these kinds of going to work for these kinds of going to work for these kinds of patients. But tricyclics and SSRIs can patients. But tricyclics and SSRIs can patients. But tricyclics and SSRIs can be very helpful and are definitely first be very helpful and are definitely first be very helpful and are definitely first line. And there's others. Exposure line. And there's others. Exposure line. And there's others. Exposure response prevention is probably the most response prevention is probably the most response prevention is probably the most effective option, which is kind of like effective option, which is kind of like effective option, which is kind of like cognitive behavioral therapy, but these cognitive behavioral therapy, but these cognitive behavioral therapy, but these are different and offered by are different and offered by are different and offered by psychologists and this is a whole field psychologists and this is a whole field psychologists and this is a whole field and there's a whole clinic at my and there's a whole clinic at my and there's a whole clinic at my institution uh focused to start by Edna Foa um uh focused to start by Edna Foa um uh focused to start by Edna Foa um uh at Penn who at Penn who at Penn who this is what they do for these patients this is what they do for these patients this is what they do for these patients uh is offer these types of cognitive uh is offer these types of cognitive uh is offer these types of cognitive therapies exposure to the stressor and therapies exposure to the stressor and therapies exposure to the stressor and to try to get patients to habituate to try to get patients to habituate to try to get patients to habituate to whatever it is that stresses them and whatever it is that stresses them and whatever it is that stresses them and causes these causes these causes these uh compulsions to help these patients uh compulsions to help these patients uh compulsions to help these patients live in everyday and function. The live in everyday and function. The live in everyday and function. The these are all these are all these are all fabulously helpful uh therapies for a fabulously helpful uh therapies for a fabulously helpful uh therapies for a variety of patients, but there's still variety of patients, but there's still variety of patients, but there's still about 30% of patients that still suffer about 30% of patients that still suffer about 30% of patients that still suffer from OCD and some of them have severe from OCD and some of them have severe from OCD and some of them have severe OCD. Sometimes it's moderate to severe OCD. Sometimes it's moderate to severe OCD. Sometimes it's moderate to severe and those are the patients that I'm and those are the patients that I'm and those are the patients that I'm really motivated to try to help. Um really motivated to try to help. Um really motivated to try to help. Um our therapies for those patients right our therapies for those patients right our therapies for those patients right now uh I would say are worth now uh I would say are worth now uh I would say are worth pursuing, but not optimal. Um and so pursuing, but not optimal. Um and so pursuing, but not optimal. Um and so it's one of those things that we it's one of those things that we it's one of those things that we have to balance as a researcher because have to balance as a researcher because have to balance as a researcher because when you see patients like this, you when you see patients like this, you when you see patients like this, you want to do everything you can to help want to do everything you can to help want to do everything you can to help them and I think it's important to them and I think it's important to them and I think it's important to educate patients on the risk and educate patients on the risk and educate patients on the risk and benefits of them. This is deep brain benefits of them. This is deep brain benefits of them. This is deep brain stimulation surgery, but also stimulation surgery, but also stimulation surgery, but also capsulotomy, which is more of an capsulotomy, which is more of an capsulotomy, which is more of an ablation approach a little bit like deep ablation approach a little bit like deep ablation approach a little bit like deep brain stimulation, but rather than brain stimulation, but rather than brain stimulation, but rather than delivering stimulation through an delivering stimulation through an delivering stimulation through an electrode, you can actually heat the electrode, you can actually heat the electrode, you can actually heat the tissue and even destroy it. Some would tissue and even destroy it. Some would tissue and even destroy it. Some would say this part of the brain is very safe say this part of the brain is very safe say this part of the brain is very safe to destroy. It's kind of like an to destroy. It's kind of like an to destroy. It's kind of like an appendix. Um others would say it's safer appendix. Um others would say it's safer appendix. Um others would say it's safer to modulate. I have seen uh patients do to modulate. I have seen uh patients do to modulate. I have seen uh patients do very well with these ablations and so very well with these ablations and so very well with these ablations and so you know, you asked me earlier what you know, you asked me earlier what you know, you asked me earlier what I find so amazing about the brain, these I find so amazing about the brain, these I find so amazing about the brain, these effects that we can have. Sometimes the effects that we can have. Sometimes the effects that we can have. Sometimes the lack of effect is what's so amazing. You lack of effect is what's so amazing. You lack of effect is what's so amazing. You can actually uh can actually uh can actually uh traverse parts of the brain without traverse parts of the brain without traverse parts of the brain without having any adverse effects on patients having any adverse effects on patients having any adverse effects on patients um function at least that you can test. um function at least that you can test. um function at least that you can test. Um but you can also destroy small parts Um but you can also destroy small parts Um but you can also destroy small parts of the brain. We're talking 3 or 4 mm in of the brain. We're talking 3 or 4 mm in of the brain. We're talking 3 or 4 mm in size. These little ablations can be size. These little ablations can be size. These little ablations can be really helpful for patients, but have no really helpful for patients, but have no really helpful for patients, but have no obvious side effects that we can tell. obvious side effects that we can tell. obvious side effects that we can tell. Perhaps after a short recovery from Perhaps after a short recovery from Perhaps after a short recovery from surgery. Uh but nonetheless, despite how surgery. Uh but nonetheless, despite how surgery. Uh but nonetheless, despite how safe they might be, uh these surgical safe they might be, uh these surgical safe they might be, uh these surgical procedures still are surgical procedures still are surgical procedures still are surgical procedures, and patients are hesitant to procedures, and patients are hesitant to procedures, and patients are hesitant to proceed, especially when they know that proceed, especially when they know that proceed, especially when they know that their chance of a transformative effect their chance of a transformative effect their chance of a transformative effect is quite low. We we can generally is quite low. We we can generally is quite low. We we can generally um uh achieve a responder rate of about 50%. achieve a responder rate of about 50%. achieve a responder rate of about 50%. Um and responders still have symptomatic Um and responders still have symptomatic Um and responders still have symptomatic OCD. So, I'm really uh OCD. So, I'm really uh OCD. So, I'm really uh sort of inspired to uh really find a uh sort of inspired to uh really find a uh sort of inspired to uh really find a way to deliver these therapies in a more way to deliver these therapies in a more way to deliver these therapies in a more disease-specific or symptom-specific disease-specific or symptom-specific disease-specific or symptom-specific way. Were one to way. Were one to way. Were one to come into your clinic this, you know, come into your clinic this, you know, come into your clinic this, you know, for this sort of a work of ablations or for this sort of a work of ablations or for this sort of a work of ablations or stimulation, uh where would you first stimulation, uh where would you first stimulation, uh where would you first start to probe in the brain? start to probe in the brain? start to probe in the brain? Yeah, you this is a Yeah, you this is a Yeah, you this is a uh a disorder of both cortex and the sub- a disorder of both cortex and the sub- a disorder of both cortex and the sub- subcortex. We find that areas in the subcortex. We find that areas in the subcortex. We find that areas in the cortex like the prefrontal and cortex like the prefrontal and cortex like the prefrontal and orbitalfrontal cortex are not orbitalfrontal cortex are not orbitalfrontal cortex are not functioning they the way they would in a functioning they the way they would in a functioning they the way they would in a non-OCD patient. They're often non-OCD patient. They're often non-OCD patient. They're often hyperfunctioning, and we need to find a hyperfunctioning, and we need to find a hyperfunctioning, and we need to find a way to try to normalize their function. way to try to normalize their function. way to try to normalize their function. And then there are projections to the And then there are projections to the And then there are projections to the subcortex, this is the basal ganglia, subcortex, this is the basal ganglia, subcortex, this is the basal ganglia, the caudate, putamen, or the dorsal the caudate, putamen, or the dorsal the caudate, putamen, or the dorsal striatum, and these are interconnected striatum, and these are interconnected striatum, and these are interconnected with the ventral striatum. This is an with the ventral striatum. This is an with the ventral striatum. This is an area of the brain that uh focus a lot of area of the brain that uh focus a lot of area of the brain that uh focus a lot of my energy in. Um this is the ventral my energy in. Um this is the ventral my energy in. Um this is the ventral striatum, which is not limited to but striatum, which is not limited to but striatum, which is not limited to but includes the nucleus accumbens. Um this includes the nucleus accumbens. Um this includes the nucleus accumbens. Um this is an area of the brain that uh we know is an area of the brain that uh we know is an area of the brain that uh we know to be involved in gating reward-seeking to be involved in gating reward-seeking to be involved in gating reward-seeking behavior. When it's perturbed, it seems behavior. When it's perturbed, it seems behavior. When it's perturbed, it seems to gate compulsive behavior, meaning a to gate compulsive behavior, meaning a to gate compulsive behavior, meaning a rat will pursue a reward despite rat will pursue a reward despite rat will pursue a reward despite punishment, despite a foot shock, for punishment, despite a foot shock, for punishment, despite a foot shock, for example. And that can be similar to an example. And that can be similar to an example. And that can be similar to an OCD patient. They will check their home OCD patient. They will check their home OCD patient. They will check their home for safety uh until 3:00 a.m. in the for safety uh until 3:00 a.m. in the for safety uh until 3:00 a.m. in the morning and not sleep that night. Doing morning and not sleep that night. Doing morning and not sleep that night. Doing something because of the urge, but something because of the urge, but something because of the urge, but despite the risk. When our judgment is despite the risk. When our judgment is despite the risk. When our judgment is consistently uh sort of puts us at risk, that's where uh sort of puts us at risk, that's where uh sort of puts us at risk, that's where we have something like OCD. we have something like OCD. we have something like OCD. Contamination behavior, where they if Contamination behavior, where they if Contamination behavior, where they if they feel contaminated they'll wash they feel contaminated they'll wash they feel contaminated they'll wash their hands for hours repeatedly or if their hands for hours repeatedly or if their hands for hours repeatedly or if they drop their toothbrush on the floor they drop their toothbrush on the floor they drop their toothbrush on the floor this will lead to a compulsive behavior this will lead to a compulsive behavior this will lead to a compulsive behavior of cleaning a toothbrush or brushing of cleaning a toothbrush or brushing of cleaning a toothbrush or brushing your teeth consistently very common your teeth consistently very common your teeth consistently very common symptoms that we see or signs that the symptoms that we see or signs that the symptoms that we see or signs that the patients report to us or that we patients report to us or that we patients report to us or that we observe but you know patients with observe but you know patients with observe but you know patients with eating disorders you know they tend to eating disorders you know they tend to eating disorders you know they tend to if they have bingeing disorder if they have bingeing disorder if they have bingeing disorder they'll overeat if they have bulimia they'll overeat if they have bulimia they'll overeat if they have bulimia they might purge despite the risk of they might purge despite the risk of they might purge despite the risk of these things and so these things and so these things and so addiction is similar we tend to addiction is similar we tend to addiction is similar we tend to drug seek if we're addicted drug seek if we're addicted drug seek if we're addicted we'll pay off a dealer in order to we'll pay off a dealer in order to we'll pay off a dealer in order to get our fix and despite the risk and get our fix and despite the risk and get our fix and despite the risk and that type of urge despite the risk is that type of urge despite the risk is that type of urge despite the risk is something that I I've always been really something that I I've always been really something that I I've always been really interested in and it's a common interested in and it's a common interested in and it's a common denominator to all of these problems and denominator to all of these problems and denominator to all of these problems and if you think about these problems I mean if you think about these problems I mean if you think about these problems I mean these are some of the most common these are some of the most common these are some of the most common conditions in our society today and I conditions in our society today and I conditions in our society today and I think the nucleus accumbens and the think the nucleus accumbens and the think the nucleus accumbens and the cortical areas that we've been cortical areas that we've been cortical areas that we've been discussing that sort of send discussing that sort of send discussing that sort of send projections to these areas are projections to these areas are projections to these areas are probably at least one of the main probably at least one of the main probably at least one of the main circuits involved in these kinds of circuits involved in these kinds of circuits involved in these kinds of things What is nucleus accumbens what things What is nucleus accumbens what things What is nucleus accumbens what roles does it play in healthy brain roles does it play in healthy brain roles does it play in healthy brain behavior and in pathology? Yeah the behavior and in pathology? Yeah the behavior and in pathology? Yeah the nucleus accumbens is a part of the brain nucleus accumbens is a part of the brain nucleus accumbens is a part of the brain part of our reward circuits it has a lot part of our reward circuits it has a lot part of our reward circuits it has a lot of functions uh of functions uh of functions uh it interconnects with many parts of it interconnects with many parts of it interconnects with many parts of the brain so when I started getting the brain so when I started getting the brain so when I started getting interested in interested in interested in reward and what a what I could do as a reward and what a what I could do as a reward and what a what I could do as a surgeon to try to improve how we manage surgeon to try to improve how we manage surgeon to try to improve how we manage rewards and what I mean by that specifically is and what I mean by that specifically is and what I mean by that specifically is if you have an urge for a reward if you have an urge for a reward if you have an urge for a reward that that's a normal phenomenon that that's a normal phenomenon that that's a normal phenomenon that that's not something we're trying to that's not something we're trying to that's not something we're trying to stop but the issue is if you have an stop but the issue is if you have an stop but the issue is if you have an urge for a reward that either puts you urge for a reward that either puts you urge for a reward that either puts you or somebody else at risk it's probably a or somebody else at risk it's probably a or somebody else at risk it's probably a reward we shouldn't have if you're a reward we shouldn't have if you're a reward we shouldn't have if you're a drug addict and you use heroin or opiate drug addict and you use heroin or opiate drug addict and you use heroin or opiate that opiate might make you feel better that opiate might make you feel better that opiate might make you feel better cuz life is stressful but the risk of cuz life is stressful but the risk of cuz life is stressful but the risk of doing those things is really high. In doing those things is really high. In doing those things is really high. In fact, potentially lethal. If you have fact, potentially lethal. If you have fact, potentially lethal. If you have OCD and you OCD and you OCD and you can't sleep at night because you're so can't sleep at night because you're so can't sleep at night because you're so nervous that you didn't lock the door nervous that you didn't lock the door nervous that you didn't lock the door and you've checked 30 times. That's an and you've checked 30 times. That's an and you've checked 30 times. That's an urge we got to treat. Eating disorders urge we got to treat. Eating disorders urge we got to treat. Eating disorders the same. This problem can be the same. This problem can be the same. This problem can be ameliorated or improved upon by a better ameliorated or improved upon by a better ameliorated or improved upon by a better understanding and a tailored treatment understanding and a tailored treatment understanding and a tailored treatment to the nucleus accumbens specifically. to the nucleus accumbens specifically. to the nucleus accumbens specifically. It seems that repeated exposure to It seems that repeated exposure to It seems that repeated exposure to something like a drug of abuse or any something like a drug of abuse or any something like a drug of abuse or any type of reward that is a really strong type of reward that is a really strong type of reward that is a really strong reward. In a way, it can hijack normal In a way, it can hijack normal In a way, it can hijack normal functioning of the nucleus accumbens. functioning of the nucleus accumbens. functioning of the nucleus accumbens. So, the goal is to just disrupt So, the goal is to just disrupt So, the goal is to just disrupt perhaps what is kind of habitual. perhaps what is kind of habitual. perhaps what is kind of habitual. Um or at least this or at least this or at least this kind of recurring problem that is kind of recurring problem that is kind of recurring problem that is happening. You know, people that have happening. You know, people that have happening. You know, people that have binge eating disorder, at least at a binge eating disorder, at least at a binge eating disorder, at least at a severe level, they tend to binge about severe level, they tend to binge about severe level, they tend to binge about once a day. once a day. once a day. So, what we decided to do in the So, what we decided to do in the So, what we decided to do in the operating room was operating room was operating room was to actually try to leverage a tool that to actually try to leverage a tool that to actually try to leverage a tool that we use all the time when we take care of we use all the time when we take care of we use all the time when we take care of patients with Parkinson's. So, with patients with Parkinson's. So, with patients with Parkinson's. So, with Parkinson's, these a lot of these Parkinson's, these a lot of these Parkinson's, these a lot of these patients, not all, have tremor. patients, not all, have tremor. patients, not all, have tremor. And so, when we place an electrode into And so, when we place an electrode into And so, when we place an electrode into this motor structure this motor structure this motor structure to try to improve their movement to try to improve their movement to try to improve their movement disorder, uh we often can hear tremor cells. uh we often can hear tremor cells. uh we often can hear tremor cells. And they sound we convert their And they sound we convert their And they sound we convert their electrical signal to an audible signal electrical signal to an audible signal electrical signal to an audible signal so we can actually hear it. And it so we can actually hear it. And it so we can actually hear it. And it sounds kind of like the tremor looks, sounds kind of like the tremor looks, sounds kind of like the tremor looks, like the frequency of the signal is the like the frequency of the signal is the like the frequency of the signal is the same as the hand shaking. same as the hand shaking. same as the hand shaking. Exactly. And you're poking around in a Exactly. And you're poking around in a Exactly. And you're poking around in a dedicated, careful way, of course. One dedicated, careful way, of course. One dedicated, careful way, of course. One poke at a time. One poke at a time with poke at a time. One poke at a time with poke at a time. One poke at a time with a very fine wire or set of wires, a very fine wire or set of wires, a very fine wire or set of wires, listening to the electrical activity listening to the electrical activity listening to the electrical activity until you until you until you encounter some cells that are you encounter some cells that are you encounter some cells that are sending out electrical activity That's sending out electrical activity That's sending out electrical activity That's right. at a similar frequency. Exactly. right. at a similar frequency. Exactly. right. at a similar frequency. Exactly. And then you can stimulate them or quiet And then you can stimulate them or quiet And then you can stimulate them or quiet them and see if the tremor goes away. them and see if the tremor goes away. them and see if the tremor goes away. So, we are very confident that when So, we are very confident that when So, we are very confident that when we stimulate that area of, in this case, we stimulate that area of, in this case, we stimulate that area of, in this case, the subthalamic nucleus. We will disrupt the subthalamic nucleus. We will disrupt the subthalamic nucleus. We will disrupt that tremor circuit and that tremor will that tremor circuit and that tremor will that tremor circuit and that tremor will dissolve and it does. So what is the dissolve and it does. So what is the dissolve and it does. So what is the analog to tremor in terms of appetite analog to tremor in terms of appetite analog to tremor in terms of appetite and desire to binge? and desire to binge? and desire to binge? &gt;&gt; Craving. &gt;&gt; Craving. &gt;&gt; Craving. So craving is a term So craving is a term So craving is a term that you know, there's probably other that you know, there's probably other that you know, there's probably other terms we could use by the way, but that terms we could use by the way, but that terms we could use by the way, but that that's the term we've chosen to use for that's the term we've chosen to use for that's the term we've chosen to use for a number of reasons. One because people a number of reasons. One because people a number of reasons. One because people relate with that term. People that have relate with that term. People that have relate with that term. People that have binge eating disorder or obesity, they binge eating disorder or obesity, they binge eating disorder or obesity, they if you ask them if they crave the answer if you ask them if they crave the answer if you ask them if they crave the answer will often be yes. will often be yes. will often be yes. If you ask them if they lose control or If you ask them if they lose control or If you ask them if they lose control or binge, they might not know what you mean binge, they might not know what you mean binge, they might not know what you mean or they might not actually feel out of or they might not actually feel out of or they might not actually feel out of control even when they are. control even when they are. control even when they are. Um So uh So uh So uh but the word craving is relatable and so but the word craving is relatable and so but the word craving is relatable and so we set out to see if we could identify we set out to see if we could identify we set out to see if we could identify craving cells. craving cells. craving cells. Um in a patient with OCD, which is Um in a patient with OCD, which is Um in a patient with OCD, which is related, in fact we target a very related, in fact we target a very related, in fact we target a very similar part of the brain. similar part of the brain. similar part of the brain. Uh we tried to identify we tried to identify we tried to identify cells related to obsessions and we cells related to obsessions and we cells related to obsessions and we believe we did do that. It was a single believe we did do that. It was a single believe we did do that. It was a single case study uh where we tried to optimize case study uh where we tried to optimize case study uh where we tried to optimize where our electrode was placed. So we where our electrode was placed. So we where our electrode was placed. So we had some had some had some proof of concept that we would be able proof of concept that we would be able proof of concept that we would be able to elicit a sort of disease specific to elicit a sort of disease specific to elicit a sort of disease specific symptom in the operating room assuming symptom in the operating room assuming symptom in the operating room assuming the patient could tolerate being awake. the patient could tolerate being awake. the patient could tolerate being awake. Not everybody needs to be awake for this Not everybody needs to be awake for this Not everybody needs to be awake for this procedure, but at least for these first procedure, but at least for these first procedure, but at least for these first in human trials where in human trials where in human trials where um we're trying we're trying to um we're trying we're trying to um we're trying we're trying to establish where in the brain we need to establish where in the brain we need to establish where in the brain we need to be, uh I think this type of approach is be, uh I think this type of approach is be, uh I think this type of approach is really critical. What is the status of really critical. What is the status of really critical. What is the status of non-invasive brain stimulation, non-invasive brain stimulation, non-invasive brain stimulation, ablation, and blocking activity in the ablation, and blocking activity in the ablation, and blocking activity in the brain? My understanding is that brain? My understanding is that brain? My understanding is that transcranial magnetic stimulation is transcranial magnetic stimulation is transcranial magnetic stimulation is being used to treat depression and a being used to treat depression and a being used to treat depression and a number of other number of other number of other um brain syndromes um brain syndromes um brain syndromes uh non-invasively, so no drilling uh non-invasively, so no drilling uh non-invasively, so no drilling through the skull. My understanding is through the skull. My understanding is through the skull. My understanding is that the spatial precision isn't that the spatial precision isn't that the spatial precision isn't that great. &gt;&gt; Yes. Um &gt;&gt; Yes. Um &gt;&gt; Yes. Um ultrasound is something I hear a lot ultrasound is something I hear a lot ultrasound is something I hear a lot about these days um and my understanding about these days um and my understanding about these days um and my understanding is that ultrasound can allow researchers is that ultrasound can allow researchers is that ultrasound can allow researchers and clinicians to stimulate specific and clinicians to stimulate specific and clinicians to stimulate specific brain areas. What are your thoughts on brain areas. What are your thoughts on brain areas. What are your thoughts on these forms of non-invasive, meaning no these forms of non-invasive, meaning no these forms of non-invasive, meaning no flipping open of a piece of the no flipping open of a piece of the no flipping open of a piece of the skull, type brain stimulation and skull, type brain stimulation and skull, type brain stimulation and blockade of brain activity? blockade of brain activity? blockade of brain activity? &gt;&gt; We need to embrace non-invasive &gt;&gt; We need to embrace non-invasive &gt;&gt; We need to embrace non-invasive approaches. Some of them are a little approaches. Some of them are a little approaches. Some of them are a little fluffy in that we don't understand how fluffy in that we don't understand how fluffy in that we don't understand how they work. they work. they work. We don't necessarily understand how deep We don't necessarily understand how deep We don't necessarily understand how deep brain stimulation works, by the way, so brain stimulation works, by the way, so brain stimulation works, by the way, so but because we don't know exactly how but because we don't know exactly how but because we don't know exactly how they work, they're not as precise as we they work, they're not as precise as we they work, they're not as precise as we would like them to be. So, we have work would like them to be. So, we have work would like them to be. So, we have work to do there, and I actually think that to do there, and I actually think that to do there, and I actually think that work is doable and actually underway. work is doable and actually underway. work is doable and actually underway. TMS, transcranial magnetic stimulation, TMS, transcranial magnetic stimulation, TMS, transcranial magnetic stimulation, it is FDA-approved for depression, by it is FDA-approved for depression, by it is FDA-approved for depression, by the way. It's also FDA-approved for OCD the way. It's also FDA-approved for OCD the way. It's also FDA-approved for OCD and for nicotine addiction. We believe and for nicotine addiction. We believe and for nicotine addiction. We believe we can use TMS to define a circuit we can use TMS to define a circuit we can use TMS to define a circuit that if modulated improves OCD, albeit that if modulated improves OCD, albeit that if modulated improves OCD, albeit temporarily. And in those patients, if temporarily. And in those patients, if temporarily. And in those patients, if it's temporary, they would be it's temporary, they would be it's temporary, they would be appropriate for an invasive study. So, appropriate for an invasive study. So, appropriate for an invasive study. So, um something we're actively working on. um something we're actively working on. um something we're actively working on. I've always believed that neurosurgeons I've always believed that neurosurgeons I've always believed that neurosurgeons need to be part of the discussion with need to be part of the discussion with need to be part of the discussion with these non-invasive approaches. We don't these non-invasive approaches. We don't these non-invasive approaches. We don't need to do them. Um need to do them. Um need to do them. Um but um I think we can help make them but um I think we can help make them but um I think we can help make them more precise and to probe non-invasively more precise and to probe non-invasively more precise and to probe non-invasively with purpose. Perhaps one day there will with purpose. Perhaps one day there will with purpose. Perhaps one day there will be a TMS target for anorexia and be a TMS target for anorexia and be a TMS target for anorexia and obesity. Uh if we are scratching the surface with if we are scratching the surface with if we are scratching the surface with invasive approaches to these problems, invasive approaches to these problems, invasive approaches to these problems, we we're even doing less with the brain we we're even doing less with the brain we we're even doing less with the brain stimulation. Um so, we have so much work stimulation. Um so, we have so much work stimulation. Um so, we have so much work to do there. Eating disorders and TMS to do there. Eating disorders and TMS to do there. Eating disorders and TMS have been so um sort of have been so um sort of have been so um sort of scarcely studied or scarcely studied or scarcely studied or there have been such little research there have been such little research there have been such little research done in that space. Um so, it is done in that space. Um so, it is done in that space. Um so, it is an area that we need to work on. So, an area that we need to work on. So, an area that we need to work on. So, ultrasound right now ultrasound right now ultrasound right now transcranial magnetic guide transcranial magnetic guide transcranial magnetic guide magnetic resonance-guided focused magnetic resonance-guided focused magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound. So, um ultrasound. So, um ultrasound. So, um uh this is an FDA-approved uh this is an FDA-approved uh this is an FDA-approved method to method to method to deliver an ablation to the brain deliver an ablation to the brain deliver an ablation to the brain non-invasively. There are uh researchers, myself There are uh researchers, myself There are uh researchers, myself included, that are trying to use included, that are trying to use included, that are trying to use transcranial magnetic guided magnetic transcranial magnetic guided magnetic transcranial magnetic guided magnetic resonance guided focused ultrasound or resonance guided focused ultrasound or resonance guided focused ultrasound or MRI guided focused ultrasound MRI guided focused ultrasound MRI guided focused ultrasound to use it in a modulatory way, not just to use it in a modulatory way, not just to use it in a modulatory way, not just as an ablation, but to drive neuronal as an ablation, but to drive neuronal as an ablation, but to drive neuronal activity or inhibit it, perhaps. We're activity or inhibit it, perhaps. We're activity or inhibit it, perhaps. We're still learning how to do that. Um still learning how to do that. Um still learning how to do that. Um there are trials that are trying to there are trials that are trying to there are trials that are trying to understand if you can use ultrasound to understand if you can use ultrasound to understand if you can use ultrasound to open the blood-brain barrier so you can open the blood-brain barrier so you can open the blood-brain barrier so you can deliver a medication to that specific deliver a medication to that specific deliver a medication to that specific area. Perhaps for a brain tumor or area. Perhaps for a brain tumor or area. Perhaps for a brain tumor or something like that. something like that. something like that. So, it's a very exciting field So, it's a very exciting field So, it's a very exciting field and it is FDA approved for tremor right and it is FDA approved for tremor right and it is FDA approved for tremor right now. And so, I actually now. And so, I actually now. And so, I actually do it routinely. do it routinely. do it routinely. For patients with tremor with For patients with tremor with For patients with tremor with Parkinson's or essential tremor. Parkinson's or essential tremor. Parkinson's or essential tremor. And so, I love doing it. It's often And so, I love doing it. It's often And so, I love doing it. It's often just kind of a miracle because there's just kind of a miracle because there's just kind of a miracle because there's no incision. I don't have to place an no incision. I don't have to place an no incision. I don't have to place an electrode into the brain to achieve a electrode into the brain to achieve a electrode into the brain to achieve a similar result. It's fabulously similar result. It's fabulously similar result. It's fabulously effective for these patients. It treats effective for these patients. It treats effective for these patients. It treats patients on one side, usually their patients on one side, usually their patients on one side, usually their dominant hand or their worse hand. And dominant hand or their worse hand. And dominant hand or their worse hand. And it um it um it um it really speaks to the fact that well, it really speaks to the fact that well, it really speaks to the fact that well, you can deliver non-invasively an you can deliver non-invasively an you can deliver non-invasively an ablation to the brain in a hypothesized ablation to the brain in a hypothesized ablation to the brain in a hypothesized zone that we think is related to the zone that we think is related to the zone that we think is related to the problem at hand. And at least with problem at hand. And at least with problem at hand. And at least with tremor, it works really well. Could this tremor, it works really well. Could this tremor, it works really well. Could this be effective for psychiatric disease, be effective for psychiatric disease, be effective for psychiatric disease, obesity, eating disorders? Uh obesity, eating disorders? Uh obesity, eating disorders? Uh well, perhaps. Actually, that would be the ideal. Actually, that would be the ideal. Actually, that would be the ideal. The problem is we don't know where to do The problem is we don't know where to do The problem is we don't know where to do the ablation. the ablation. the ablation. Um there is a trial that we would like Um there is a trial that we would like Um there is a trial that we would like to do for OCD where we would deliver an to do for OCD where we would deliver an to do for OCD where we would deliver an ablation to the same area of the brain ablation to the same area of the brain ablation to the same area of the brain that we've been delivering ablations to that we've been delivering ablations to that we've been delivering ablations to for years for patients with OCD and it for years for patients with OCD and it for years for patients with OCD and it helps a bit. That's called a helps a bit. That's called a helps a bit. That's called a capsulotomy. Um capsulotomy. Um capsulotomy. Um but really the outcome is probably going but really the outcome is probably going but really the outcome is probably going to be about the same. It's a nice method to be about the same. It's a nice method to be about the same. It's a nice method because it's not invasive, but we because it's not invasive, but we because it's not invasive, but we need to find a new target for these for need to find a new target for these for need to find a new target for these for these conditions. And because of the these conditions. And because of the these conditions. And because of the common denominator of the urge despite common denominator of the urge despite common denominator of the urge despite the risk, sort of that compulsion, um the risk, sort of that compulsion, um the risk, sort of that compulsion, um yeah, perhaps it could be the same yeah, perhaps it could be the same yeah, perhaps it could be the same target. I don't know. Um target. I don't know. Um target. I don't know. Um but I would argue we need to do these but I would argue we need to do these but I would argue we need to do these modulatory experiments either with a modulatory experiments either with a modulatory experiments either with a device or with invasive recordings uh to device or with invasive recordings uh to device or with invasive recordings uh to better understand where these problems better understand where these problems better understand where these problems are coming from, to define where we are coming from, to define where we are coming from, to define where we should do an ultrasound treatment. There should do an ultrasound treatment. There should do an ultrasound treatment. There has been a revolution in America. It was has been a revolution in America. It was has been a revolution in America. It was in Europe before it was in America where in Europe before it was in America where in Europe before it was in America where we would do stereoencephalography, we would do stereoencephalography, we would do stereoencephalography, which is basically like doing an EEG of which is basically like doing an EEG of which is basically like doing an EEG of patients with epilepsy, but with patients with epilepsy, but with patients with epilepsy, but with invasive electrodes. And we would place invasive electrodes. And we would place invasive electrodes. And we would place tiny little wires less than a millimeter tiny little wires less than a millimeter tiny little wires less than a millimeter diameter all throughout the brain into diameter all throughout the brain into diameter all throughout the brain into parts of the brain that we believe are parts of the brain that we believe are parts of the brain that we believe are involved in seizures. involved in seizures. involved in seizures. And we would admit the patients to the And we would admit the patients to the And we would admit the patients to the hospital and figure out where the hospital and figure out where the hospital and figure out where the seizures were starting and propagating. seizures were starting and propagating. seizures were starting and propagating. And then um yeah, we could stimulate And then um yeah, we could stimulate And then um yeah, we could stimulate those electrodes to see if there was a those electrodes to see if there was a those electrodes to see if there was a symptom that was important and I try to symptom that was important and I try to symptom that was important and I try to identify a region that we thought we identify a region that we thought we identify a region that we thought we could either could either could either remove surgically, uh ablate with a remove surgically, uh ablate with a remove surgically, uh ablate with a laser, or put a stimulator in it, laser, or put a stimulator in it, laser, or put a stimulator in it, perhaps. Um that's commonplace now for epilepsy. Um that's commonplace now for epilepsy. Um that's commonplace now for epilepsy. Um and it works extremely well and it's and it works extremely well and it's and it works extremely well and it's very safe. Of course, it's still a brain very safe. Of course, it's still a brain very safe. Of course, it's still a brain procedure, um but the uh the procedure, um but the uh the procedure, um but the uh the complication rate is surprisingly low, complication rate is surprisingly low, complication rate is surprisingly low, quite honestly, for the amount of quite honestly, for the amount of quite honestly, for the amount of electrodes that we place. And it's electrodes that we place. And it's electrodes that we place. And it's extremely well tolerated. Most of these extremely well tolerated. Most of these extremely well tolerated. Most of these patients leave the hospital and they patients leave the hospital and they patients leave the hospital and they don't even feel like they've had don't even feel like they've had don't even feel like they've had surgery. So, uh there's actually a lot of So, uh there's actually a lot of So, uh there's actually a lot of interest in using that procedure to interest in using that procedure to interest in using that procedure to study mental health disorders. We are trying mental health disorders. We are trying mental health disorders. We are trying to do it for patients with obsessive to do it for patients with obsessive to do it for patients with obsessive compul- compulsive disorder. We're compul- compulsive disorder. We're compul- compulsive disorder. We're awaiting an FDA decision on that. Uh but awaiting an FDA decision on that. Uh but awaiting an FDA decision on that. Uh but actually I credit uh actually I credit uh actually I credit uh our colleagues at Baylor and at UCSF for our colleagues at Baylor and at UCSF for our colleagues at Baylor and at UCSF for studying this uh already. Bringing for studying this uh already. Bringing for studying this uh already. Bringing together the epilepsy technique and the together the epilepsy technique and the together the epilepsy technique and the psychiatry expertise to study how we psychiatry expertise to study how we psychiatry expertise to study how we could better target electrodes in could better target electrodes in could better target electrodes in depression. And I'll tell you, if they have a And I'll tell you, if they have a And I'll tell you, if they have a consistent target, consistent target, consistent target, perhaps there becomes an ultrasound perhaps there becomes an ultrasound perhaps there becomes an ultrasound target. Um but right now, the approach target. Um but right now, the approach target. Um but right now, the approach is a bit more reversible cuz you can is a bit more reversible cuz you can is a bit more reversible cuz you can always shut that electrode off or even always shut that electrode off or even always shut that electrode off or even remove the electrode if perhaps it's not remove the electrode if perhaps it's not remove the electrode if perhaps it's not in the optimal location to treat the in the optimal location to treat the in the optimal location to treat the depression. Uh but actually after a large volume of uh but actually after a large volume of uh but actually after a large volume of uh cases, perhaps, they could pool that cases, perhaps, they could pool that cases, perhaps, they could pool that data to develop a new ultrasound data to develop a new ultrasound data to develop a new ultrasound target for depression. I think that target for depression. I think that target for depression. I think that would be fabulous and probably is their would be fabulous and probably is their would be fabulous and probably is their long-term goal. Not to speak for them, long-term goal. Not to speak for them, long-term goal. Not to speak for them, uh but that would be something that I uh but that would be something that I uh but that would be something that I I'm sure is on their radar. I'm sure is on their radar. I'm sure is on their radar. You might ask, "Well, why aren't you You might ask, "Well, why aren't you You might ask, "Well, why aren't you doing this for obesity right now in uh doing this for obesity right now in uh doing this for obesity right now in uh in our in our study?" And the reason is in our in our study?" And the reason is in our in our study?" And the reason is that um that um that um we've developed a target for obesity uh we've developed a target for obesity uh we've developed a target for obesity uh and binge eating disorder uh developed and binge eating disorder uh developed and binge eating disorder uh developed out of mice that we believe um is out of mice that we believe um is out of mice that we believe um is relevant for the human state because you relevant for the human state because you relevant for the human state because you can model this problem in a mouse a bit can model this problem in a mouse a bit can model this problem in a mouse a bit better than you than you can model better than you than you can model better than you than you can model depression or OCD. depression or OCD. depression or OCD. So, we feel like we can rely on the So, we feel like we can rely on the So, we feel like we can rely on the preclinical studies more. preclinical studies more. preclinical studies more. Whereas with these perhaps more I don't Whereas with these perhaps more I don't Whereas with these perhaps more I don't want to say more complicated, but more want to say more complicated, but more want to say more complicated, but more human mental health conditions that are human mental health conditions that are human mental health conditions that are hard to model in a mouse, you really hard to model in a mouse, you really hard to model in a mouse, you really have to study it in the human. And you have to study it in the human. And you have to study it in the human. And you can perhaps start in an epileptic can perhaps start in an epileptic can perhaps start in an epileptic patient, a patient that has electrodes, patient, a patient that has electrodes, patient, a patient that has electrodes, and try to provoke a depressed state or and try to provoke a depressed state or and try to provoke a depressed state or study epileptics that have comorbid study epileptics that have comorbid study epileptics that have comorbid depression, for example. Uh and that can depression, for example. Uh and that can depression, for example. Uh and that can really validate this approach as well. really validate this approach as well. really validate this approach as well. But in the end, it's getting into But in the end, it's getting into But in the end, it's getting into the human brain that we need to do in the human brain that we need to do in the human brain that we need to do in the disease specifically um the disease specifically um the disease specifically um that will eventually lead to a that will eventually lead to a that will eventually lead to a non-invasive approach, either a lesion non-invasive approach, either a lesion non-invasive approach, either a lesion or modulatory approach. Modulatory would or modulatory approach. Modulatory would or modulatory approach. Modulatory would be like TMS or lesion approach would be like TMS or lesion approach would be like TMS or lesion approach would be with ultrasound. If people can be made with ultrasound. If people can be made with ultrasound. If people can be made to feel or make themselves feel just a to feel or make themselves feel just a to feel or make themselves feel just a little bit better, little bit better, little bit better, a little less anxious just prior to a little less anxious just prior to a little less anxious just prior to a craving episode or a binge episode, craving episode or a binge episode, craving episode or a binge episode, and maybe even if people can become and maybe even if people can become and maybe even if people can become better at detecting their own internal better at detecting their own internal better at detecting their own internal states and when they're kind of veering states and when they're kind of veering states and when they're kind of veering toward a binge or veering toward using a toward a binge or veering toward using a toward a binge or veering toward using a drug or drug or drug or maybe even veering toward suicidal maybe even veering toward suicidal maybe even veering toward suicidal thinking, Seems like that awareness thinking, Seems like that awareness thinking, Seems like that awareness seems like maybe among the best tools seems like maybe among the best tools seems like maybe among the best tools that people could develop. Yes. that people could develop. Yes. that people could develop. Yes. I've always thought that if we can I've always thought that if we can I've always thought that if we can improve awareness, we can improve awareness, we can improve awareness, we can improve outcomes. I think that's probably true outcomes. I think that's probably true outcomes. I think that's probably true for many of these patients. The problem for many of these patients. The problem for many of these patients. The problem I think comes down to the fact that some I think comes down to the fact that some I think comes down to the fact that some of these patients are so resistant to of these patients are so resistant to of these patients are so resistant to treatment. And the patients that we see as a And the patients that we see as a And the patients that we see as a surgeon, for example, are the patients surgeon, for example, are the patients surgeon, for example, are the patients that they've tried cognitive behavioral that they've tried cognitive behavioral that they've tried cognitive behavioral therapy, and they've tried medications, therapy, and they've tried medications, therapy, and they've tried medications, they've tried behavioral management. they've tried behavioral management. they've tried behavioral management. They're as aware as they could possibly They're as aware as they could possibly They're as aware as they could possibly be, and they still lose control. We've be, and they still lose control. We've be, and they still lose control. We've had this studied in the lab. So, we will had this studied in the lab. So, we will had this studied in the lab. So, we will bring patients to the laboratory with bring patients to the laboratory with bring patients to the laboratory with this implanted device this implanted device this implanted device to try to provoke this electrographic to try to provoke this electrographic to try to provoke this electrographic electrical signal um that can be electrical signal um that can be electrical signal um that can be detected by the actual device that will detected by the actual device that will detected by the actual device that will stimulate them when they're at home. stimulate them when they're at home. stimulate them when they're at home. But before we actually initiate But before we actually initiate But before we actually initiate stimulation, we want to see can this stimulation, we want to see can this stimulation, we want to see can this device detect this craving cell signal, device detect this craving cell signal, device detect this craving cell signal, which is going to be different than what which is going to be different than what which is going to be different than what we saw in the operating room, because we saw in the operating room, because we saw in the operating room, because that's a single cell, but these devices, that's a single cell, but these devices, that's a single cell, but these devices, these electrodes are about a millimeter these electrodes are about a millimeter these electrodes are about a millimeter in diameter instead of like a tenth of a in diameter instead of like a tenth of a in diameter instead of like a tenth of a millimeter, which is what we use in the millimeter, which is what we use in the millimeter, which is what we use in the operating room. Um so, they're operating room. Um so, they're operating room. Um so, they're only hearing or detecting, I should only hearing or detecting, I should only hearing or detecting, I should say, thousands of cells' responses. say, thousands of cells' responses. say, thousands of cells' responses. And we actually have a way to provoke we actually have a way to provoke we actually have a way to provoke binges. It's called a mood provocation. binges. It's called a mood provocation. binges. It's called a mood provocation. It's very well very well validated. It's very well very well validated. It's very well very well validated. It's a little bit like provoking It's a little bit like provoking It's a little bit like provoking seizures in the epileptic monitoring seizures in the epileptic monitoring seizures in the epileptic monitoring unit, but here in the sort of unit, but here in the sort of unit, but here in the sort of uh psychiatric monitoring unit or the psychiatric monitoring unit or the psychiatric monitoring unit or the food monitoring unit, food monitoring unit, food monitoring unit, uh we actually have a psychiatrist uh we actually have a psychiatrist uh we actually have a psychiatrist and eating disorder specialist come and eating disorder specialist come and eating disorder specialist come and induce a mood that is related to induce a mood that is related to induce a mood that is related to each patient's sort of self-described each patient's sort of self-described each patient's sort of self-described binge episode. So, this psychiatrist binge episode. So, this psychiatrist binge episode. So, this psychiatrist comes in and provokes Yes. comes in and provokes Yes. comes in and provokes Yes. a feeling that can evoke the negative a feeling that can evoke the negative a feeling that can evoke the negative behavior. &gt;&gt; That's exactly right. So that we can &gt;&gt; That's exactly right. So that we can &gt;&gt; That's exactly right. So that we can video and synchronize the video to the video and synchronize the video to the video and synchronize the video to the brain signal recordings. brain signal recordings. brain signal recordings. The patients all wear an eye tracker so The patients all wear an eye tracker so The patients all wear an eye tracker so we can see what they're eating at all we can see what they're eating at all we can see what they're eating at all times and what they're looking at times and what they're looking at times and what they're looking at specifically and that allows us to specifically and that allows us to specifically and that allows us to have the best temporal resolution have the best temporal resolution have the best temporal resolution possible to understand what is happening possible to understand what is happening possible to understand what is happening right before the bite. right before the bite. right before the bite. And even under video surveillance And even under video surveillance And even under video surveillance through a one-day one-way mirror in a through a one-day one-way mirror in a through a one-day one-way mirror in a laboratory setting when patients are laboratory setting when patients are laboratory setting when patients are very well aware that they're very well aware that they're very well aware that they're there to be studied if they're going to there to be studied if they're going to there to be studied if they're going to binge they still do. they still do. they still do. And we believe they do because they just And we believe they do because they just And we believe they do because they just can't control it as aware as they are of can't control it as aware as they are of can't control it as aware as they are of it. And it's probably because they're the And it's probably because they're the And it's probably because they're the most severe. most severe. most severe. So I think if we can improve awareness, So I think if we can improve awareness, So I think if we can improve awareness, not just the societal awareness that not just the societal awareness that not just the societal awareness that I've been talking about earlier, but the I've been talking about earlier, but the I've been talking about earlier, but the patient awareness patient awareness patient awareness around their problem, I think that could around their problem, I think that could around their problem, I think that could be a powerful way to help so many of be a powerful way to help so many of be a powerful way to help so many of these patients. And that's sort of the these patients. And that's sort of the these patients. And that's sort of the role of cognitive behavioral therapy. role of cognitive behavioral therapy. role of cognitive behavioral therapy. The problem with cognitive behavioral The problem with cognitive behavioral The problem with cognitive behavioral therapy or I should say the limitation therapy or I should say the limitation therapy or I should say the limitation of it, I actually don't have a any of it, I actually don't have a any of it, I actually don't have a any problem with it. I think it's a problem with it. I think it's a problem with it. I think it's a wonderful treatment. Is that if you stop it, many of these Is that if you stop it, many of these Is that if you stop it, many of these patients go back to their old behaviors. patients go back to their old behaviors. patients go back to their old behaviors. I don't want to say old habits, but it I don't want to say old habits, but it I don't want to say old habits, but it might be a habit, but they old might be a habit, but they old might be a habit, but they old behaviors. And so um And so um And so um that's the problem is it's not that's the problem is it's not that's the problem is it's not necessarily lasting in the absence of necessarily lasting in the absence of necessarily lasting in the absence of continued cognitive behavioral therapy. continued cognitive behavioral therapy. continued cognitive behavioral therapy. Some people can benefit [clears throat] Some people can benefit [clears throat] Some people can benefit [clears throat] from it long term, but some can't. Uh from it long term, but some can't. Uh from it long term, but some can't. Uh but I think in the less severe but I think in the less severe but I think in the less severe patients, improving awareness key. improving awareness key. improving awareness key. But in these really refractory patients, But in these really refractory patients, But in these really refractory patients, this is this is kind of like this is the this is this is kind of like this is the this is this is kind of like this is the disease despite the awareness. They disease despite the awareness. They disease despite the awareness. They can't control themselves. And that's can't control themselves. And that's can't control themselves. And that's what we're trying to restore is that what we're trying to restore is that what we're trying to restore is that improved ability to control their improved ability to control their improved ability to control their behavior. Do you think there's a role for machines Do you think there's a role for machines Do you think there's a role for machines and artificial intelligence here? and artificial intelligence here? and artificial intelligence here? There are a couple laboratories up at There are a couple laboratories up at There are a couple laboratories up at the University Washington that are using the University Washington that are using the University Washington that are using particular signature patterns of within particular signature patterns of within particular signature patterns of within voice to try and help to try and help to try and help suicidal people who are suicidally depressed people who are suicidally depressed people who are suicidally depressed know when they're headed towards an know when they're headed towards an know when they're headed towards an episode before they even can consciously episode before they even can consciously episode before they even can consciously know. This gets right down to issues of know. This gets right down to issues of know. This gets right down to issues of free will and whether or not machines free will and whether or not machines free will and whether or not machines can be smarter than we are. But you can be smarter than we are. But you can be smarter than we are. But you know, one could argue that some of the know, one could argue that some of the know, one could argue that some of the search algorithms search algorithms search algorithms on Google and other search engines are on Google and other search engines are on Google and other search engines are actually more aware of our preferences actually more aware of our preferences actually more aware of our preferences than we are. than we are. than we are. Um [clears throat] Um [clears throat] Um [clears throat] basically what these are, these are basically what these are, these are basically what these are, these are devices that are listening to people devices that are listening to people devices that are listening to people talk all day. They're also paying talk all day. They're also paying talk all day. They're also paying attention to patterns of breathing and attention to patterns of breathing and attention to patterns of breathing and how well people slept, etc. Integrating how well people slept, etc. Integrating how well people slept, etc. Integrating a huge number of cues and then a huge number of cues and then a huge number of cues and then signaling somebody with a you know, a signaling somebody with a you know, a signaling somebody with a you know, a yellow light. Like you know, you're yellow light. Like you know, you're yellow light. Like you know, you're headed into a depressive episode. The headed into a depressive episode. The headed into a depressive episode. The person might say, "I feel fine." Or I person might say, "I feel fine." Or I person might say, "I feel fine." Or I feel pretty good. This is kind of feel pretty good. This is kind of feel pretty good. This is kind of baseline state for me. And they're baseline state for me. And they're baseline state for me. And they're saying, "Uh-uh. This is where you were saying, "Uh-uh. This is where you were saying, "Uh-uh. This is where you were preceding the last episode that took you preceding the last episode that took you preceding the last episode that took you down a deep dark trench and it took down a deep dark trench and it took down a deep dark trench and it took months to get out of." Um I wonder months to get out of." Um I wonder months to get out of." Um I wonder whether or not some of these devices whether or not some of these devices whether or not some of these devices could help with the sorts of things that could help with the sorts of things that could help with the sorts of things that we're talking about today. Yeah. we're talking about today. Yeah. we're talking about today. Yeah. I think so. Um I've always said we have I think so. Um I've always said we have I think so. Um I've always said we have to get in the brain before we get out of to get in the brain before we get out of to get in the brain before we get out of it. And if we get in the brain and it. And if we get in the brain and it. And if we get in the brain and understand what these signals look like, understand what these signals look like, understand what these signals look like, we'll know what those non-invasive we'll know what those non-invasive we'll know what those non-invasive signals are. signals are. signals are. I think it's possible that we are I think it's possible that we are I think it's possible that we are scientifically sophisticated enough to scientifically sophisticated enough to scientifically sophisticated enough to use machine learning and sort of this use machine learning and sort of this use machine learning and sort of this kind of bot technique to anticipate when kind of bot technique to anticipate when kind of bot technique to anticipate when somebody is going to be highly somebody is going to be highly somebody is going to be highly impulsive. You know, suicide is the most impulsive. You know, suicide is the most impulsive. You know, suicide is the most dangerous impulse. It's something that dangerous impulse. It's something that dangerous impulse. It's something that is immensely a focus of the lab is immensely a focus of the lab is immensely a focus of the lab is impulsivity. We've talked mostly about impulsivity. We've talked mostly about impulsivity. We've talked mostly about compulsion. Compulsion being, you know, going after Compulsion being, you know, going after Compulsion being, you know, going after a reward or the urge despite the a reward or the urge despite the a reward or the urge despite the risk. Um risk. Um risk. Um &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; impulsivity is similar but different. &gt;&gt; impulsivity is similar but different. &gt;&gt; impulsivity is similar but different. It's kind of going after something It's kind of going after something It's kind of going after something um a little bit If you If you model a little bit If you If you model a little bit If you If you model impulsivity in a in a mouse, it's, you impulsivity in a in a mouse, it's, you impulsivity in a in a mouse, it's, you know, related to know, related to know, related to you know, going after a food reward you know, going after a food reward you know, going after a food reward without the sort of paired tone that without the sort of paired tone that without the sort of paired tone that you're the mouse is supposed to wait you're the mouse is supposed to wait you're the mouse is supposed to wait for. The mouse doesn't want to wait for. The mouse doesn't want to wait for. The mouse doesn't want to wait anymore. They they just go after the anymore. They they just go after the anymore. They they just go after the food. Um I've been that mouse. Yeah, food. Um I've been that mouse. Yeah, food. Um I've been that mouse. Yeah, we've all been. we've all been. we've all been. We can all relate with this uh to a We can all relate with this uh to a We can all relate with this uh to a certain extent. Again, it's a spectrum. certain extent. Again, it's a spectrum. certain extent. Again, it's a spectrum. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, um So, in any case, I So, in any case, I So, in any case, I non sequitur, but I certainly think non sequitur, but I certainly think non sequitur, but I certainly think that there is a way to use our own that there is a way to use our own that there is a way to use our own body's physiology body's physiology body's physiology to anticipate to anticipate to anticipate when these impulses are coming online. when these impulses are coming online. when these impulses are coming online. How best to do that, I think we're just How best to do that, I think we're just How best to do that, I think we're just scratching the surface, but um scratching the surface, but um scratching the surface, but um these are the kinds of solutions we these are the kinds of solutions we these are the kinds of solutions we need. Some of these problems are of need. Some of these problems are of need. Some of these problems are of epidemic proportions. Largest public epidemic proportions. Largest public epidemic proportions. Largest public health problems in this country, in this health problems in this country, in this health problems in this country, in this world. Obesity, opiate crisis, world. Obesity, opiate crisis, world. Obesity, opiate crisis, depression, suicidality. I mean, that's depression, suicidality. I mean, that's depression, suicidality. I mean, that's like a third of our country, maybe more. like a third of our country, maybe more. like a third of our country, maybe more. We need scalable solutions. But, you We need scalable solutions. But, you We need scalable solutions. But, you know, I'm a neurosurgeon. I'm only know, I'm a neurosurgeon. I'm only know, I'm a neurosurgeon. I'm only going to be able to treat the most going to be able to treat the most going to be able to treat the most severe of patients with these problems. severe of patients with these problems. severe of patients with these problems. You know, how You know, how You know, how you know, we've only done about 200,000 you know, we've only done about 200,000 you know, we've only done about 200,000 deep brain stimulation surgeries deep brain stimulation surgeries deep brain stimulation surgeries ever. So, I mean, the problem we're talking So, I mean, the problem we're talking So, I mean, the problem we're talking about here is about here is about here is 50 million Americans. There's no 50 million Americans. There's no 50 million Americans. There's no possibility that surgeons can address possibility that surgeons can address possibility that surgeons can address that problem. But, we could help inspire that problem. But, we could help inspire that problem. But, we could help inspire an initiative to go after that kind of an initiative to go after that kind of an initiative to go after that kind of problem or help make it more rigorous. problem or help make it more rigorous. problem or help make it more rigorous. Because the last thing we need is a, you Because the last thing we need is a, you Because the last thing we need is a, you know, some sort of wearable fancy tool know, some sort of wearable fancy tool know, some sort of wearable fancy tool that, you know, that, you know, that, you know, wastes people's money and time. You wastes people's money and time. You wastes people's money and time. You know, we need real therapies for these know, we need real therapies for these know, we need real therapies for these things. Not that these devices that things. Not that these devices that things. Not that these devices that we're discussing are not. Uh I think we're discussing are not. Uh I think we're discussing are not. Uh I think actually there's lots of promise. actually there's lots of promise. actually there's lots of promise. We use machine learning in the lab all We use machine learning in the lab all We use machine learning in the lab all the time. I'm not a the time. I'm not a the time. I'm not a an electrical engineer or the an electrical engineer or the an electrical engineer or the computational neuroscientist doing this computational neuroscientist doing this computational neuroscientist doing this type of work. I just helped develop type of work. I just helped develop type of work. I just helped develop the hypotheses around it. But, um I help the hypotheses around it. But, um I help the hypotheses around it. But, um I help fundraise around it. But I definitely fundraise around it. But I definitely fundraise around it. But I definitely think there's a future for it. I just I think there's a future for it. I just I think there's a future for it. I just I suspect we're scratching the suspect we're scratching the suspect we're scratching the surface on how best to do it. I really surface on how best to do it. I really surface on how best to do it. I really appreciate you sharing those tools. A appreciate you sharing those tools. A appreciate you sharing those tools. A number of people number of people number of people I'm guessing out there might want to I'm guessing out there might want to I'm guessing out there might want to become neurosurgeons. I really believe become neurosurgeons. I really believe become neurosurgeons. I really believe that in hearing today's conversation that in hearing today's conversation that in hearing today's conversation that you will spark an interest in that you will spark an interest in that you will spark an interest in medicine and or neurosurgery. medicine and or neurosurgery. medicine and or neurosurgery. &gt;&gt; I hope so. Um well, certainly you need &gt;&gt; I hope so. Um well, certainly you need &gt;&gt; I hope so. Um well, certainly you need to be a physician before you can become to be a physician before you can become to be a physician before you can become a neurosurgeon. So and neurosurgery in a neurosurgeon. So and neurosurgery in a neurosurgeon. So and neurosurgery in some cases and that would be beautiful some cases and that would be beautiful some cases and that would be beautiful and I predict that will be happen that and I predict that will be happen that and I predict that will be happen that will happen excuse me as a consequence will happen excuse me as a consequence will happen excuse me as a consequence of what you've shared today. Really want of what you've shared today. Really want of what you've shared today. Really want to thank you for taking time out of to thank you for taking time out of to thank you for taking time out of your not just immensely busy, but very your not just immensely busy, but very your not just immensely busy, but very important schedule because important schedule because important schedule because again, the work that you're doing is again, the work that you're doing is again, the work that you're doing is really out there on that cutting I don't really out there on that cutting I don't really out there on that cutting I don't want to say bleeding edge cuz in this want to say bleeding edge cuz in this want to say bleeding edge cuz in this context it's not going to sound right, context it's not going to sound right, context it's not going to sound right, but on that extreme cutting edge of what but on that extreme cutting edge of what but on that extreme cutting edge of what we understand about how the human brain we understand about how the human brain we understand about how the human brain works and how it can be repaired. So on works and how it can be repaired. So on works and how it can be repaired. So on behalf of everybody and myself as behalf of everybody and myself as behalf of everybody and myself as well, thank you so very much. well, thank you so very much. well, thank you so very much. &gt;&gt; I'm honored. Thank you so much for &gt;&gt; I'm honored. Thank you so much for &gt;&gt; I'm honored. Thank you so much for having me.