Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing the immune Today, we are discussing the immune Today, we are discussing the immune system. And we are also discussing how the And we are also discussing how the And we are also discussing how the nervous system can be used to activate nervous system can be used to activate nervous system can be used to activate and control the immune system. and control the immune system. and control the immune system. The first topic we have to attack The first topic we have to attack The first topic we have to attack is the question of what is the immune is the question of what is the immune is the question of what is the immune system and how does it work? I'd like to system and how does it work? I'd like to system and how does it work? I'd like to just take a moment and do a sort of just take a moment and do a sort of just take a moment and do a sort of brief immune system 101. Really simple. brief immune system 101. Really simple. brief immune system 101. Really simple. Cover the basic elements of the immune Cover the basic elements of the immune Cover the basic elements of the immune system, so that everyone listening or system, so that everyone listening or system, so that everyone listening or watching this can get a clear sense of watching this can get a clear sense of watching this can get a clear sense of how the immune system functions and what how the immune system functions and what how the immune system functions and what its basic parts are. It's actually its basic parts are. It's actually its basic parts are. It's actually really simple because it is truly really simple because it is truly really simple because it is truly elegant in design. You have three main elegant in design. You have three main elegant in design. You have three main layers of defense layers of defense layers of defense for your health. And the first of those for your health. And the first of those for your health. And the first of those three is a physical barrier that we call three is a physical barrier that we call three is a physical barrier that we call your skin. And that might seem kind of your skin. And that might seem kind of your skin. And that might seem kind of obvious, but obvious, but obvious, but everything about you is contained in everything about you is contained in everything about you is contained in this compartment that is boundary by this compartment that is boundary by this compartment that is boundary by your skin. your skin. your skin. If you've ever had a cut, you If you've ever had a cut, you If you've ever had a cut, you essentially have a breach of the essentially have a breach of the essentially have a breach of the boundary that is your immune system. boundary that is your immune system. boundary that is your immune system. Still in category one, your body and Still in category one, your body and Still in category one, your body and your external surface, you have openings your external surface, you have openings your external surface, you have openings to that surface. So, what are those to that surface. So, what are those to that surface. So, what are those openings? Well, let's start at the top openings? Well, let's start at the top openings? Well, let's start at the top and work our way down. and work our way down. and work our way down. A primary site of potential infection A primary site of potential infection A primary site of potential infection are your eyes. are your eyes. are your eyes. You have your ears, you have your You have your ears, you have your You have your ears, you have your nostrils, you have your mouth. Okay, nostrils, you have your mouth. Okay, nostrils, you have your mouth. Okay, those are going to be the primary sites those are going to be the primary sites those are going to be the primary sites by which things can get into your by which things can get into your by which things can get into your system, and you need to put things into system, and you need to put things into system, and you need to put things into your system, you need to drink and eat, your system, you need to drink and eat, your system, you need to drink and eat, and you need to get light into your and you need to get light into your and you need to get light into your system, that's why you have those system, that's why you have those system, that's why you have those openings. And then, of course, along the openings. And then, of course, along the openings. And then, of course, along the back of your throat, all the way down to back of your throat, all the way down to back of your throat, all the way down to your stomach and your digestive system, your stomach and your digestive system, your stomach and your digestive system, and through your intestines and out your and through your intestines and out your and through your intestines and out your rectum, you have a tube that you are rectum, you have a tube that you are rectum, you have a tube that you are basically a series of tubes. I've said basically a series of tubes. I've said basically a series of tubes. I've said that before in this podcast, and this is that before in this podcast, and this is that before in this podcast, and this is one such tube by which you extract one such tube by which you extract one such tube by which you extract nutrients from the outside environment. nutrients from the outside environment. nutrients from the outside environment. But, all along that tube, including your But, all along that tube, including your But, all along that tube, including your nose and your mouth, it's lined with nose and your mouth, it's lined with nose and your mouth, it's lined with mucus. And while mucus might seem kind mucus. And while mucus might seem kind mucus. And while mucus might seem kind of gross to some of you, the more you of gross to some of you, the more you of gross to some of you, the more you learn about mucus, the more you realize learn about mucus, the more you realize learn about mucus, the more you realize that mucus is really, really cool. that mucus is really, really cool. that mucus is really, really cool. Because mucus essentially acts as a Because mucus essentially acts as a Because mucus essentially acts as a filter, as a trap for bacteria and filter, as a trap for bacteria and filter, as a trap for bacteria and viruses, and it has certain ways of viruses, and it has certain ways of viruses, and it has certain ways of scrubbing or killing those bacteria and scrubbing or killing those bacteria and scrubbing or killing those bacteria and viruses. Now, inevitably, Now, inevitably, Now, inevitably, bacteria, viruses, and parasitic bacteria, viruses, and parasitic bacteria, viruses, and parasitic infections are going to make their way infections are going to make their way infections are going to make their way into our body. But, whether or not they into our body. But, whether or not they into our body. But, whether or not they are killed off or whether or not they are killed off or whether or not they are killed off or whether or not they take over and cause us harm is going to take over and cause us harm is going to take over and cause us harm is going to be determined by layers two and three. be determined by layers two and three. be determined by layers two and three. So, layers two and three are the So, layers two and three are the So, layers two and three are the so-called innate immune system and the so-called innate immune system and the so-called innate immune system and the adaptive immune system. So, the innate adaptive immune system. So, the innate adaptive immune system. So, the innate immune system is what I would call the immune system is what I would call the immune system is what I would call the second layer of defense. It's very fast. second layer of defense. It's very fast. second layer of defense. It's very fast. So, this innate immune system is this So, this innate immune system is this So, this innate immune system is this rapid response. When something enters rapid response. When something enters rapid response. When something enters our system and our body doesn't our system and our body doesn't our system and our body doesn't recognize it, it's something that's recognize it, it's something that's recognize it, it's something that's either a bacteria, virus, or parasite. either a bacteria, virus, or parasite. either a bacteria, virus, or parasite. And the innate immune system involves And the innate immune system involves And the innate immune system involves the release of particular cells that are the release of particular cells that are the release of particular cells that are waiting, dormant, ready to attack waiting, dormant, ready to attack waiting, dormant, ready to attack whatever this invader is. And some of whatever this invader is. And some of whatever this invader is. And some of these cell types you've heard of before. these cell types you've heard of before. these cell types you've heard of before. The most typical one are the are the The most typical one are the are the The most typical one are the are the so-called white blood cells. So, the so-called white blood cells. So, the so-called white blood cells. So, the white blood cells will actively go to white blood cells will actively go to white blood cells will actively go to the site of invasion and will start to the site of invasion and will start to the site of invasion and will start to encapsulate or try and um encapsulate or try and um encapsulate or try and um surround that given invader. The other surround that given invader. The other surround that given invader. The other names of these different cell types are names of these different cell types are names of these different cell types are things like neutrophils, macrophages, things like neutrophils, macrophages, things like neutrophils, macrophages, natural killer cells. They're just a few natural killer cells. They're just a few natural killer cells. They're just a few of the many types of immune cells. They of the many types of immune cells. They of the many types of immune cells. They work in concert with two other work in concert with two other work in concert with two other assistants. And those assistants are assistants. And those assistants are assistants. And those assistants are called the complement proteins. called the complement proteins. called the complement proteins. Complement proteins exist in the blood Complement proteins exist in the blood Complement proteins exist in the blood and what they do is they travel to sites and what they do is they travel to sites and what they do is they travel to sites where there's an invasion and they mark where there's an invasion and they mark where there's an invasion and they mark certain things for certain things for certain things for being engulfed and eaten. So, they sort being engulfed and eaten. So, they sort being engulfed and eaten. So, they sort of put a an eat me tag on it. And then of put a an eat me tag on it. And then of put a an eat me tag on it. And then there are the cells that are either there are the cells that are either there are the cells that are either damaged from the injury or from the damaged from the injury or from the damaged from the injury or from the parasite or are suffering because of the parasite or are suffering because of the parasite or are suffering because of the bacteria or the virus itself. And the bacteria or the virus itself. And the bacteria or the virus itself. And the cells of your body will also release an cells of your body will also release an cells of your body will also release an alarm signal, which is not an eat me alarm signal, which is not an eat me alarm signal, which is not an eat me signal, but a help me signal. And those signal, but a help me signal. And those signal, but a help me signal. And those help me signals come in the form what we help me signals come in the form what we help me signals come in the form what we call cytokines. And the cytokines are call cytokines. And the cytokines are call cytokines. And the cytokines are things like interleukin 1, interleukin things like interleukin 1, interleukin things like interleukin 1, interleukin 6, tumor necrosis factor alpha. The 6, tumor necrosis factor alpha. The 6, tumor necrosis factor alpha. The interleukin are shouting out help me. interleukin are shouting out help me. interleukin are shouting out help me. The complement proteins are coming in The complement proteins are coming in The complement proteins are coming in and saying eat this and tagging the and saying eat this and tagging the and saying eat this and tagging the invader with an eat me signal. And the invader with an eat me signal. And the invader with an eat me signal. And then the killer cells and the white then the killer cells and the white then the killer cells and the white blood cells are doing the job of blood cells are doing the job of blood cells are doing the job of trying to kill off that thing. That's trying to kill off that thing. That's trying to kill off that thing. That's the innate immune system. So, that your the innate immune system. So, that your the innate immune system. So, that your skin and your mucus lining skin and your mucus lining skin and your mucus lining plus your innate immune system are a plus your innate immune system are a plus your innate immune system are a beautiful two-layered beautiful two-layered beautiful two-layered set of defenses against various kinds of set of defenses against various kinds of set of defenses against various kinds of invaders and infections. And then invaders and infections. And then invaders and infections. And then there's the third type, which is the there's the third type, which is the there's the third type, which is the adaptive immune system. And you'll adaptive immune system. And you'll adaptive immune system. And you'll notice that leading up until now I notice that leading up until now I notice that leading up until now I haven't said the word antibody at all. haven't said the word antibody at all. haven't said the word antibody at all. And that's because it is the job not of And that's because it is the job not of And that's because it is the job not of the skin or the mucus or the microbiome the skin or the mucus or the microbiome the skin or the mucus or the microbiome or the innate immune system to produce or the innate immune system to produce or the innate immune system to produce antibodies that can recognize specific antibodies that can recognize specific antibodies that can recognize specific invaders, but rather it is the job of invaders, but rather it is the job of invaders, but rather it is the job of the adaptive immune system to create the adaptive immune system to create the adaptive immune system to create antibodies against antibodies against antibodies against bacteria, viruses, and even parasites, bacteria, viruses, and even parasites, bacteria, viruses, and even parasites, and even physical and even physical and even physical um intruders to your system. um intruders to your system. um intruders to your system. So, the adaptive immune system has this So, the adaptive immune system has this So, the adaptive immune system has this incredible ability to show up at the incredible ability to show up at the incredible ability to show up at the site of invasion or infection or site of invasion or infection or site of invasion or infection or inflammation. And what it does is it inflammation. And what it does is it inflammation. And what it does is it actually attaches to and creates a sort actually attaches to and creates a sort actually attaches to and creates a sort of a an imprint of the shape of whatever of a an imprint of the shape of whatever of a an imprint of the shape of whatever invader happens to be there. invader happens to be there. invader happens to be there. And then, using that imprint in concert And then, using that imprint in concert And then, using that imprint in concert with some other cells, creates with some other cells, creates with some other cells, creates antibodies that are specific to antibodies that are specific to antibodies that are specific to recognize that invader should the body recognize that invader should the body recognize that invader should the body ever have that invader inside of it ever have that invader inside of it ever have that invader inside of it again. Now, that's why it's called the again. Now, that's why it's called the again. Now, that's why it's called the adaptive immune system. And in many adaptive immune system. And in many adaptive immune system. And in many ways, it creates a memory of a prior ways, it creates a memory of a prior ways, it creates a memory of a prior infection so that these antibodies can infection so that these antibodies can infection so that these antibodies can be made anytime that same invader comes be made anytime that same invader comes be made anytime that same invader comes back again. All right? And so, this is back again. All right? And so, this is back again. All right? And so, this is the basis of what we call immunity. Now, the basis of what we call immunity. Now, the basis of what we call immunity. Now, there are a lot more details to the there are a lot more details to the there are a lot more details to the adaptive immune system, but I just want adaptive immune system, but I just want adaptive immune system, but I just want to emphasize a few points that might be emphasize a few points that might be emphasize a few points that might be relevant. Um first of all, relevant. Um first of all, relevant. Um first of all, the name of the antibodies that are the name of the antibodies that are the name of the antibodies that are created sometimes come in the form of created sometimes come in the form of created sometimes come in the form of IgM and IgG, things of that sort. This isn't and IgG, things of that sort. This isn't and IgG, things of that sort. This isn't a full deep dive immunology class, but a full deep dive immunology class, but a full deep dive immunology class, but IG stands for immunoglobulin, okay? So, IG stands for immunoglobulin, okay? So, IG stands for immunoglobulin, okay? So, the immunoglobulins are part of the immunoglobulins are part of the immunoglobulins are part of the adaptive immune response in creating adaptive immune response in creating adaptive immune response in creating antibodies. If you hear IgM, the IgM is the first of If you hear IgM, the IgM is the first of If you hear IgM, the IgM is the first of the adaptive immune responses, and it the adaptive immune responses, and it the adaptive immune responses, and it tends to come on earlier. So, if tends to come on earlier. So, if tends to come on earlier. So, if somebody is immunopositive for IgM for a somebody is immunopositive for IgM for a somebody is immunopositive for IgM for a particular type of viral or bacterial particular type of viral or bacterial particular type of viral or bacterial invader, that means that it was a fairly invader, that means that it was a fairly invader, that means that it was a fairly recent infection. recent infection. recent infection. Later, one creates the adaptive immune Later, one creates the adaptive immune Later, one creates the adaptive immune system, I should say, creates an IgG, system, I should say, creates an IgG, system, I should say, creates an IgG, which is the more stable form of the which is the more stable form of the which is the more stable form of the specific antibody that's going to specific antibody that's going to specific antibody that's going to recognize a given invader. So, IgG tends recognize a given invader. So, IgG tends recognize a given invader. So, IgG tends to come up a little bit later. So, just to come up a little bit later. So, just to come up a little bit later. So, just to recap, to recap, to recap, something gets into your system, then something gets into your system, then something gets into your system, then there's the innate response, there's the innate response, there's the innate response, which is a more general response of which is a more general response of which is a more general response of trying to contain and combat the trying to contain and combat the trying to contain and combat the infection or invader, and then the infection or invader, and then the infection or invader, and then the adaptive response is the one that adaptive response is the one that adaptive response is the one that generates the antibodies first, the IgM generates the antibodies first, the IgM generates the antibodies first, the IgM response, the immunoglobulin M response, the immunoglobulin M response, the immunoglobulin M response, and then the immunoglobulin G response, and then the immunoglobulin G response, and then the immunoglobulin G response, IgG response. So, how do we keep these IgG response. So, how do we keep these IgG response. So, how do we keep these three barriers or these three defense systems to or these three defense systems to or these three defense systems to infection tuned up? infection tuned up? infection tuned up? One of the key ways we can do that is to One of the key ways we can do that is to One of the key ways we can do that is to keep that mucus lining keep that mucus lining keep that mucus lining in really good shape. And what does that in really good shape. And what does that in really good shape. And what does that mean? Well, the mucus lining needs mean? Well, the mucus lining needs mean? Well, the mucus lining needs to turn over quite often, and it needs to turn over quite often, and it needs to turn over quite often, and it needs to be the correct chemistry to be a trap to be the correct chemistry to be a trap to be the correct chemistry to be a trap for the bad stuff, and for the bad stuff, and for the bad stuff, and for it to be permeable to the good for it to be permeable to the good for it to be permeable to the good stuff, to the nutrients that we need. stuff, to the nutrients that we need. stuff, to the nutrients that we need. And it is now very clear from hundreds, And it is now very clear from hundreds, And it is now very clear from hundreds, if not thousands, of studies that the if not thousands, of studies that the if not thousands, of studies that the best way to do that is to maintain a best way to do that is to maintain a best way to do that is to maintain a healthy, so-called microbiome. healthy, so-called microbiome. healthy, so-called microbiome. The microbiome being these little The microbiome being these little The microbiome being these little bacterial organisms that are good for bacterial organisms that are good for bacterial organisms that are good for us, that live all along our mucus us, that live all along our mucus us, that live all along our mucus pathways, and even in our eyes. Now, pathways, and even in our eyes. Now, pathways, and even in our eyes. Now, just to be really clear, it's not just to be really clear, it's not just to be really clear, it's not just about the gut microbiome. We actually about the gut microbiome. We actually about the gut microbiome. We actually have a microbiome in our eyes, we have a microbiome in our eyes, we have a microbiome in our eyes, we have one that's specific to our mouth, we one that's specific to our mouth, we one that's specific to our mouth, we have a nasal-specific microbiome, have a nasal-specific microbiome, have a nasal-specific microbiome, there's one all along the gut, and the there's one all along the gut, and the there's one all along the gut, and the species of microbiota that live all species of microbiota that live all species of microbiota that live all along the digestive tract differ from along the digestive tract differ from along the digestive tract differ from the mouth to the throat to the stomach, the mouth to the throat to the stomach, the mouth to the throat to the stomach, intestines, and to the rectum. It's well intestines, and to the rectum. It's well intestines, and to the rectum. It's well established that there are healthy established that there are healthy established that there are healthy microbiota that live all along that microbiota that live all along that microbiota that live all along that length, and that they differ along that length, and that they differ along that length, and that they differ along that length. This is a reminder that whenever This is a reminder that whenever This is a reminder that whenever possible, unless eating or speaking, you possible, unless eating or speaking, you possible, unless eating or speaking, you want to be nasal breathing, not want to be nasal breathing, not want to be nasal breathing, not breathing through your mouth. Your nose breathing through your mouth. Your nose breathing through your mouth. Your nose is a much better filter is a much better filter is a much better filter for viruses and bacteria than is your for viruses and bacteria than is your for viruses and bacteria than is your mouth. And so, be a nose breather, not a mouth. And so, be a nose breather, not a mouth. And so, be a nose breather, not a mouth breather, you will combat more of mouth breather, you will combat more of mouth breather, you will combat more of the infections that you are constantly the infections that you are constantly the infections that you are constantly confronted with. The other way to try confronted with. The other way to try confronted with. The other way to try and keep out and keep out and keep out bad things and to avoid getting sick is bad things and to avoid getting sick is bad things and to avoid getting sick is the advice that your mother and the advice that your mother and the advice that your mother and certainly my mother gave me, which is to certainly my mother gave me, which is to certainly my mother gave me, which is to not touch your eyes after not touch your eyes after not touch your eyes after touching other people or touching other touching other people or touching other touching other people or touching other surfaces. And the reason to avoid doing surfaces. And the reason to avoid doing surfaces. And the reason to avoid doing that is the eyes are a primary entry that is the eyes are a primary entry that is the eyes are a primary entry point for a lot of bacteria and viruses. for a lot of bacteria and viruses. for a lot of bacteria and viruses. And then the third way to keep a healthy And then the third way to keep a healthy And then the third way to keep a healthy line of defense line of defense line of defense for your for your for your entire mucus tract is to enhance the entire mucus tract is to enhance the entire mucus tract is to enhance the proliferation of good gut microbiota. proliferation of good gut microbiota. proliferation of good gut microbiota. The best way to enhance the quality of The best way to enhance the quality of The best way to enhance the quality of your gut microbiome and the mucus lining your gut microbiome and the mucus lining your gut microbiome and the mucus lining that serves as this protective layer all that serves as this protective layer all that serves as this protective layer all along your body is to ingest two to four along your body is to ingest two to four along your body is to ingest two to four servings a day of fermented foods, low servings a day of fermented foods, low servings a day of fermented foods, low sugar fermented foods. It helps reduce sugar fermented foods. It helps reduce sugar fermented foods. It helps reduce the activity of certain cytokines. When the activity of certain cytokines. When the activity of certain cytokines. When people have a healthy gut microbiome, people have a healthy gut microbiome, people have a healthy gut microbiome, there are fewer cells in the body being there are fewer cells in the body being there are fewer cells in the body being infected from outside infections and infected from outside infections and infected from outside infections and therefore less of a reason for cells to therefore less of a reason for cells to therefore less of a reason for cells to be crying out help because they are be crying out help because they are be crying out help because they are thriving, not suffering. Things like thriving, not suffering. Things like thriving, not suffering. Things like sauerkraut, things like natto, if you sauerkraut, things like natto, if you sauerkraut, things like natto, if you can access that, kimchi, pickles, again can access that, kimchi, pickles, again can access that, kimchi, pickles, again low sugar sources are going to be the low sugar sources are going to be the low sugar sources are going to be the sources that are going to be most sources that are going to be most sources that are going to be most effective for this. Next, I'd like to effective for this. Next, I'd like to effective for this. Next, I'd like to talk about what's called sickness talk about what's called sickness talk about what's called sickness behavior. Sickness behavior is a suite behavior. Sickness behavior is a suite behavior. Sickness behavior is a suite of responses that we tend to all undergo of responses that we tend to all undergo of responses that we tend to all undergo when we are feeling sick. The main thing when we are feeling sick. The main thing when we are feeling sick. The main thing about sickness behavior is that it tends about sickness behavior is that it tends about sickness behavior is that it tends to involve a slowing of our usual levels to involve a slowing of our usual levels to involve a slowing of our usual levels of activity. People start to feel of activity. People start to feel of activity. People start to feel lethargic or they feel like the lethargic or they feel like the lethargic or they feel like the activities that previously they could do activities that previously they could do activities that previously they could do with relative ease are very difficult with relative ease are very difficult with relative ease are very difficult for them or somewhat overwhelming. for them or somewhat overwhelming. for them or somewhat overwhelming. The other thing you start to see is that The other thing you start to see is that The other thing you start to see is that people and animals, by the way, stop people and animals, by the way, stop people and animals, by the way, stop grooming. They stop taking care of grooming. They stop taking care of grooming. They stop taking care of themselves. Not necessarily stop themselves. Not necessarily stop themselves. Not necessarily stop showering, although oftentimes that's showering, although oftentimes that's showering, although oftentimes that's the case, but they will stop uh doing the case, but they will stop uh doing the case, but they will stop uh doing their hair. They'll stop putting on their hair. They'll stop putting on their hair. They'll stop putting on makeup. Uh makeup. Uh makeup. Uh uh you know, depending on whether or not uh you know, depending on whether or not uh you know, depending on whether or not they did that before, they might stop. they did that before, they might stop. they did that before, they might stop. Animals will stop licking and grooming Animals will stop licking and grooming Animals will stop licking and grooming themselves. People will stop taking care of their People will stop taking care of their People will stop taking care of their cosmetic appearance. Now, it's not just cosmetic appearance. Now, it's not just cosmetic appearance. Now, it's not just because they don't care how they look because they don't care how they look because they don't care how they look when they're sick, it's because there's when they're sick, it's because there's when they're sick, it's because there's this overall suppression of certain this overall suppression of certain this overall suppression of certain kinds of activities and an enhancement kinds of activities and an enhancement kinds of activities and an enhancement of other kinds of activities. And this of other kinds of activities. And this of other kinds of activities. And this is really important. Sickness behavior is really important. Sickness behavior is really important. Sickness behavior is actually a motivated state. It's a is actually a motivated state. It's a is actually a motivated state. It's a state that's designed to accomplish state that's designed to accomplish state that's designed to accomplish certain things. One of the other certain things. One of the other certain things. One of the other features of sickness behavior, in features of sickness behavior, in features of sickness behavior, in addition to being lethargic, loss of addition to being lethargic, loss of addition to being lethargic, loss of grooming, will be grooming, will be grooming, will be a loss of appetite. Right? Oftentimes, a loss of appetite. Right? Oftentimes, a loss of appetite. Right? Oftentimes, people who have a great appetite people who have a great appetite people who have a great appetite normally just won't feel hungry at all. normally just won't feel hungry at all. normally just won't feel hungry at all. When we have that, we can be kind of When we have that, we can be kind of When we have that, we can be kind of irritable, we don't want to do certain irritable, we don't want to do certain irritable, we don't want to do certain things, and we just want to be left things, and we just want to be left things, and we just want to be left alone. things are harder. How? Why? Well, things are harder. How? Why? Well, things are harder. How? Why? Well, there's a known pathway, which is the there's a known pathway, which is the there's a known pathway, which is the so-called vagus nerve, so-called vagus nerve, so-called vagus nerve, that connects the body and the brain, that connects the body and the brain, that connects the body and the brain, signals to particular brain sites to signals to particular brain sites to signals to particular brain sites to engage this category of motivational engage this category of motivational engage this category of motivational state that we call sickness behavior. state that we call sickness behavior. state that we call sickness behavior. The vagus nerve is a very extensive The vagus nerve is a very extensive The vagus nerve is a very extensive nerve pathway. It's the 10th cranial nerve pathway. It's the 10th cranial nerve pathway. It's the 10th cranial nerve, comes out of the nerve, comes out of the nerve, comes out of the back of the brainstem, heads into back of the brainstem, heads into back of the brainstem, heads into the body, and branches out the body, and branches out the body, and branches out extensively to innervate or connect to extensively to innervate or connect to extensively to innervate or connect to many of our organs, including our lungs, many of our organs, including our lungs, many of our organs, including our lungs, our heart, our gut, etc. And all of our heart, our gut, etc. And all of our heart, our gut, etc. And all of those organs are able also to send those organs are able also to send those organs are able also to send neural signals back up to the brain. neural signals back up to the brain. neural signals back up to the brain. We sometimes hear the vagus as the route We sometimes hear the vagus as the route We sometimes hear the vagus as the route to calming ourselves down. to calming ourselves down. to calming ourselves down. Unfortunately, that's more or less a Unfortunately, that's more or less a Unfortunately, that's more or less a myth that I don't know how it got myth that I don't know how it got myth that I don't know how it got propagated. There have now been propagated. There have now been propagated. There have now been many studies of the vagus many studies of the vagus many studies of the vagus in various contexts, including in various contexts, including in various contexts, including in sickness behavior, and it's very clear sickness behavior, and it's very clear sickness behavior, and it's very clear that the vagus nerve is the fast pathway that the vagus nerve is the fast pathway that the vagus nerve is the fast pathway by which an infection in the body is by which an infection in the body is by which an infection in the body is signaled to the brain to a particular signaled to the brain to a particular signaled to the brain to a particular location in the brain called the location in the brain called the location in the brain called the hypothalamus, which harbors a lot of hypothalamus, which harbors a lot of hypothalamus, which harbors a lot of different types of neurons. Neurons, for different types of neurons. Neurons, for different types of neurons. Neurons, for instance, in the preoptic area that instance, in the preoptic area that instance, in the preoptic area that increase body temperature and fever. increase body temperature and fever. increase body temperature and fever. Right? That's one of the most important Right? That's one of the most important Right? That's one of the most important things is to increase body temperature things is to increase body temperature things is to increase body temperature in order to It's the body's attempt to in order to It's the body's attempt to in order to It's the body's attempt to kill off this invader because many kill off this invader because many kill off this invader because many viruses and many bacteria don't survive well at and many bacteria don't survive well at and many bacteria don't survive well at elevated heat. That's the function of a elevated heat. That's the function of a elevated heat. That's the function of a fever. It also sends fever. It also sends fever. It also sends input to areas of the brain that change input to areas of the brain that change input to areas of the brain that change your perception of the outside world. your perception of the outside world. your perception of the outside world. One of the most uh obvious of these, One of the most uh obvious of these, One of the most uh obvious of these, obvious once I tell it to you, is photophobia. once I tell it to you, is photophobia. once I tell it to you, is photophobia. Right? I love bright sunshine. I love Right? I love bright sunshine. I love Right? I love bright sunshine. I love bright lights when I want to be alert. bright lights when I want to be alert. bright lights when I want to be alert. But most people, when they are sick, But most people, when they are sick, But most people, when they are sick, when there's an inflammation response in when there's an inflammation response in when there's an inflammation response in the body, the body, the body, they feel like bright lights are kind of they feel like bright lights are kind of they feel like bright lights are kind of aversive. They get a well-described, aversive. They get a well-described, aversive. They get a well-described, kind of classical photophobia. And kind of classical photophobia. And kind of classical photophobia. And that's mediated by a pathway that goes that's mediated by a pathway that goes that's mediated by a pathway that goes from your eye from your eye from your eye to an area of your thalamus called the an area of your thalamus called the an area of your thalamus called the anterior nucleus of the of the thalamus. anterior nucleus of the of the thalamus. anterior nucleus of the of the thalamus. Then from there up to the outer lining Then from there up to the outer lining Then from there up to the outer lining of the brain, which is the meninges, of the brain, which is the meninges, of the brain, which is the meninges, just over the on the outside of the just over the on the outside of the just over the on the outside of the brain where the brain starts to brain where the brain starts to brain where the brain starts to interface with some of the other uh interface with some of the other uh interface with some of the other uh connective tissues. We can actually connective tissues. We can actually connective tissues. We can actually create a photophobia and a headache when create a photophobia and a headache when create a photophobia and a headache when one is ill. And the last element I'd one is ill. And the last element I'd one is ill. And the last element I'd like to talk about is the rest. There's like to talk about is the rest. There's like to talk about is the rest. There's something that gets triggered from the something that gets triggered from the something that gets triggered from the body to the brain to the hypothalamus. body to the brain to the hypothalamus. body to the brain to the hypothalamus. And there are nuclei there that promote And there are nuclei there that promote And there are nuclei there that promote the desire to sleep even during the desire to sleep even during the desire to sleep even during the daytime, what would normally be the daytime, what would normally be the daytime, what would normally be the active phase of your circadian cycle. active phase of your circadian cycle. active phase of your circadian cycle. Now, that is really interesting because Now, that is really interesting because Now, that is really interesting because what's happening here is you've got what's happening here is you've got what's happening here is you've got multiple pathways that are saying multiple pathways that are saying multiple pathways that are saying avoid light, avoid light, avoid light, reduce your amount of behavior, heat up, reduce your amount of behavior, heat up, reduce your amount of behavior, heat up, all the things that are making you sick. all the things that are making you sick. all the things that are making you sick. This is sickness behavior and it's going This is sickness behavior and it's going This is sickness behavior and it's going from your from your from your body to your mind to make you do your body to your mind to make you do your body to your mind to make you do the right thing. the right thing. the right thing. Now, there's also a slow pathway that's Now, there's also a slow pathway that's Now, there's also a slow pathway that's purely mediated by the blood, so-called purely mediated by the blood, so-called purely mediated by the blood, so-called humoral factors, not because they're humoral factors, not because they're humoral factors, not because they're funny, but humoral factors are factors funny, but humoral factors are factors funny, but humoral factors are factors of the blood. of the blood. of the blood. As you have an effect an infection for As you have an effect an infection for As you have an effect an infection for many hours or days, many hours or days, many hours or days, the amount of IL-6 and IL-1 and tumor amount of IL-6 and IL-1 and tumor amount of IL-6 and IL-1 and tumor necrosis factor and other inflammatory necrosis factor and other inflammatory necrosis factor and other inflammatory cytokines is starting to increase such cytokines is starting to increase such cytokines is starting to increase such that the total amount in your circulation the total amount in your circulation the total amount in your circulation gets high enough and is communicated to gets high enough and is communicated to gets high enough and is communicated to the brain. the brain. the brain. And it tends to enter the brain through And it tends to enter the brain through And it tends to enter the brain through a particular type of tissue that's a particular type of tissue that's a particular type of tissue that's really interesting called choroid, c h o really interesting called choroid, c h o really interesting called choroid, c h o r o i d. The choroid starts releasing r o i d. The choroid starts releasing r o i d. The choroid starts releasing and responding to these cytokines and responding to these cytokines and responding to these cytokines uh inflammatory cytokines, and then the uh inflammatory cytokines, and then the uh inflammatory cytokines, and then the brain actually starts to experience all brain actually starts to experience all brain actually starts to experience all sorts of changes in terms of sorts of changes in terms of sorts of changes in terms of inflammation to neurons, your memory inflammation to neurons, your memory inflammation to neurons, your memory tends to get poor, your cognition tends to get poor, your cognition tends to get poor, your cognition tends to get poor. These are transient things to get poor. These are transient things to get poor. These are transient things most often. These eventually these most often. These eventually these most often. These eventually these things will pass, but this is deep into things will pass, but this is deep into things will pass, but this is deep into sickness when you're really feeling sickness when you're really feeling sickness when you're really feeling lousy. You can't read, you can't watch a lousy. You can't read, you can't watch a lousy. You can't read, you can't watch a movie, you can't do anything. So, if you movie, you can't do anything. So, if you movie, you can't do anything. So, if you ever get sick ever get sick ever get sick and you just can't be bothered by and you just can't be bothered by and you just can't be bothered by anything, it's probably because you've anything, it's probably because you've anything, it's probably because you've had that fast response from the body and had that fast response from the body and had that fast response from the body and you've also had this slower response you've also had this slower response you've also had this slower response where you literally have a set of where you literally have a set of where you literally have a set of tissues in your brain that are sending tissues in your brain that are sending tissues in your brain that are sending out these inflammatory signals and out these inflammatory signals and out these inflammatory signals and now your whole brain is starting to cope now your whole brain is starting to cope now your whole brain is starting to cope or is trying to cope with this or is trying to cope with this or is trying to cope with this infection. So, you've got a slow pathway infection. So, you've got a slow pathway infection. So, you've got a slow pathway and a fast pathway. and a fast pathway. and a fast pathway. That all sounds really terrible. So, now That all sounds really terrible. So, now That all sounds really terrible. So, now I'd like to talk about what you can do I'd like to talk about what you can do I'd like to talk about what you can do to reduce the probability of getting to reduce the probability of getting to reduce the probability of getting sick and sick and sick and there are actually things that one can there are actually things that one can there are actually things that one can do as you start to get sick and once do as you start to get sick and once do as you start to get sick and once you're sick to accelerate the healing you're sick to accelerate the healing you're sick to accelerate the healing process by flipping the equation. Up process by flipping the equation. Up process by flipping the equation. Up until now we've been talking about how until now we've been talking about how until now we've been talking about how the body the body the body activates certain areas in the brain to activates certain areas in the brain to activates certain areas in the brain to create sickness behavior that's very create sickness behavior that's very create sickness behavior that's very much like depression. You're probably much like depression. You're probably much like depression. You're probably all familiar with this from any time all familiar with this from any time all familiar with this from any time you've had a cold or a flu or something you've had a cold or a flu or something you've had a cold or a flu or something really lousy or an injury. Now let's really lousy or an injury. Now let's really lousy or an injury. Now let's flip the equation and ask what can we do flip the equation and ask what can we do flip the equation and ask what can we do with our nervous system in order to with our nervous system in order to with our nervous system in order to enhance the function of our immune enhance the function of our immune enhance the function of our immune system in order to be able to heal and recover in order to be able to heal and recover in order to be able to heal and recover from illness and injury more quickly. from illness and injury more quickly. from illness and injury more quickly. We all know what we should do. We should We all know what we should do. We should We all know what we should do. We should all hydrate, drink some water, and go to hydrate, drink some water, and go to hydrate, drink some water, and go to sleep. Right? That's what we're all we are all Right? That's what we're all we are all Right? That's what we're all we are all told. But there are actually things that told. But there are actually things that told. But there are actually things that you can actively do in order to get your you can actively do in order to get your you can actively do in order to get your immune system to deploy a more robust immune system to deploy a more robust immune system to deploy a more robust response at that early phase of response at that early phase of response at that early phase of potential infection. potential infection. potential infection. Let's focus first on the rest component. Let's focus first on the rest component. Let's focus first on the rest component. Yes, of course we are all told that we Yes, of course we are all told that we Yes, of course we are all told that we should take a hot shower and go to should take a hot shower and go to should take a hot shower and go to sleep, you know, and get 9 or 10 hours sleep, you know, and get 9 or 10 hours sleep, you know, and get 9 or 10 hours of sleep. of sleep. of sleep. But there's an interesting way of But there's an interesting way of But there's an interesting way of looking at sleep specifically for its looking at sleep specifically for its looking at sleep specifically for its role in enhancing the immune system. role in enhancing the immune system. role in enhancing the immune system. During sleep and in particular during During sleep and in particular during During sleep and in particular during sleep that's associated with the early sleep that's associated with the early sleep that's associated with the early stage of any kind of viral or bacterial stage of any kind of viral or bacterial stage of any kind of viral or bacterial infection, the so-called glymphatic system the so-called glymphatic system the so-called glymphatic system is much more active than it would be is much more active than it would be is much more active than it would be normally. What's the glymphatic system? normally. What's the glymphatic system? normally. What's the glymphatic system? The glymphatic system with a G The glymphatic system with a G The glymphatic system with a G is a system in the brain by which debris is a system in the brain by which debris is a system in the brain by which debris that accumulates throughout the day, that accumulates throughout the day, that accumulates throughout the day, but in particular debris that but in particular debris that but in particular debris that accumulates under conditions of accumulates under conditions of accumulates under conditions of neuroinflammation and inflammation of neuroinflammation and inflammation of neuroinflammation and inflammation of the body the body the body is cleared out or is washed out of the is cleared out or is washed out of the is cleared out or is washed out of the brain. And the activity of this glymphatic And the activity of this glymphatic And the activity of this glymphatic system is extremely important for the system is extremely important for the system is extremely important for the recovery from infection of any kind. recovery from infection of any kind. recovery from infection of any kind. There is a way that you can increase the There is a way that you can increase the There is a way that you can increase the activity of your glymphatic system under activity of your glymphatic system under activity of your glymphatic system under normal circumstances. normal circumstances. normal circumstances. Because of the mechanics of the Because of the mechanics of the Because of the mechanics of the glymphatic system, glymphatic system, glymphatic system, it turns out that if you elevate your it turns out that if you elevate your it turns out that if you elevate your heels by about 12 degrees, it doesn't heels by about 12 degrees, it doesn't heels by about 12 degrees, it doesn't have to be exactly 12, as you sleep by have to be exactly 12, as you sleep by have to be exactly 12, as you sleep by putting maybe a rolled pillow or two putting maybe a rolled pillow or two putting maybe a rolled pillow or two pillows underneath your feet, by having pillows underneath your feet, by having pillows underneath your feet, by having the head below your legs, it seems that the head below your legs, it seems that the head below your legs, it seems that there's more glymphatic washout or there's more glymphatic washout or there's more glymphatic washout or clearance during sleep. So, I would say clearance during sleep. So, I would say clearance during sleep. So, I would say if you're not feeling well, yes, take if you're not feeling well, yes, take if you're not feeling well, yes, take the hot shower. Yes, uh get into bed and the hot shower. Yes, uh get into bed and the hot shower. Yes, uh get into bed and go to sleep, but elevate your feet to go to sleep, but elevate your feet to go to sleep, but elevate your feet to try and increase the activity of the try and increase the activity of the try and increase the activity of the glymphatic system. Some might even glymphatic system. Some might even glymphatic system. Some might even consider that consider that consider that if you have to be awake, that you might if you have to be awake, that you might if you have to be awake, that you might want to be awake with your feet elevated want to be awake with your feet elevated want to be awake with your feet elevated above your head. Now, that might not be above your head. Now, that might not be above your head. Now, that might not be practical for the workplace, um but it practical for the workplace, um but it practical for the workplace, um but it might be practical for a short nap might be practical for a short nap might be practical for a short nap during the day or something of that during the day or something of that during the day or something of that sort. Next, I'd like to do an in-depth sort. Next, I'd like to do an in-depth sort. Next, I'd like to do an in-depth analysis of a study analysis of a study analysis of a study that has achieved some prominence out that has achieved some prominence out that has achieved some prominence out there, not just in the scientific literature, not just in the scientific literature, not just in the scientific literature, but on the internet, because it relates but on the internet, because it relates but on the internet, because it relates to how particular types of breathing can to how particular types of breathing can to how particular types of breathing can impact the immune system and the ability impact the immune system and the ability impact the immune system and the ability to combat infection. to combat infection. to combat infection. The title of this paper is voluntary The title of this paper is voluntary The title of this paper is voluntary activation of the sympathetic nervous activation of the sympathetic nervous activation of the sympathetic nervous system and attenuation of the innate system and attenuation of the innate system and attenuation of the innate immune response in humans. immune response in humans. immune response in humans. This is a paper that was published in This is a paper that was published in This is a paper that was published in PNAS, which is the Proceedings of the National which is the Proceedings of the National which is the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA. It's a very Academy of Sciences USA. It's a very Academy of Sciences USA. It's a very prestigious journal, and I just want to prestigious journal, and I just want to prestigious journal, and I just want to describe the basic contour of the study. describe the basic contour of the study. describe the basic contour of the study. I'll explain the findings, and then I I'll explain the findings, and then I I'll explain the findings, and then I want to go in-depth and explain the want to go in-depth and explain the want to go in-depth and explain the mechanistic basis for these findings and mechanistic basis for these findings and mechanistic basis for these findings and the protocol that we can all export from the protocol that we can all export from the protocol that we can all export from these findings. these findings. these findings. So, here we go. So, first of all, a couple here we go. So, first of all, a couple here we go. So, first of all, a couple of terms so that everybody is on the of terms so that everybody is on the of terms so that everybody is on the same page. same page. same page. The sympathetic nervous system is one The sympathetic nervous system is one The sympathetic nervous system is one division of our nervous system. It's a division of our nervous system. It's a division of our nervous system. It's a set of neurons down the middle of our set of neurons down the middle of our set of neurons down the middle of our spinal cord and in our brain spinal cord and in our brain spinal cord and in our brain that generally lead to a heightened that generally lead to a heightened that generally lead to a heightened state of arousal and alertness. It's state of arousal and alertness. It's state of arousal and alertness. It's associated with epinephrine release in associated with epinephrine release in associated with epinephrine release in the brain and adrenaline release in the brain and adrenaline release in the brain and adrenaline release in the body. It's the so-called fight or flight It's the so-called fight or flight It's the so-called fight or flight system when it's really active, but it's system when it's really active, but it's system when it's really active, but it's the system that's the system that's the system that's active when we are wide awake. active when we are wide awake. active when we are wide awake. And we already talked about the innate we already talked about the innate we already talked about the innate immune system. That's that first line of immune system. That's that first line of immune system. That's that first line of defense after the skin barrier, of defense after the skin barrier, of defense after the skin barrier, of course, whereby some infection comes into the whereby some infection comes into the whereby some infection comes into the body and there's this rapid response of body and there's this rapid response of body and there's this rapid response of increasing inflammation. And that's also increasing inflammation. And that's also increasing inflammation. And that's also about the time that you first feel about the time that you first feel about the time that you first feel lousy. So, when you start to feel like, lousy. So, when you start to feel like, lousy. So, when you start to feel like, "Oh, I think I've got something. I don't "Oh, I think I've got something. I don't "Oh, I think I've got something. I don't feel right. A headache. I feel nauseous. feel right. A headache. I feel nauseous. feel right. A headache. I feel nauseous. I'm heating up. I don't feel good." I'm heating up. I don't feel good." I'm heating up. I don't feel good." That's the That's the That's the innate immune system kicking in. the innate immune system kicking in. the innate immune system kicking in. So, what they did in this study, they So, what they did in this study, they So, what they did in this study, they injected people with E. coli. It's a injected people with E. coli. It's a injected people with E. coli. It's a bacteria, which makes people all people feel which makes people all people feel which makes people all people feel terrible. These people voluntarily terrible. These people voluntarily terrible. These people voluntarily signed up for this study. signed up for this study. signed up for this study. However, some of the subjects in this However, some of the subjects in this However, some of the subjects in this study performed a behavioral protocol that can best be a behavioral protocol that can best be a behavioral protocol that can best be described as cyclic hyperventilation. described as cyclic hyperventilation. described as cyclic hyperventilation. So, they're comparing controls that do So, they're comparing controls that do So, they're comparing controls that do just sort of a basic meditation versus just sort of a basic meditation versus just sort of a basic meditation versus people that do this intense breathing people that do this intense breathing people that do this intense breathing followed by some breath holds. In the followed by some breath holds. In the followed by some breath holds. In the intervention group, the breathing group, intervention group, the breathing group, intervention group, the breathing group, plasma levels of anti-inflammatory plasma levels of anti-inflammatory plasma levels of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, so this is a cytokine IL-10, so this is a cytokine IL-10, so this is a cytokine that is lowers inflammation, increased that is lowers inflammation, increased that is lowers inflammation, increased after endotoxin administration. after endotoxin administration. after endotoxin administration. And that was triggered by an increase in And that was triggered by an increase in And that was triggered by an increase in epinephrine and adrenaline. So, in other epinephrine and adrenaline. So, in other epinephrine and adrenaline. So, in other words, doing a particular pattern of words, doing a particular pattern of words, doing a particular pattern of breathing allowed an anti-inflammatory breathing allowed an anti-inflammatory breathing allowed an anti-inflammatory cytokine to be turned on. And they cytokine to be turned on. And they cytokine to be turned on. And they discovered that levels of discovered that levels of discovered that levels of pro-inflammatory TNF alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, TNF alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, TNF alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, IL-6, interleukin 6, and interleukin 8, IL-6, interleukin 6, and interleukin 8, IL-6, interleukin 6, and interleukin 8, which you should all be familiar with which you should all be familiar with which you should all be familiar with now, as pro-inflammatory cytokines were now, as pro-inflammatory cytokines were now, as pro-inflammatory cytokines were lower in the intervention group. lower in the intervention group. lower in the intervention group. Finally, flu-like symptoms were lower in Finally, flu-like symptoms were lower in Finally, flu-like symptoms were lower in the intervention group. So, this is an the intervention group. So, this is an the intervention group. So, this is an amazing finding, right? These are human amazing finding, right? These are human amazing finding, right? These are human subjects. One is One group of subjects is doing One is One group of subjects is doing One is One group of subjects is doing this breathing protocol. The other group this breathing protocol. The other group this breathing protocol. The other group of subjects is just meditating. They of subjects is just meditating. They of subjects is just meditating. They both Both sets of subjects have been in both Both sets of subjects have been in both Both sets of subjects have been in injected with E. coli, so you know injected with E. coli, so you know injected with E. coli, so you know everyone's getting the same amount everyone's getting the same amount everyone's getting the same amount placed into their system. How in the placed into their system. How in the placed into their system. How in the world does this work? Why does this world does this work? Why does this world does this work? Why does this work? First of all, what is this magical work? First of all, what is this magical work? First of all, what is this magical pattern of breathing? Some of you may pattern of breathing? Some of you may pattern of breathing? Some of you may recognize this as so-called Wim Hof recognize this as so-called Wim Hof recognize this as so-called Wim Hof breathing. The breathing that is breathing. The breathing that is breathing. The breathing that is so-called Wim Hof breathing is very so-called Wim Hof breathing is very so-called Wim Hof breathing is very similar, not exactly the same, but very similar, not exactly the same, but very similar, not exactly the same, but very similar to tumo breathing similar to tumo breathing similar to tumo breathing as it's been described historically. In as it's been described historically. In as it's been described historically. In the science and physiology community, we the science and physiology community, we the science and physiology community, we refer to it as cyclic hyperventilation, refer to it as cyclic hyperventilation, refer to it as cyclic hyperventilation, which just means repeated deep breaths which just means repeated deep breaths which just means repeated deep breaths in and out, and then there are these in and out, and then there are these in and out, and then there are these retentions. So, I'm because I'm here in retentions. So, I'm because I'm here in retentions. So, I'm because I'm here in the hot seat anyway, I might as well the hot seat anyway, I might as well the hot seat anyway, I might as well demonstrate it for you so you know what demonstrate it for you so you know what demonstrate it for you so you know what this looks like. It involves this looks like. It involves this looks like. It involves 20 to 30 deep inhales and then 20 to 30 deep inhales and then 20 to 30 deep inhales and then exhales through the mouth exhales through the mouth exhales through the mouth followed by a exhale of all one's air followed by a exhale of all one's air followed by a exhale of all one's air and a breath hold. That's the retention. and a breath hold. That's the retention. and a breath hold. That's the retention. And then at some point, 15 to 60 seconds And then at some point, 15 to 60 seconds And then at some point, 15 to 60 seconds later, repeating the 25 or 30 breaths later, repeating the 25 or 30 breaths later, repeating the 25 or 30 breaths and then again a breath hold with lungs and then again a breath hold with lungs and then again a breath hold with lungs empty. Okay, I'm not going to do the empty. Okay, I'm not going to do the empty. Okay, I'm not going to do the whole thing right now, but it goes whole thing right now, but it goes whole thing right now, but it goes something like this. Okay, so let's assume I did that for 30 Okay, so let's assume I did that for 30 Okay, so let's assume I did that for 30 breaths. I can already feel myself 30 breaths. I can already feel myself 30 breaths. I can already feel myself um perspiring a little bit. You're um perspiring a little bit. You're um perspiring a little bit. You're heating up. That's the release of heating up. That's the release of heating up. That's the release of adrenaline. It's caused by that breathing pattern It's caused by that breathing pattern It's caused by that breathing pattern and then exhaling all of one's air, no and then exhaling all of one's air, no and then exhaling all of one's air, no speaking in between like I'm doing. And then sitting lungs empty until one And then sitting lungs empty until one And then sitting lungs empty until one feels the impulse to breathe and then feels the impulse to breathe and then feels the impulse to breathe and then repeating for several rounds, two or repeating for several rounds, two or repeating for several rounds, two or three or even four rounds. three or even four rounds. three or even four rounds. Basically, this study looked at people Basically, this study looked at people Basically, this study looked at people doing cyclic hyperventilation with doing cyclic hyperventilation with doing cyclic hyperventilation with retention, three rounds of 25 to 30 retention, three rounds of 25 to 30 retention, three rounds of 25 to 30 breaths followed by exhale hold in breaths followed by exhale hold in breaths followed by exhale hold in between of various duration, but in general 15 of various duration, but in general 15 of various duration, but in general 15 to 60 seconds is typical. So, what's to 60 seconds is typical. So, what's to 60 seconds is typical. So, what's going on here? How is the breathing going on here? How is the breathing going on here? How is the breathing leading to leading to leading to these shifts in these shifts in these shifts in or I should say reduction in or I should say reduction in or I should say reduction in inflammatory cytokines and an increase inflammatory cytokines and an increase inflammatory cytokines and an increase in the liberation in the liberation in the liberation of these anti-inflammatory cytokines? of these anti-inflammatory cytokines? of these anti-inflammatory cytokines? This is beyond the scope of this This is beyond the scope of this This is beyond the scope of this discussion, but that it's actually the discussion, but that it's actually the discussion, but that it's actually the release of epinephrine, aka adrenaline, release of epinephrine, aka adrenaline, release of epinephrine, aka adrenaline, that's causing this reduction in that's causing this reduction in that's causing this reduction in inflammation. And inflammation. And inflammation. And that's actually supported by something that's actually supported by something that's actually supported by something that you've probably experienced before, that you've probably experienced before, that you've probably experienced before, which is if you've ever worked which is if you've ever worked which is if you've ever worked really hard or worked really hard or worked really hard or you've been care a caretaker for you've been care a caretaker for you've been care a caretaker for somebody else or studying for exams somebody else or studying for exams somebody else or studying for exams and people around you are getting sick and people around you are getting sick and people around you are getting sick and you're just powering through it and you're just powering through it and you're just powering through it and you're not getting sick, but then and you're not getting sick, but then and you're not getting sick, but then you stop, you turn in your final exam, you stop, you turn in your final exam, you stop, you turn in your final exam, you stop taking care of somebody you stop taking care of somebody you stop taking care of somebody else or you finally stop and rest or you else or you finally stop and rest or you else or you finally stop and rest or you go on vacation and then you get sick. go on vacation and then you get sick. go on vacation and then you get sick. Well, you've just experienced the effect Well, you've just experienced the effect Well, you've just experienced the effect that adrenaline, epinephrine, can have that adrenaline, epinephrine, can have that adrenaline, epinephrine, can have in activating your immune system by way in activating your immune system by way in activating your immune system by way of the nervous system in order to keep of the nervous system in order to keep of the nervous system in order to keep fighting and combating infection. And fighting and combating infection. And fighting and combating infection. And that brings us to a larger theme, which that brings us to a larger theme, which that brings us to a larger theme, which is that stress and combating infection is that stress and combating infection is that stress and combating infection or a wound is or a wound is or a wound is not one unique system. It's the same not one unique system. It's the same not one unique system. It's the same stress system that you use to combat stress system that you use to combat stress system that you use to combat psychological stress. So, when you're psychological stress. So, when you're psychological stress. So, when you're very stressed, at least in the very stressed, at least in the very stressed, at least in the short term, short term, short term, because you release so much adrenaline because you release so much adrenaline because you release so much adrenaline and epinephrine, you're actually better and epinephrine, you're actually better and epinephrine, you're actually better able to combat infections and you reduce able to combat infections and you reduce able to combat infections and you reduce inflammation and the whole feeling lousy inflammation and the whole feeling lousy inflammation and the whole feeling lousy response, right? Remember, reduced response, right? Remember, reduced response, right? Remember, reduced flu-like symptoms here. So, this pattern flu-like symptoms here. So, this pattern flu-like symptoms here. So, this pattern of breathing is actually a very useful of breathing is actually a very useful of breathing is actually a very useful tool. And I confess, I use this pattern tool. And I confess, I use this pattern tool. And I confess, I use this pattern of breathing anytime I am at the initial of breathing anytime I am at the initial of breathing anytime I am at the initial stages of getting some sort of bug. stages of getting some sort of bug. stages of getting some sort of bug. If I feel like I've been running myself If I feel like I've been running myself If I feel like I've been running myself ragged or if I somehow, for whatever ragged or if I somehow, for whatever ragged or if I somehow, for whatever reason, have a tickle in my throat or I reason, have a tickle in my throat or I reason, have a tickle in my throat or I have that kind of sensation in my nose have that kind of sensation in my nose have that kind of sensation in my nose like I might have um like I might have um like I might have um it may might have caught a bug of some it may might have caught a bug of some it may might have caught a bug of some sort, I will do this pattern of sort, I will do this pattern of sort, I will do this pattern of breathing. I've been doing it consistently gosh, I've been doing it consistently gosh, I've been doing it consistently gosh, for the last 4 years or more. Um you for the last 4 years or more. Um you for the last 4 years or more. Um you know, now this is just anecdotal uh know, now this is just anecdotal uh know, now this is just anecdotal uh reports, but I find that it allows me reports, but I find that it allows me reports, but I find that it allows me indeed to indeed to indeed to either have those early symptoms either have those early symptoms either have those early symptoms disappear or it allows me to just kind disappear or it allows me to just kind disappear or it allows me to just kind of push through and harder longer. I of push through and harder longer. I of push through and harder longer. I don't suggest people continue to push don't suggest people continue to push don't suggest people continue to push through exposure to infections. Obviously, you exposure to infections. Obviously, you exposure to infections. Obviously, you don't want to infect other people. Um don't want to infect other people. Um don't want to infect other people. Um nor do you want to crash and suddenly nor do you want to crash and suddenly nor do you want to crash and suddenly get a massive uh illness of some get a massive uh illness of some get a massive uh illness of some sort because you stop doing this sort because you stop doing this sort because you stop doing this breathing. But, I do think it's a useful breathing. But, I do think it's a useful breathing. But, I do think it's a useful tool. It's a purely behavioral tool. It's a purely behavioral tool. It's a purely behavioral intervention that has been shown here intervention that has been shown here intervention that has been shown here and now there additional studies on the and now there additional studies on the and now there additional studies on the way to enhance the function of your immune to enhance the function of your immune to enhance the function of your immune system and to reduce inflammation. And system and to reduce inflammation. And system and to reduce inflammation. And this is this is this is to me one of the most concrete examples to me one of the most concrete examples to me one of the most concrete examples of a zero cost tool of a zero cost tool of a zero cost tool that bridges the activation of the that bridges the activation of the that bridges the activation of the nervous system through breathing nervous system through breathing nervous system through breathing with the immune system by way of with the immune system by way of with the immune system by way of releasing adrenaline and thereby releasing adrenaline and thereby releasing adrenaline and thereby reducing the reducing the reducing the terrible effects or feelings of terrible effects or feelings of terrible effects or feelings of lousiness from a lousiness from a lousiness from a in this case, an E. coli infection. in this case, an E. coli infection. in this case, an E. coli infection. There's one last very interesting There's one last very interesting There's one last very interesting feature of this study that I want to feature of this study that I want to feature of this study that I want to emphasize. And that was that they emphasize. And that was that they emphasize. And that was that they actually measured the so-called actually measured the so-called actually measured the so-called catecholamine concentrations. catecholamine concentrations. catecholamine concentrations. Catecholamines are things like dopamine, Catecholamines are things like dopamine, Catecholamines are things like dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine. epinephrine, norepinephrine. epinephrine, norepinephrine. These are chemicals These are chemicals These are chemicals in your nervous system in your nervous system in your nervous system and body that promote states of and body that promote states of and body that promote states of alertness. Uh dopamine, of course, part alertness. Uh dopamine, of course, part alertness. Uh dopamine, of course, part of the reward and motivation pathways. of the reward and motivation pathways. of the reward and motivation pathways. They explored the levels of these They explored the levels of these They explored the levels of these molecules in blood, in plasma molecules in blood, in plasma molecules in blood, in plasma during and after this breathing during and after this breathing during and after this breathing protocol. And as interesting, as I mentioned And as interesting, as I mentioned And as interesting, as I mentioned before, epinephrine showed robust before, epinephrine showed robust before, epinephrine showed robust increases compared to the control group. increases compared to the control group. increases compared to the control group. Norepinephrine significant increases Norepinephrine significant increases Norepinephrine significant increases occurred in the in the breathing group, occurred in the in the breathing group, occurred in the in the breathing group, but um in the cyclic hyperventilation but um in the cyclic hyperventilation but um in the cyclic hyperventilation retention breathing group, of course. retention breathing group, of course. retention breathing group, of course. Um but less so. Um and dopamine levels Um but less so. Um and dopamine levels Um but less so. Um and dopamine levels actually um dropped somewhat. actually um dropped somewhat. actually um dropped somewhat. But this is very interesting because But this is very interesting because But this is very interesting because there's a new and emerging literature there's a new and emerging literature there's a new and emerging literature largely from Aisa, A Y S A Rolls Lab uh largely from Aisa, A Y S A Rolls Lab uh largely from Aisa, A Y S A Rolls Lab uh in Israel. What her laboratory has shown in Israel. What her laboratory has shown in Israel. What her laboratory has shown is that is that is that motivational state motivational state motivational state and mindset has a powerful impact on and mindset has a powerful impact on and mindset has a powerful impact on various aspects of the immune system various aspects of the immune system various aspects of the immune system that were thought to be independent of that were thought to be independent of that were thought to be independent of the brain and mind and thinking. They the brain and mind and thinking. They the brain and mind and thinking. They explored the well-established explored the well-established explored the well-established psychological phenomenon that when psychological phenomenon that when psychological phenomenon that when cancer patients or very ill people or cancer patients or very ill people or cancer patients or very ill people or people who are suffering from very people who are suffering from very people who are suffering from very debilitating injuries when they had or debilitating injuries when they had or debilitating injuries when they had or report when people had or reported a report when people had or reported a report when people had or reported a sense of hope, their rates of recovery sense of hope, their rates of recovery sense of hope, their rates of recovery were much higher. All right, sounds were much higher. All right, sounds were much higher. All right, sounds very subjective. very subjective. very subjective. But what is a sense of hope? A sense of But what is a sense of hope? A sense of But what is a sense of hope? A sense of hope is a sense of the future. A sense hope is a sense of the future. A sense hope is a sense of the future. A sense of the future is tightly associated with of the future is tightly associated with of the future is tightly associated with the dopamine system. And so what they've the dopamine system. And so what they've the dopamine system. And so what they've discovered and through other studies discovered and through other studies discovered and through other studies from other groups have discovered is from other groups have discovered is from other groups have discovered is that stimulation of the dopamine pathway that stimulation of the dopamine pathway that stimulation of the dopamine pathway either simply by thinking about a future either simply by thinking about a future either simply by thinking about a future ideally a positive future, but thinking ideally a positive future, but thinking ideally a positive future, but thinking about a positive future leads to about a positive future leads to about a positive future leads to activation of the so-called mesolimbic activation of the so-called mesolimbic activation of the so-called mesolimbic reward pathway and could reduce the size reward pathway and could reduce the size reward pathway and could reduce the size of tumors, could accelerate wound of tumors, could accelerate wound of tumors, could accelerate wound healing, could greatly accelerate the healing, could greatly accelerate the healing, could greatly accelerate the passage from a state of illness to a passage from a state of illness to a passage from a state of illness to a state of health and well-being. state of health and well-being. state of health and well-being. It's because this reward pathway and the It's because this reward pathway and the It's because this reward pathway and the fact that it's related to a sense of the fact that it's related to a sense of the fact that it's related to a sense of the future seems to liberate entire systems future seems to liberate entire systems future seems to liberate entire systems within the body that make within the body that make within the body that make inflammatory cytokines go down inflammatory cytokines go down inflammatory cytokines go down and anti-inflammatory cytokines go up. and anti-inflammatory cytokines go up. and anti-inflammatory cytokines go up. Exactly as was demonstrated in the Exactly as was demonstrated in the Exactly as was demonstrated in the beautiful PNAS study where breathing beautiful PNAS study where breathing beautiful PNAS study where breathing cyclic hyperventilation was used to cyclic hyperventilation was used to cyclic hyperventilation was used to increase epinephrine, increase epinephrine, increase epinephrine, increase norepinephrine, and to augment the norepinephrine, and to augment the norepinephrine, and to augment the catecholamine system. So, catecholamine system. So, catecholamine system. So, I think that the bridges between I think that the bridges between I think that the bridges between these studies are really relevant. There these studies are really relevant. There these studies are really relevant. There is a very exciting article published is a very exciting article published is a very exciting article published from Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical from Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical from Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical School and the title of the article is a School and the title of the article is a School and the title of the article is a neuroanatomical basis for neuroanatomical basis for neuroanatomical basis for electroacupuncture to drive the vagal electroacupuncture to drive the vagal electroacupuncture to drive the vagal adrenal axis. When Chufu's lab looked at adrenal axis. When Chufu's lab looked at adrenal axis. When Chufu's lab looked at stimulation of the body with so-called stimulation of the body with so-called stimulation of the body with so-called electroacupuncture, so this is these are electroacupuncture, so this is these are electroacupuncture, so this is these are needles where a small bit of electrical needles where a small bit of electrical needles where a small bit of electrical current, low level of electrical current, low level of electrical current, low level of electrical current, is passed into the needle current, is passed into the needle current, is passed into the needle and therefore into the body, they and therefore into the body, they and therefore into the body, they located sites on the body that can located sites on the body that can located sites on the body that can increase inflammation by way of increase inflammation by way of increase inflammation by way of releasing inflammatory cytokines. These releasing inflammatory cytokines. These releasing inflammatory cytokines. These areas included the abdomen and they areas included the abdomen and they areas included the abdomen and they found areas on the body such as the found areas on the body such as the found areas on the body such as the lower limbs, the hind limbs in this case lower limbs, the hind limbs in this case lower limbs, the hind limbs in this case that can stimulate the vagal adrenal that can stimulate the vagal adrenal that can stimulate the vagal adrenal reflex and can lead to reduced inflammation. and can lead to reduced inflammation. and can lead to reduced inflammation. And what was really interesting is that And what was really interesting is that And what was really interesting is that they figured out that it was activation they figured out that it was activation they figured out that it was activation of nerve endings that resided in the of nerve endings that resided in the of nerve endings that resided in the fascia. The fascia is a really thick fascia. The fascia is a really thick fascia. The fascia is a really thick sheath of tissue that surrounds muscle. sheath of tissue that surrounds muscle. sheath of tissue that surrounds muscle. And so what they discovered is there's a And so what they discovered is there's a And so what they discovered is there's a specific population of neurons, those specific population of neurons, those specific population of neurons, those neurons have a name as they often do in neurons have a name as they often do in neurons have a name as they often do in science. Name isn't important, but if science. Name isn't important, but if science. Name isn't important, but if you want to look it up, it's the proc you want to look it up, it's the proc you want to look it up, it's the proc R2 neurons, p r o k R2 neurons. R2 neurons, p r o k R2 neurons. R2 neurons, p r o k R2 neurons. And they send a connection deep into the And they send a connection deep into the And they send a connection deep into the limb fascial tissue. And then they send limb fascial tissue. And then they send limb fascial tissue. And then they send another wire another wire another wire up into the spinal cord into a region of up into the spinal cord into a region of up into the spinal cord into a region of the hindbrain the hindbrain the hindbrain in the back of your brain kind of near in the back of your brain kind of near in the back of your brain kind of near your neck called the medulla in the your neck called the medulla in the your neck called the medulla in the medulla oblongata. medulla oblongata. medulla oblongata. That neuron also has a name called the That neuron also has a name called the That neuron also has a name called the DMZ, doesn't matter. And that neuron DMZ, doesn't matter. And that neuron DMZ, doesn't matter. And that neuron connects to the adrenal gland to release connects to the adrenal gland to release connects to the adrenal gland to release our good old friends the catecholamines our good old friends the catecholamines our good old friends the catecholamines norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine or epinephrine, and dopamine or epinephrine, and dopamine or norepinephrine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine. So, what is all this and dopamine. So, what is all this and dopamine. So, what is all this saying? This is saying that activation saying? This is saying that activation saying? This is saying that activation of the deep fascial tissue of the deep fascial tissue of the deep fascial tissue causes a chain of causes a chain of causes a chain of neural reactions that leads eventually neural reactions that leads eventually neural reactions that leads eventually to the release of norepinephrine, to the release of norepinephrine, to the release of norepinephrine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine. And once again, lowers and dopamine. And once again, lowers and dopamine. And once again, lowers inflammation very much like the inflammation very much like the inflammation very much like the breathing study that we talked about breathing study that we talked about breathing study that we talked about earlier in the pattern of cyclic earlier in the pattern of cyclic earlier in the pattern of cyclic hyperventilation with retention leading hyperventilation with retention leading hyperventilation with retention leading to reductions in inflammation. Okay, so to reductions in inflammation. Okay, so to reductions in inflammation. Okay, so thus far we've been discussing how one thus far we've been discussing how one thus far we've been discussing how one can prevent can prevent can prevent getting sick or when one starts to feel getting sick or when one starts to feel getting sick or when one starts to feel ill, how one might be able to shorten the how one might be able to shorten the how one might be able to shorten the course of that infection by ramping up course of that infection by ramping up course of that infection by ramping up the activity of the immune system. But the activity of the immune system. But the activity of the immune system. But what about when you're already what about when you're already what about when you're already experiencing symptoms? There are many experiencing symptoms? There are many experiencing symptoms? There are many ways to address that at the symptom ways to address that at the symptom ways to address that at the symptom level. You're probably aware of all the level. You're probably aware of all the level. You're probably aware of all the over-the-counter medications, many of over-the-counter medications, many of over-the-counter medications, many of which focus on the epinephrine system. which focus on the epinephrine system. which focus on the epinephrine system. You know, things that are of the You know, things that are of the You know, things that are of the pseudoephedrine variety pseudoephedrine variety pseudoephedrine variety prevent or reduce congestion prevent or reduce congestion prevent or reduce congestion because of the way that they cause because of the way that they cause because of the way that they cause release of epinephrine and some of the release of epinephrine and some of the release of epinephrine and some of the effects on dilating the bronchioles and effects on dilating the bronchioles and effects on dilating the bronchioles and dilating the nasal passages and so dilating the nasal passages and so dilating the nasal passages and so forth. I'm not going to speak to whether or not I'm not going to speak to whether or not I'm not going to speak to whether or not those are good or bad choices. They do those are good or bad choices. They do those are good or bad choices. They do have a couple of effects that are not so have a couple of effects that are not so have a couple of effects that are not so great for the course of great for the course of great for the course of treating the underlying cause, which are treating the underlying cause, which are treating the underlying cause, which are first of all, they can cause first of all, they can cause first of all, they can cause dehydration. So, you have to make sure dehydration. So, you have to make sure dehydration. So, you have to make sure that you're hydrating well both fluids that you're hydrating well both fluids that you're hydrating well both fluids and electrolytes. and electrolytes. and electrolytes. And they also can interfere with sleep. they also can interfere with sleep. they also can interfere with sleep. There is an interesting alternative There is an interesting alternative There is an interesting alternative choice, and when I say alternative, I do choice, and when I say alternative, I do choice, and when I say alternative, I do mean alternative. mean alternative. mean alternative. The choice that I'm referring to is The choice that I'm referring to is The choice that I'm referring to is spirulina, which is actually a form of spirulina, which is actually a form of spirulina, which is actually a form of algae. There are some really nice algae. There are some really nice algae. There are some really nice studies and some data and also an studies and some data and also an studies and some data and also an understanding of the mechanism by which understanding of the mechanism by which understanding of the mechanism by which spirulina can have potent effects in spirulina can have potent effects in spirulina can have potent effects in reducing what's called rhinitis, which reducing what's called rhinitis, which reducing what's called rhinitis, which is a fancy word for congestion of the is a fancy word for congestion of the is a fancy word for congestion of the nose and inflammation of the nose. nose and inflammation of the nose. nose and inflammation of the nose. These looked at humans, so this is not a These looked at humans, so this is not a These looked at humans, so this is not a mouse study. This is a study on humans. mouse study. This is a study on humans. mouse study. This is a study on humans. Both sexes, so males and females. Both sexes, so males and females. Both sexes, so males and females. In one case, looking at 100 plus In one case, looking at 100 plus In one case, looking at 100 plus subjects, 129 subjects. The other, 65 subjects, 129 subjects. The other, 65 subjects, 129 subjects. The other, 65 subjects. So, decent number of subjects, subjects. So, decent number of subjects, subjects. So, decent number of subjects, randomized trial, double blind. Both randomized trial, double blind. Both randomized trial, double blind. Both cases saw significant decreases in cases saw significant decreases in cases saw significant decreases in nasal obstruction, improved ability to nasal obstruction, improved ability to nasal obstruction, improved ability to smell, improved sleep, uh improved sleep, uh improved sleep, uh daily working, cytokine daily working, cytokine daily working, cytokine inflammatory cytokines were reduced as inflammatory cytokines were reduced as inflammatory cytokines were reduced as well. Reduction in nasal itching, all the Reduction in nasal itching, all the Reduction in nasal itching, all the stuff that you'd like to stuff that you'd like to stuff that you'd like to experience, I could imagine, after experience, I could imagine, after experience, I could imagine, after taking 2 g, 2 g, not milligrams, but 2 g taking 2 g, 2 g, not milligrams, but 2 g taking 2 g, 2 g, not milligrams, but 2 g of spirulina. Once again, we've covered of spirulina. Once again, we've covered of spirulina. Once again, we've covered a lot of information. Today, we learned a lot of information. Today, we learned a lot of information. Today, we learned about the immune system, the adaptive about the immune system, the adaptive about the immune system, the adaptive immune system, the innate immune system, immune system, the innate immune system, immune system, the innate immune system, and the nervous system and how those and the nervous system and how those and the nervous system and how those interact. And throughout, we discussed interact. And throughout, we discussed interact. And throughout, we discussed protocols that can allow you to tap into protocols that can allow you to tap into protocols that can allow you to tap into this relationship between the nervous this relationship between the nervous this relationship between the nervous system and immune system and hopefully system and immune system and hopefully system and immune system and hopefully avoid and/or shorten the course of any avoid and/or shorten the course of any avoid and/or shorten the course of any illnesses, injuries, or inflammation that you might injuries, or inflammation that you might injuries, or inflammation that you might encounter.