Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Serju Pusca. Dr. Sergu today is Dr. Serju Pusca. Dr. Sergu today is Dr. Serju Pusca. Dr. Sergu Pasca is a professor of psychiatry and Pasca is a professor of psychiatry and Pasca is a professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences and the director of behavioral sciences and the director of behavioral sciences and the director of the Stanford brain organogenesis the Stanford brain organogenesis the Stanford brain organogenesis program. During today's episode, we program. During today's episode, we program. During today's episode, we discuss autism, schizophrenia, and human discuss autism, schizophrenia, and human discuss autism, schizophrenia, and human brain development generally, both brain development generally, both brain development generally, both brain development during pregnancy as well as development during pregnancy as well as development during pregnancy as well as during childhood and leading all the way during childhood and leading all the way during childhood and leading all the way up to our third decade of life. During up to our third decade of life. During up to our third decade of life. During today's discussion, you will get the today's discussion, you will get the today's discussion, you will get the most up-to-date information about autism most up-to-date information about autism most up-to-date information about autism and its treatments. You'll learn why the and its treatments. You'll learn why the and its treatments. You'll learn why the prevalence of autism is rising, the role prevalence of autism is rising, the role prevalence of autism is rising, the role that genes play in autism, and the novel that genes play in autism, and the novel that genes play in autism, and the novel treatments that Dr. Pusca is developing treatments that Dr. Pusca is developing treatments that Dr. Pusca is developing to treat what is called profound autism, to treat what is called profound autism, to treat what is called profound autism, which are the most severe cases of which are the most severe cases of which are the most severe cases of autism. Dr. Pusca is one of a small autism. Dr. Pusca is one of a small autism. Dr. Pusca is one of a small handful of researchers that pioneered handful of researchers that pioneered handful of researchers that pioneered the discovery and development of what the discovery and development of what the discovery and development of what are called organoids and assemblids are called organoids and assemblids are called organoids and assemblids which are essentially human brain which are essentially human brain which are essentially human brain circuits derived from stem cells that circuits derived from stem cells that circuits derived from stem cells that form in a dish so that one can study form in a dish so that one can study form in a dish so that one can study them directly. And while that might them directly. And while that might them directly. And while that might sound artificial today he explains why sound artificial today he explains why sound artificial today he explains why those organoids and assemblids are those organoids and assemblids are those organoids and assemblids are immensely powerful for understanding immensely powerful for understanding immensely powerful for understanding exactly what is wrong in psychiatric exactly what is wrong in psychiatric exactly what is wrong in psychiatric illnesses like profound autism, illnesses like profound autism, illnesses like profound autism, schizophrenia and other psychiatric schizophrenia and other psychiatric schizophrenia and other psychiatric challenges and for developing cures. So challenges and for developing cures. So challenges and for developing cures. So today you're going to learn a lot about today you're going to learn a lot about today you're going to learn a lot about human brain development and about stem human brain development and about stem human brain development and about stem cells which is going to be important for cells which is going to be important for cells which is going to be important for anyone interested in how the brain wires anyone interested in how the brain wires anyone interested in how the brain wires up, how to treat various diseases of the up, how to treat various diseases of the up, how to treat various diseases of the brain, but also for anyone who is brain, but also for anyone who is brain, but also for anyone who is considering stem cell therapies. As considering stem cell therapies. As considering stem cell therapies. As you'll soon learn, Sergu is an you'll soon learn, Sergu is an you'll soon learn, Sergu is an extraordinary scientist, but also an extraordinary scientist, but also an extraordinary scientist, but also an extraordinary teacher. By the end of extraordinary teacher. By the end of extraordinary teacher. By the end of today's episode, you'll have the latest today's episode, you'll have the latest today's episode, you'll have the latest information on stem cells, organoids, information on stem cells, organoids, information on stem cells, organoids, autism, and what is being done to cure autism, and what is being done to cure autism, and what is being done to cure autism and other psychiatric conditions. autism and other psychiatric conditions. autism and other psychiatric conditions. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer effort to bring zerocost to consumer effort to bring zerocost to consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. Dr. discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. Dr. discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. Dr. Sergu Pasca, welcome. Sergu Pasca, welcome. Sergu Pasca, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's great to be here. We're &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's great to be here. We're &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's great to be here. We're old friends. Uh shared a laboratory old friends. Uh shared a laboratory old friends. Uh shared a laboratory space years ago. We'll get back to that space years ago. We'll get back to that space years ago. We'll get back to that a little later. In the meantime, these a little later. In the meantime, these a little later. In the meantime, these days there's a ton of interest and I days there's a ton of interest and I days there's a ton of interest and I think misunderstanding about autism. think misunderstanding about autism. think misunderstanding about autism. As soon as the topic of autism comes up, As soon as the topic of autism comes up, As soon as the topic of autism comes up, immediately some people will say, "Why immediately some people will say, "Why immediately some people will say, "Why are we trying to cure this thing?" I are we trying to cure this thing?" I are we trying to cure this thing?" I know autistic uh children and adults know autistic uh children and adults know autistic uh children and adults that are delightful people that lead that are delightful people that lead that are delightful people that lead functional lives. They might be a little functional lives. They might be a little functional lives. They might be a little bit different or a lot different than bit different or a lot different than bit different or a lot different than other people, but why are we trying to other people, but why are we trying to other people, but why are we trying to quote unquote cure autism? And then quote unquote cure autism? And then quote unquote cure autism? And then other people will say, well, there are other people will say, well, there are other people will say, well, there are people with autism who need constant people with autism who need constant people with autism who need constant care, who will never live independently. care, who will never live independently. care, who will never live independently. Tell us about autism, what this spectrum Tell us about autism, what this spectrum Tell us about autism, what this spectrum really is, and then we'll talk about really is, and then we'll talk about really is, and then we'll talk about what your laboratory is doing to try and what your laboratory is doing to try and what your laboratory is doing to try and literally find cures for the most literally find cures for the most literally find cures for the most debilitating forms of autism. debilitating forms of autism. debilitating forms of autism. &gt;&gt; Well, autism is a complex condition. &gt;&gt; Well, autism is a complex condition. &gt;&gt; Well, autism is a complex condition. It's a spectrum, as you said. uh in a It's a spectrum, as you said. uh in a It's a spectrum, as you said. uh in a way you could say autism and way you could say autism and way you could say autism and neurodedevelopmental disorders. neurodedevelopmental disorders. neurodedevelopmental disorders. It's behaviorally defined. There's no It's behaviorally defined. There's no It's behaviorally defined. There's no biomarker. So in a way it's a condition biomarker. So in a way it's a condition biomarker. So in a way it's a condition that is defined exclusively by observing that is defined exclusively by observing that is defined exclusively by observing behavior which is actually the case for behavior which is actually the case for behavior which is actually the case for most psychiatric disorders. Um but it's most psychiatric disorders. Um but it's most psychiatric disorders. Um but it's essentially diagnosed by the presence essentially diagnosed by the presence essentially diagnosed by the presence and absence of certain behaviors in a and absence of certain behaviors in a and absence of certain behaviors in a certain period of time or up to a certain period of time or up to a certain period of time or up to a certain age. And of course what certain age. And of course what certain age. And of course what triggered I think a lot of discussions triggered I think a lot of discussions triggered I think a lot of discussions in recent years is because the number uh in recent years is because the number uh in recent years is because the number uh or the prevalence of autism has or the prevalence of autism has or the prevalence of autism has increased. So now it's close to almost increased. So now it's close to almost increased. So now it's close to almost 3% of the general population which of 3% of the general population which of 3% of the general population which of course it's a big number course it's a big number course it's a big number &gt;&gt; 3%. &gt;&gt; 3%. &gt;&gt; 3%. &gt;&gt; Almost 3%. Yes. &gt;&gt; Almost 3%. Yes. &gt;&gt; Almost 3%. Yes. &gt;&gt; Wow. So it has increased even since I &gt;&gt; Wow. So it has increased even since I &gt;&gt; Wow. So it has increased even since I was in medical school. When I was in was in medical school. When I was in was in medical school. When I was in medical school actually was considered a medical school actually was considered a medical school actually was considered a rare disease. The reason why I actually rare disease. The reason why I actually rare disease. The reason why I actually studied autism because it was a very studied autism because it was a very studied autism because it was a very rare disease and we had very few rare disease and we had very few rare disease and we had very few resources. So we thought studying a rare resources. So we thought studying a rare resources. So we thought studying a rare disease would be easier disease would be easier disease would be easier &gt;&gt; but now we also know so much more about &gt;&gt; but now we also know so much more about &gt;&gt; but now we also know so much more about this condition. So we do know for this condition. So we do know for this condition. So we do know for instance that there is a strong genetic instance that there is a strong genetic instance that there is a strong genetic component to it uh which for a while component to it uh which for a while component to it uh which for a while obviously we didn't in fact uh in obviously we didn't in fact uh in obviously we didn't in fact uh in early days the psychoanalytic early days the psychoanalytic early days the psychoanalytic perspective dominated especially in the perspective dominated especially in the perspective dominated especially in the 50s and 60s. So it was thought that it 50s and 60s. So it was thought that it 50s and 60s. So it was thought that it was resulting from having very cold was resulting from having very cold was resulting from having very cold parents in particular cold mother. parents in particular cold mother. parents in particular cold mother. &gt;&gt; Emotionally cold. &gt;&gt; Emotionally cold. &gt;&gt; Emotionally cold. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Emotionally cold. It was the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Emotionally cold. It was the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Emotionally cold. It was the so-called refrigerated refrigerator so-called refrigerated refrigerator so-called refrigerated refrigerator mother hypothesis mother hypothesis mother hypothesis uh of autism. And then in the 70s, some uh of autism. And then in the 70s, some uh of autism. And then in the 70s, some of the first biological studies were of the first biological studies were of the first biological studies were done primarily in twins done primarily in twins done primarily in twins that show something quite remarkable that show something quite remarkable that show something quite remarkable that if you have twins that are that if you have twins that are that if you have twins that are identical, genetically identical and one identical, genetically identical and one identical, genetically identical and one has autism, then the probability that has autism, then the probability that has autism, then the probability that the other one has autism is very the other one has autism is very the other one has autism is very high &gt;&gt; even with different mothers. &gt;&gt; even with different mothers. &gt;&gt; even with different mothers. &gt;&gt; Sure. Yes. &gt;&gt; Sure. Yes. &gt;&gt; Sure. Yes. &gt;&gt; But generally we think that there is a &gt;&gt; But generally we think that there is a &gt;&gt; But generally we think that there is a strong heritable component to autism. So strong heritable component to autism. So strong heritable component to autism. So that was like in the late '7s and really that was like in the late '7s and really that was like in the late '7s and really just in the last 1015 years we've just in the last 1015 years we've just in the last 1015 years we've learned actually that there are genes learned actually that there are genes learned actually that there are genes associated with uh autism and with associated with uh autism and with associated with uh autism and with certainly with very specific forms of certainly with very specific forms of certainly with very specific forms of autism. So that's what we would call autism. So that's what we would call autism. So that's what we would call generally profound autism today. The generally profound autism today. The generally profound autism today. The conditions that are severe uh that are conditions that are severe uh that are conditions that are severe uh that are causing an impairment uh they're very causing an impairment uh they're very causing an impairment uh they're very often associated with other conditions often associated with other conditions often associated with other conditions such as intellectual disability. So low such as intellectual disability. So low such as intellectual disability. So low IQ, epilepsy. So because it is a IQ, epilepsy. So because it is a IQ, epilepsy. So because it is a spectrum of course it creates a lot of spectrum of course it creates a lot of spectrum of course it creates a lot of confusion uh and certainly there's no confusion uh and certainly there's no confusion uh and certainly there's no doubt that uh there are individuals that doubt that uh there are individuals that doubt that uh there are individuals that have autistic traits that are fully have autistic traits that are fully have autistic traits that are fully functional in the general population but functional in the general population but functional in the general population but the reality is also that there are uh the reality is also that there are uh the reality is also that there are uh kids that have autism who are very kids that have autism who are very kids that have autism who are very impaired and will require actually impaired and will require actually impaired and will require actually lifelong care of sorts. You know, lifelong care of sorts. You know, lifelong care of sorts. You know, another way of like thinking is about another way of like thinking is about another way of like thinking is about autism is that autism is not one autism is that autism is not one autism is that autism is not one disease. And I think, you know, no disease. And I think, you know, no disease. And I think, you know, no psychiatrist or even biologists who psychiatrist or even biologists who psychiatrist or even biologists who studying autism would ever consider that studying autism would ever consider that studying autism would ever consider that this is one single disease. The way I this is one single disease. The way I this is one single disease. The way I look at it um sometimes is like think look at it um sometimes is like think look at it um sometimes is like think about the fever of the 19th century in about the fever of the 19th century in about the fever of the 19th century in medicine, right? So you see this very medicine, right? So you see this very medicine, right? So you see this very often in movies, right? They will say, often in movies, right? They will say, often in movies, right? They will say, "Oh, he has a fever, high fever. He's "Oh, he has a fever, high fever. He's "Oh, he has a fever, high fever. He's going to die from high fever." Well, going to die from high fever." Well, going to die from high fever." Well, that fever could have been a viral that fever could have been a viral that fever could have been a viral infection, a bacterial infection, could infection, a bacterial infection, could infection, a bacterial infection, could have been cancer, metastatic cancer, have been cancer, metastatic cancer, have been cancer, metastatic cancer, right? Could have been an autoimmune right? Could have been an autoimmune right? Could have been an autoimmune disease. The treatments are very disease. The treatments are very disease. The treatments are very different. But in that time, that's all different. But in that time, that's all different. But in that time, that's all we knew. It was we were observing that we knew. It was we were observing that we knew. It was we were observing that behavior in which case raising of the behavior in which case raising of the behavior in which case raising of the temperature, but we didn't know the temperature, but we didn't know the temperature, but we didn't know the biology. Today, we will use very biology. Today, we will use very biology. Today, we will use very different treatments for those different treatments for those different treatments for those conditions and some of them of course we conditions and some of them of course we conditions and some of them of course we don't even treat, right? We just don't even treat, right? We just don't even treat, right? We just observe. So I think observe. So I think observe. So I think in autism research as it is the case for in autism research as it is the case for in autism research as it is the case for many psychiatric conditions they are many psychiatric conditions they are many psychiatric conditions they are defined behaviorally but there's a defined behaviorally but there's a defined behaviorally but there's a disconnect with the biology very often disconnect with the biology very often disconnect with the biology very often we don't have good biological we don't we don't have good biological we don't we don't have good biological we don't have biological markers by definition have biological markers by definition have biological markers by definition and so that disconnect I think creates a and so that disconnect I think creates a and so that disconnect I think creates a lot of confusion lot of confusion lot of confusion I have a couple of questions first of I have a couple of questions first of I have a couple of questions first of all is the prevalence of autism higher all is the prevalence of autism higher all is the prevalence of autism higher in males I've been told yes um if it's in males I've been told yes um if it's in males I've been told yes um if it's 3% overall is it um what what's the 3% overall is it um what what's the 3% overall is it um what what's the distribution for males who are distribution for males who are distribution for males who are &gt;&gt; the ratio varies also based on severity &gt;&gt; the ratio varies also based on severity &gt;&gt; the ratio varies also based on severity but generally it's been one to four so but generally it's been one to four so but generally it's been one to four so more males than uh females more males than uh females more males than uh females &gt;&gt; and uh we just recently had our &gt;&gt; and uh we just recently had our &gt;&gt; and uh we just recently had our colleague Nero Shaw on the podcast who colleague Nero Shaw on the podcast who colleague Nero Shaw on the podcast who basically said the difference between a basically said the difference between a basically said the difference between a biological male and female comes down to biological male and female comes down to biological male and female comes down to this SRY gene this SRY gene this SRY gene &gt;&gt; not even necessarily on the Y chromosome &gt;&gt; not even necessarily on the Y chromosome &gt;&gt; not even necessarily on the Y chromosome if If a baby has the SRY gene, you're if If a baby has the SRY gene, you're if If a baby has the SRY gene, you're going to get a fully functional male. going to get a fully functional male. going to get a fully functional male. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um if not, you you're essentially &gt;&gt; Um if not, you you're essentially &gt;&gt; Um if not, you you're essentially dealing with a female. So presumably dealing with a female. So presumably dealing with a female. So presumably something about the SRY gene is something about the SRY gene is something about the SRY gene is conferring a vulnerability to autism. I conferring a vulnerability to autism. I conferring a vulnerability to autism. I think it's fascinating. Well, there are think it's fascinating. Well, there are think it's fascinating. Well, there are a lot of discussions of course like what a lot of discussions of course like what a lot of discussions of course like what causes this difference and you know some causes this difference and you know some causes this difference and you know some discussions are just in terms of discussions are just in terms of discussions are just in terms of diagnosis that perhaps some of the girls diagnosis that perhaps some of the girls diagnosis that perhaps some of the girls are not getting diagnosed properly that are not getting diagnosed properly that are not getting diagnosed properly that they're we do know that some of them are they're we do know that some of them are they're we do know that some of them are very good at what we call like masking very good at what we call like masking very good at what we call like masking the symptoms or so like the symptoms or so like the symptoms or so like &gt;&gt; you know learning the skills uh social &gt;&gt; you know learning the skills uh social &gt;&gt; you know learning the skills uh social skills and so like covering for that skills and so like covering for that skills and so like covering for that diagnosis. But what we do know for sure diagnosis. But what we do know for sure diagnosis. But what we do know for sure is that there are differences in how the is that there are differences in how the is that there are differences in how the male and the female brain especially male and the female brain especially male and the female brain especially around birth can actually take up around birth can actually take up around birth can actually take up injury. &gt;&gt; So think for instance about premature &gt;&gt; So think for instance about premature &gt;&gt; So think for instance about premature birth. You know one of the best birth. You know one of the best birth. You know one of the best predictors for a premature baby in terms predictors for a premature baby in terms predictors for a premature baby in terms of outcomes it's actually to be a female of outcomes it's actually to be a female of outcomes it's actually to be a female just in general females preeis will do just in general females preeis will do just in general females preeis will do much better for whatever reasons you much better for whatever reasons you much better for whatever reasons you know uh you know the way the nervous know uh you know the way the nervous know uh you know the way the nervous system is built the resilience. We know system is built the resilience. We know system is built the resilience. We know that the maturation stage is also that the maturation stage is also that the maturation stage is also different right uh for the male and the different right uh for the male and the different right uh for the male and the female you know think about like female you know think about like female you know think about like acquisition of certain milestones that acquisition of certain milestones that acquisition of certain milestones that happen much faster in girls they happen much faster in girls they happen much faster in girls they generally tend to speak a few months generally tend to speak a few months generally tend to speak a few months earlier to walk a few months earlier so earlier to walk a few months earlier so earlier to walk a few months earlier so just the nervous system uh is maturing just the nervous system uh is maturing just the nervous system uh is maturing at different uh at a different pace at different uh at a different pace at different uh at a different pace and can take injury differently. So it and can take injury differently. So it and can take injury differently. So it could be that uh is certainly could be that uh is certainly could be that uh is certainly the cause. But at the same time and as the cause. But at the same time and as the cause. But at the same time and as we were talking since autism is not one we were talking since autism is not one we were talking since autism is not one single disease, it is very hard to point single disease, it is very hard to point single disease, it is very hard to point out to one specific factor that is out to one specific factor that is out to one specific factor that is behind it. I'd like to take a quick behind it. I'd like to take a quick behind it. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes a protein sponsors, David. David makes a protein sponsors, David. David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories, and zero protein, only 150 calories, and zero protein, only 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 grams of gram of sugar. That's right, 28 grams of gram of sugar. That's right, 28 grams of protein and 75% of its calories come protein and 75% of its calories come protein and 75% of its calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than from protein. This is 50% higher than from protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. David the next closest protein bar. David the next closest protein bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even protein bars also taste amazing. Even protein bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar the texture is amazing. My favorite bar the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough, but is the chocolate chip cookie dough, but is the chocolate chip cookie dough, but then again, I also like the new then again, I also like the new then again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all like all the flavors a lot. They're all like all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of one gram easy to hit my protein goals of one gram easy to hit my protein goals of one gram of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious, and given They're incredibly delicious, and given They're incredibly delicious, and given that they have 28 g of protein, they're that they have 28 g of protein, they're that they have 28 g of protein, they're really satisfying for having just 150 really satisfying for having just 150 really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, calories. If you'd like to try David, calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Helixleep. Helixleep makes mattresses Helixleep. Helixleep makes mattresses Helixleep. Helixleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your and pillows that are customized to your and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on this and other many times before on this and other many times before on this and other podcasts about the fact that getting a podcasts about the fact that getting a podcasts about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of great night's sleep is the foundation of great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the on makes a huge difference in the on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each night. how soft it is or how firm it is night. how soft it is or how firm it is night. how soft it is or how firm it is all play into your comfort and need to all play into your comfort and need to all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you can If you go to the Helix website, you can If you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep on your back, your side, or your on your back, your side, or your on your back, your side, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night?" Things of that sort. during the night?" Things of that sort. during the night?" Things of that sort. Maybe you know the answers to those Maybe you know the answers to those Maybe you know the answers to those questions, maybe you don't. Either way, questions, maybe you don't. Either way, questions, maybe you don't. Either way, Helix will match you to the ideal Helix will match you to the ideal Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned mattress for you. For me, that turned mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress. I started out to be the Dusk mattress. I started out to be the Dusk mattress. I started sleeping on a Dusk mattress about 3 and sleeping on a Dusk mattress about 3 and sleeping on a Dusk mattress about 3 and a half years ago, and it's been far and a half years ago, and it's been far and a half years ago, and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. away the best sleep that I've ever had. away the best sleep that I've ever had. If you'd like to try Helixleep, you can If you'd like to try Helixleep, you can If you'd like to try Helixleep, you can go to helixleep.com/huberman, go to helixleep.com/huberman, go to helixleep.com/huberman, take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's customized to you. Right now, Helix is customized to you. Right now, Helix is customized to you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 27% off all mattress giving up to 27% off all mattress giving up to 27% off all mattress orders. Again, that's orders. Again, that's orders. Again, that's helixleep.com/huberman to get up to 27% off. to get up to 27% off. to get up to 27% off. You mentioned that autism is diagnosed You mentioned that autism is diagnosed You mentioned that autism is diagnosed by behavioral measures or the lack of uh by behavioral measures or the lack of uh by behavioral measures or the lack of uh behavioral symptomology, what we call behavioral symptomology, what we call behavioral symptomology, what we call positive and negative symptoms, which positive and negative symptoms, which positive and negative symptoms, which can be confusing language because people can be confusing language because people can be confusing language because people think positive means good. No, positive think positive means good. No, positive think positive means good. No, positive is the presence, negative is the is the presence, negative is the is the presence, negative is the absence. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; I haven't looked at this literature in a &gt;&gt; I haven't looked at this literature in a &gt;&gt; I haven't looked at this literature in a while, but uh the last time I did, it while, but uh the last time I did, it while, but uh the last time I did, it seemed that babies or young children seemed that babies or young children seemed that babies or young children failing to uh focus their own gaze on failing to uh focus their own gaze on failing to uh focus their own gaze on the eyes of other people is one of the eyes of other people is one of the eyes of other people is one of the major diagnostic criteria. uh seems they major diagnostic criteria. uh seems they major diagnostic criteria. uh seems they look at the face uh they'll um look at the face uh they'll um look at the face uh they'll um more holistically or they'll zoom in more holistically or they'll zoom in more holistically or they'll zoom in just on the nose but they're not really just on the nose but they're not really just on the nose but they're not really making as much eye contact. Is that making as much eye contact. Is that making as much eye contact. Is that still a diagnostic criteria? still a diagnostic criteria? still a diagnostic criteria? &gt;&gt; It's not part of the diagnostic &gt;&gt; It's not part of the diagnostic &gt;&gt; It's not part of the diagnostic criteria. Um interesting. It's uh but it criteria. Um interesting. It's uh but it criteria. Um interesting. It's uh but it is one of the features that has been is one of the features that has been is one of the features that has been observed. &gt;&gt; Uh of course it also has to do with just &gt;&gt; Uh of course it also has to do with just &gt;&gt; Uh of course it also has to do with just in general like joint attention is one in general like joint attention is one in general like joint attention is one of the earlier. So you know uh if you of the earlier. So you know uh if you of the earlier. So you know uh if you just tell a child like oh look here just tell a child like oh look here just tell a child like oh look here right? So if they kind like have that right? So if they kind like have that right? So if they kind like have that attention, if they engage in that attention, if they engage in that attention, if they engage in that attention, uh it's one of the features attention, uh it's one of the features attention, uh it's one of the features that is associated with autism is not that is associated with autism is not that is associated with autism is not certainly diagnostic, is not uh certainly diagnostic, is not uh certainly diagnostic, is not uh pathogmonic, so to speak. So it's not pathogmonic, so to speak. So it's not pathogmonic, so to speak. So it's not specific to the disease in any way. specific to the disease in any way. specific to the disease in any way. &gt;&gt; Uh but there's certainly many deficits &gt;&gt; Uh but there's certainly many deficits &gt;&gt; Uh but there's certainly many deficits and some of them can actually be and some of them can actually be and some of them can actually be compensated later. Interesting. There compensated later. Interesting. There compensated later. Interesting. There were some other things I've heard over were some other things I've heard over were some other things I've heard over the years for instance that when the years for instance that when the years for instance that when children with autism have a fever that children with autism have a fever that children with autism have a fever that their symptoms improve. Is that still their symptoms improve. Is that still their symptoms improve. Is that still the case? the case? the case? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So those are mostly anecdotic &gt;&gt; Yeah. So those are mostly anecdotic &gt;&gt; Yeah. So those are mostly anecdotic reports &gt;&gt; um of patients who would have a very &gt;&gt; um of patients who would have a very &gt;&gt; um of patients who would have a very high fever and then for instance they high fever and then for instance they high fever and then for instance they were non-verbal. So many patients with were non-verbal. So many patients with were non-verbal. So many patients with autism uh or individuals with autism uh or individuals with autism uh or individuals with autism will have you know will be non-verbal. will have you know will be non-verbal. will have you know will be non-verbal. they have very few words or if they you they have very few words or if they you they have very few words or if they you know they're not able to know they're not able to know they're not able to communicate and so there are few reports communicate and so there are few reports communicate and so there are few reports of parents saying that when they spike a of parents saying that when they spike a of parents saying that when they spike a very high fever they'll start talking in very high fever they'll start talking in very high fever they'll start talking in sentences like very briefly or like sentences like very briefly or like sentences like very briefly or like engage and in fact I mean that is known engage and in fact I mean that is known engage and in fact I mean that is known uh you know kids in general when they uh you know kids in general when they uh you know kids in general when they have a high fever they tend to be more have a high fever they tend to be more have a high fever they tend to be more talkative it activates somehow the talkative it activates somehow the talkative it activates somehow the nervous system there have been a lot of nervous system there have been a lot of nervous system there have been a lot of hypothesis about this um some of them uh hypothesis about this um some of them uh hypothesis about this um some of them uh having to do with how the neurodenergic having to do with how the neurodenergic having to do with how the neurodenergic system is activating during fever. system is activating during fever. system is activating during fever. Others saying that there are some of the Others saying that there are some of the Others saying that there are some of the cytoines, the immune molecules that are cytoines, the immune molecules that are cytoines, the immune molecules that are present during fever that are somehow present during fever that are somehow present during fever that are somehow getting into the brain activating the getting into the brain activating the getting into the brain activating the nervous system. And others as simple as nervous system. And others as simple as nervous system. And others as simple as oh ion channels, right? Ion channels oh ion channels, right? Ion channels oh ion channels, right? Ion channels will open uh more when the temperature will open uh more when the temperature will open uh more when the temperature rises. So something about the circuits rises. So something about the circuits rises. So something about the circuits functioning differently during that. But functioning differently during that. But functioning differently during that. But it's mostly anecdotic uh at this it's mostly anecdotic uh at this it's mostly anecdotic uh at this point. And it's certainly again probably point. And it's certainly again probably point. And it's certainly again probably not present in all individuals with not present in all individuals with not present in all individuals with autism. Also because autism is again not autism. Also because autism is again not autism. Also because autism is again not one single disease. So we would not one single disease. So we would not one single disease. So we would not expect it to be present in all. expect it to be present in all. expect it to be present in all. &gt;&gt; A few years ago there was a lot of &gt;&gt; A few years ago there was a lot of &gt;&gt; A few years ago there was a lot of excitement about the idea that autism excitement about the idea that autism excitement about the idea that autism might somehow be related perhaps even might somehow be related perhaps even might somehow be related perhaps even caused by deficits in the microbiome. Um caused by deficits in the microbiome. Um caused by deficits in the microbiome. Um there were some mouse experiments of there were some mouse experiments of there were some mouse experiments of doing uh fecal transplants from what we doing uh fecal transplants from what we doing uh fecal transplants from what we call wild type or healthy mice into mice call wild type or healthy mice into mice call wild type or healthy mice into mice that were uh had some symptoms that were uh had some symptoms that were uh had some symptoms that resemble autism and there were resemble autism and there were resemble autism and there were improvements observed um to the point improvements observed um to the point improvements observed um to the point where I think there were some human where I think there were some human where I think there were some human clinical trials using fecal transplants clinical trials using fecal transplants clinical trials using fecal transplants um what ever became of that? um what ever became of that? um what ever became of that? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think again almost everything &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think again almost everything &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think again almost everything has been associated or thought to be has been associated or thought to be has been associated or thought to be causal but generally demonstrating this causal but generally demonstrating this causal but generally demonstrating this is very difficult. So you know we is very difficult. So you know we is very difficult. So you know we cannot deny that perhaps improving the cannot deny that perhaps improving the cannot deny that perhaps improving the microbiome will improve the you know the microbiome will improve the you know the microbiome will improve the you know the quality of life of some of these quality of life of some of these quality of life of some of these individuals but whether it's really individuals but whether it's really individuals but whether it's really causal there's no um clear evidence for causal there's no um clear evidence for causal there's no um clear evidence for it. Think about it just to give you it. Think about it just to give you it. Think about it just to give you another example think about sleep. Many another example think about sleep. Many another example think about sleep. Many patients uh will report especially the ones that uh will report especially the ones that uh will report especially the ones that are profoundly impaired will have severe are profoundly impaired will have severe are profoundly impaired will have severe sleep disturbances. I mean 70 80% of sleep disturbances. I mean 70 80% of sleep disturbances. I mean 70 80% of them you know they can have nights where them you know they can have nights where them you know they can have nights where they sleep very little right then do they sleep very little right then do they sleep very little right then do that for like a week so just imagine that for like a week so just imagine that for like a week so just imagine even just improving the quality of sleep even just improving the quality of sleep even just improving the quality of sleep for those patients can do miracle I mean for those patients can do miracle I mean for those patients can do miracle I mean all of us right if we don't sleep all of us right if we don't sleep all of us right if we don't sleep for 3 4 days our social skills you know for 3 4 days our social skills you know for 3 4 days our social skills you know we become socially impaired so I think we become socially impaired so I think we become socially impaired so I think of course correcting uh a lot of this of course correcting uh a lot of this of course correcting uh a lot of this issue so for instance many patients are issue so for instance many patients are issue so for instance many patients are picky eaters you know they don't like picky eaters you know they don't like picky eaters you know they don't like certain textures so they will never eat certain textures so they will never eat certain textures so they will never eat for instance veggies right so that creat for instance veggies right so that creat for instance veggies right so that creat In the early days, for instance, we In the early days, for instance, we In the early days, for instance, we thought that uh you know there are thought that uh you know there are thought that uh you know there are dietary disturbances that really at the dietary disturbances that really at the dietary disturbances that really at the core. Of course, it remains to be seen core. Of course, it remains to be seen core. Of course, it remains to be seen whether just simply correcting those is whether just simply correcting those is whether just simply correcting those is going to be just improving or certainly going to be just improving or certainly going to be just improving or certainly reversing um some of the forms. But reversing um some of the forms. But reversing um some of the forms. But again, most of the evidence points out again, most of the evidence points out again, most of the evidence points out towards a very strong genetic component towards a very strong genetic component towards a very strong genetic component uh behind it. And in fact, we now have uh behind it. And in fact, we now have uh behind it. And in fact, we now have hundreds of genes that we know when hundreds of genes that we know when hundreds of genes that we know when they are mutated, they're strongly they are mutated, they're strongly they are mutated, they're strongly associated with specific forms of associated with specific forms of associated with specific forms of autism. &gt;&gt; I'm curious uh what sorts of um proteins &gt;&gt; I'm curious uh what sorts of um proteins &gt;&gt; I'm curious uh what sorts of um proteins those genes are upstream of. And I ask those genes are upstream of. And I ask those genes are upstream of. And I ask because uh David Ginty at Harvard um I because uh David Ginty at Harvard um I because uh David Ginty at Harvard um I think did these really beautiful think did these really beautiful think did these really beautiful experiments where he induced mutations experiments where he induced mutations experiments where he induced mutations just in the periphery so outside the just in the periphery so outside the just in the periphery so outside the brain of these mouse models for autism brain of these mouse models for autism brain of these mouse models for autism and saw a lot of the same symptomology and saw a lot of the same symptomology and saw a lot of the same symptomology &gt;&gt; raising the question of whether or not &gt;&gt; raising the question of whether or not &gt;&gt; raising the question of whether or not autism originates in the brain or autism originates in the brain or autism originates in the brain or whether or not the deficits in the brain whether or not the deficits in the brain whether or not the deficits in the brain are the byproduct of changes in the are the byproduct of changes in the are the byproduct of changes in the body. Yes, microbiome but perhaps um body. Yes, microbiome but perhaps um body. Yes, microbiome but perhaps um their skin, their hearing etc. are more their skin, their hearing etc. are more their skin, their hearing etc. are more sensitive and maybe that's why they, you sensitive and maybe that's why they, you sensitive and maybe that's why they, you know, you can imagine if you were ultra know, you can imagine if you were ultra know, you can imagine if you were ultra sensitive to an environment that your sensitive to an environment that your sensitive to an environment that your brain would eventually wire differently brain would eventually wire differently brain would eventually wire differently according to kind of overwhelmed by what according to kind of overwhelmed by what according to kind of overwhelmed by what was happening in the sensory landscape. was happening in the sensory landscape. was happening in the sensory landscape. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. And those are really &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. And those are really &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. And those are really elegant experiments that he's done. Many elegant experiments that he's done. Many elegant experiments that he's done. Many of the genes, you know, they fit in of the genes, you know, they fit in of the genes, you know, they fit in different categories like you would have different categories like you would have different categories like you would have genes that would produce proteins that genes that would produce proteins that genes that would produce proteins that sit at synapses, uh, which was sort of sit at synapses, uh, which was sort of sit at synapses, uh, which was sort of like to be expected. Some of them are like to be expected. Some of them are like to be expected. Some of them are you know ion channels. They're proteins you know ion channels. They're proteins you know ion channels. They're proteins that would let ions inside or outside of that would let ions inside or outside of that would let ions inside or outside of a neuron. There are many of these a neuron. There are many of these a neuron. There are many of these conditions so-called channelopathies. conditions so-called channelopathies. conditions so-called channelopathies. Then there are the ones that are like Then there are the ones that are like Then there are the ones that are like synaptic related. So synaptopies there synaptic related. So synaptopies there synaptic related. So synaptopies there are a lot of chromatin genes. So like are a lot of chromatin genes. So like are a lot of chromatin genes. So like proteins that pack the DNA in cells proteins that pack the DNA in cells proteins that pack the DNA in cells those are chromatinopathies. those are chromatinopathies. those are chromatinopathies. Um so they're really again many Um so they're really again many Um so they're really again many categories of genes. And then what is categories of genes. And then what is categories of genes. And then what is also interesting is that many of these also interesting is that many of these also interesting is that many of these genes are also expressed in the genes are also expressed in the genes are also expressed in the periphery. So I think the experiments periphery. So I think the experiments periphery. So I think the experiments that you were mentioning are really that you were mentioning are really that you were mentioning are really elegant because it showed that indeed elegant because it showed that indeed elegant because it showed that indeed that can perturb the development of the that can perturb the development of the that can perturb the development of the nervous system even if they're affecting nervous system even if they're affecting nervous system even if they're affecting just the periphery. Of course now in just the periphery. Of course now in just the periphery. Of course now in patients there are present also in the patients there are present also in the patients there are present also in the central nervous system. So it's always central nervous system. So it's always central nervous system. So it's always difficult to distinguish but just difficult to distinguish but just difficult to distinguish but just missing some of the critical periods or missing some of the critical periods or missing some of the critical periods or perturbing some of these critical perturbing some of these critical perturbing some of these critical periods of development can have periods of development can have periods of development can have certainly devastating effects later on. certainly devastating effects later on. certainly devastating effects later on. So, if a parent comes into the clinic So, if a parent comes into the clinic So, if a parent comes into the clinic nowadays um with a child that's nowadays um with a child that's nowadays um with a child that's diagnosed with profound autism, what is diagnosed with profound autism, what is diagnosed with profound autism, what is the treatment? Uh let's set aside the uh the treatment? Uh let's set aside the uh the treatment? Uh let's set aside the uh the potential for epilepsy, which the potential for epilepsy, which the potential for epilepsy, which hopefully they would treat as well, or hopefully they would treat as well, or hopefully they would treat as well, or other things that might be secondary. Um other things that might be secondary. Um other things that might be secondary. Um but what is the typical treatment? Are but what is the typical treatment? Are but what is the typical treatment? Are they doing and let's assume infinite they doing and let's assume infinite they doing and let's assume infinite resources, which of course nobody has, resources, which of course nobody has, resources, which of course nobody has, most people don't have. But if one had most people don't have. But if one had most people don't have. But if one had infinite resources, what would be done? infinite resources, what would be done? infinite resources, what would be done? Would it be behavioral training? Would it be behavioral training? Would it be behavioral training? Would it be something to control the it be something to control the it be something to control the activation state of the brain? I mean, activation state of the brain? I mean, activation state of the brain? I mean, as far as I know, there's no single as far as I know, there's no single as far as I know, there's no single treatment for autism. treatment for autism. treatment for autism. &gt;&gt; No, there's no single treatment for &gt;&gt; No, there's no single treatment for &gt;&gt; No, there's no single treatment for autism. Again, in the context of this autism. Again, in the context of this autism. Again, in the context of this not being one single disease, what we not being one single disease, what we not being one single disease, what we can say today is that if um you know, a can say today is that if um you know, a can say today is that if um you know, a family walks into the clinic with the family walks into the clinic with the family walks into the clinic with the diagnosis of autism or perhaps like they diagnosis of autism or perhaps like they diagnosis of autism or perhaps like they receive it into the clinic, there's like receive it into the clinic, there's like receive it into the clinic, there's like a 20% probability that they'll leave the a 20% probability that they'll leave the a 20% probability that they'll leave the clinic with the genetic diagnosis. clinic with the genetic diagnosis. clinic with the genetic diagnosis. meaning that it will be pointed out to meaning that it will be pointed out to meaning that it will be pointed out to them that this gene is mutated in your them that this gene is mutated in your them that this gene is mutated in your child. And it may be sometimes a child. And it may be sometimes a child. And it may be sometimes a mutation that was present in one of the mutation that was present in one of the mutation that was present in one of the parents and got transmitted or maybe was parents and got transmitted or maybe was parents and got transmitted or maybe was present in both and somehow you know the present in both and somehow you know the present in both and somehow you know the child got two copies that were uh child got two copies that were uh child got two copies that were uh modified now or many of the genes were modified now or many of the genes were modified now or many of the genes were actually mutated denovo meaning that the actually mutated denovo meaning that the actually mutated denovo meaning that the mutation was not present in either mutation was not present in either mutation was not present in either parents but something went wrong during parents but something went wrong during parents but something went wrong during development perhaps early in the sperm development perhaps early in the sperm development perhaps early in the sperm cell in the egg cell or perhaps in early cell in the egg cell or perhaps in early cell in the egg cell or perhaps in early stages of development and a new mutation stages of development and a new mutation stages of development and a new mutation was acquired but that is also the we We was acquired but that is also the we We was acquired but that is also the we We acquire a lot of mutations. All of us acquire a lot of mutations. All of us acquire a lot of mutations. All of us they we have a lot of new mutations, they we have a lot of new mutations, they we have a lot of new mutations, right? About like 80 new mutations. 30 right? About like 80 new mutations. 30 right? About like 80 new mutations. 30 of them are protein truncating. So of them are protein truncating. So of them are protein truncating. So certainly the challenge very often is to certainly the challenge very often is to certainly the challenge very often is to even when you see a gene that is even when you see a gene that is even when you see a gene that is mutated to know whether that gene is mutated to know whether that gene is mutated to know whether that gene is truly causing the disease. So very often truly causing the disease. So very often truly causing the disease. So very often the way we know is that we find many the way we know is that we find many the way we know is that we find many patients that have a similar patients that have a similar patients that have a similar presentation clinically. Let's say maybe presentation clinically. Let's say maybe presentation clinically. Let's say maybe they'll have synacttoy. So they're they'll have synacttoy. So they're they'll have synacttoy. So they're webbing of the finger and they have webbing of the finger and they have webbing of the finger and they have autism and let's say epilepsy and they autism and let's say epilepsy and they autism and let's say epilepsy and they all have a mutation in one single all have a mutation in one single all have a mutation in one single channel let's say in a calcium channel. channel let's say in a calcium channel. channel let's say in a calcium channel. So that would be timothy syndrome a So that would be timothy syndrome a So that would be timothy syndrome a genetic form of autism where the genetic form of autism where the genetic form of autism where the mutation is very clear actually there's mutation is very clear actually there's mutation is very clear actually there's one single letter in the genome that is one single letter in the genome that is one single letter in the genome that is changed and causes a relatively similar changed and causes a relatively similar changed and causes a relatively similar presentation in all of these patients. presentation in all of these patients. presentation in all of these patients. So about 20% of the patients will get a So about 20% of the patients will get a So about 20% of the patients will get a genetic diagnosis. Now sadly that genetic diagnosis. Now sadly that genetic diagnosis. Now sadly that doesn't do that much today because we doesn't do that much today because we doesn't do that much today because we don't really have specific therapies for don't really have specific therapies for don't really have specific therapies for those forms. I think the hope is that those forms. I think the hope is that those forms. I think the hope is that perhaps we will have individual perhaps we will have individual perhaps we will have individual treatments whether they're going to be treatments whether they're going to be treatments whether they're going to be genetic or otherwise. So being part of genetic or otherwise. So being part of genetic or otherwise. So being part of that community is generally useful and that community is generally useful and that community is generally useful and then the rest of the patients will then the rest of the patients will then the rest of the patients will essentially fit into this larger essentially fit into this larger essentially fit into this larger category of idiopathic meaning that we category of idiopathic meaning that we category of idiopathic meaning that we don't really know the precise uh cause. don't really know the precise uh cause. don't really know the precise uh cause. I want to talk about Timothy syndrome I want to talk about Timothy syndrome I want to talk about Timothy syndrome and I also want to talk about genetic and I also want to talk about genetic and I also want to talk about genetic approaches for fixing genes so called approaches for fixing genes so called approaches for fixing genes so called gene therapy. Uh before we do that, gene therapy. Uh before we do that, gene therapy. Uh before we do that, would you be willing to just speculate would you be willing to just speculate would you be willing to just speculate on why you think there's this fairly on why you think there's this fairly on why you think there's this fairly dramatic increase in the incidence of dramatic increase in the incidence of dramatic increase in the incidence of autism? Uh people will always say, well, autism? Uh people will always say, well, autism? Uh people will always say, well, maybe it's better detection, better maybe it's better detection, better maybe it's better detection, better diagnosis. So, I'd like your thoughts on diagnosis. So, I'd like your thoughts on diagnosis. So, I'd like your thoughts on that. And if there are increases that that. And if there are increases that that. And if there are increases that can't be explained with that, I I'm I can't be explained with that, I I'm I can't be explained with that, I I'm I just would like your thoughts. I realize just would like your thoughts. I realize just would like your thoughts. I realize we're not talking um formal bioatistics we're not talking um formal bioatistics we're not talking um formal bioatistics here. I just in your experience, you're here. I just in your experience, you're here. I just in your experience, you're an MD, you think about autism a lot. Uh an MD, you think about autism a lot. Uh an MD, you think about autism a lot. Uh you're working on potential cures for you're working on potential cures for you're working on potential cures for autism and other neurologic conditions. autism and other neurologic conditions. autism and other neurologic conditions. How do you think about this increased How do you think about this increased How do you think about this increased prevalence issue? prevalence issue? prevalence issue? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the certainly the increase &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the certainly the increase &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the certainly the increase is still puzzling, right? So I think on is still puzzling, right? So I think on is still puzzling, right? So I think on one hand there's no doubt that the one hand there's no doubt that the one hand there's no doubt that the changes in diagnostic criteria which changes in diagnostic criteria which changes in diagnostic criteria which have happened over time I mean we had to have happened over time I mean we had to have happened over time I mean we had to just refine what autism really is that just refine what autism really is that just refine what autism really is that changed uh you know to some extent the changed uh you know to some extent the changed uh you know to some extent the prevalence. We've also seen you know a prevalence. We've also seen you know a prevalence. We've also seen you know a diagnostic migration so to speak. So diagnostic migration so to speak. So diagnostic migration so to speak. So some children for instance you know 30 some children for instance you know 30 some children for instance you know 30 years ago would have been diagnosed with years ago would have been diagnosed with years ago would have been diagnosed with intellectual disability intellectual disability intellectual disability and today they fit the criteria for and today they fit the criteria for and today they fit the criteria for autism. you know about a third of uh autism. you know about a third of uh autism. you know about a third of uh individuals with autism also have individuals with autism also have individuals with autism also have intellectual disability. So there is intellectual disability. So there is intellectual disability. So there is also great overlap between the also great overlap between the also great overlap between the conditions. So there's been a move conditions. So there's been a move conditions. So there's been a move sometimes between the diagnosis over sometimes between the diagnosis over sometimes between the diagnosis over time. Of course there are all kind of time. Of course there are all kind of time. Of course there are all kind of discussions about you know availability discussions about you know availability discussions about you know availability of services and to what extent that is of services and to what extent that is of services and to what extent that is also contributing uh right but uh you also contributing uh right but uh you also contributing uh right but uh you know we don't really you know we don't know we don't really you know we don't know we don't really you know we don't truly understand all the reasons behind truly understand all the reasons behind truly understand all the reasons behind like this uh this increase. There's like this uh this increase. There's like this uh this increase. There's there's no doubt we can explain. We know there's no doubt we can explain. We know there's no doubt we can explain. We know that it's highly heritable based on that it's highly heritable based on that it's highly heritable based on genetic studies. genetic studies. genetic studies. &gt;&gt; So we know the heritability is very &gt;&gt; So we know the heritability is very &gt;&gt; So we know the heritability is very high, one of the highest for psychiatric high, one of the highest for psychiatric high, one of the highest for psychiatric disorders that we know of. Uh but of disorders that we know of. Uh but of disorders that we know of. Uh but of course we can we don't have the genes course we can we don't have the genes course we can we don't have the genes for every single form. So it is likely for every single form. So it is likely for every single form. So it is likely that some of them are very rare, right? that some of them are very rare, right? that some of them are very rare, right? So essentially just think of it as like So essentially just think of it as like So essentially just think of it as like you know they're individually rare form you know they're individually rare form you know they're individually rare form but collectively common. So it will take but collectively common. So it will take but collectively common. So it will take a while until we sort like map all of a while until we sort like map all of a while until we sort like map all of them. And then of course there are them. And then of course there are them. And then of course there are environmental factors that we do know environmental factors that we do know environmental factors that we do know historically can contribute to this. So historically can contribute to this. So historically can contribute to this. So there are various exposures to uh there are various exposures to uh there are various exposures to uh environmental factors like in early days environmental factors like in early days environmental factors like in early days uh talidomide for instance was one of uh talidomide for instance was one of uh talidomide for instance was one of them that we know increases uh the risk them that we know increases uh the risk them that we know increases uh the risk uh for autism. So of course those are uh for autism. So of course those are uh for autism. So of course those are contributing but contributing but contributing but &gt;&gt; but theomide was a drug given to &gt;&gt; but theomide was a drug given to &gt;&gt; but theomide was a drug given to pregnant mothers to um try and prevent pregnant mothers to um try and prevent pregnant mothers to um try and prevent miscarriage. Right. Exactly. It's no miscarriage. Right. Exactly. It's no miscarriage. Right. Exactly. It's no longer prescribed. longer prescribed. longer prescribed. &gt;&gt; It's no longer prescribed. &gt;&gt; It's no longer prescribed. &gt;&gt; It's no longer prescribed. &gt;&gt; It's caused major birth defects. &gt;&gt; It's caused major birth defects. &gt;&gt; It's caused major birth defects. &gt;&gt; Defects. Exactly. Yeah. So there &gt;&gt; Defects. Exactly. Yeah. So there &gt;&gt; Defects. Exactly. Yeah. So there certainly you know it's quite complex certainly you know it's quite complex certainly you know it's quite complex because first of all the definition of because first of all the definition of because first of all the definition of the condition is quite difficult the condition is quite difficult the condition is quite difficult right and I think that is in general right and I think that is in general right and I think that is in general like the challenge with psychiatric like the challenge with psychiatric like the challenge with psychiatric disorders right um and perhaps one disorders right um and perhaps one disorders right um and perhaps one of the reasons we've made such slow of the reasons we've made such slow of the reasons we've made such slow progress in understanding these progress in understanding these progress in understanding these conditions because of course the power conditions because of course the power conditions because of course the power of modern medicine is in molecular of modern medicine is in molecular of modern medicine is in molecular biology you know we like deploy this biology you know we like deploy this biology you know we like deploy this remarkable force of an understanding and remarkable force of an understanding and remarkable force of an understanding and in order to do that you You need two in order to do that you You need two in order to do that you You need two things. You need first of all to u have things. You need first of all to u have things. You need first of all to u have a very clear definition of what that a very clear definition of what that a very clear definition of what that disease is generally biologically right. disease is generally biologically right. disease is generally biologically right. Think about like myardial inffection you Think about like myardial inffection you Think about like myardial inffection you know very clearly defined in terms of know very clearly defined in terms of know very clearly defined in terms of like what it actually means. You like what it actually means. You like what it actually means. You immediately have biomarkers right the immediately have biomarkers right the immediately have biomarkers right the patient walks in you take blood you can patient walks in you take blood you can patient walks in you take blood you can immediately tell yes in 20 minutes you immediately tell yes in 20 minutes you immediately tell yes in 20 minutes you can tell that they have a myioardial can tell that they have a myioardial can tell that they have a myioardial inffection based on a biioarker. And inffection based on a biioarker. And inffection based on a biioarker. And then the other one which is certainly then the other one which is certainly then the other one which is certainly very important which and to a large very important which and to a large very important which and to a large extent is sort of like you know is the extent is sort of like you know is the extent is sort of like you know is the source of all the work that we've done source of all the work that we've done source of all the work that we've done is the unbearable inaccessibility of the is the unbearable inaccessibility of the is the unbearable inaccessibility of the human brain so to speak and to a large human brain so to speak and to a large human brain so to speak and to a large extent the human brain is inaccessible extent the human brain is inaccessible extent the human brain is inaccessible for most of its development. And so if for most of its development. And so if for most of its development. And so if you look actually across branches of you look actually across branches of you look actually across branches of medicine you can see that there is a medicine you can see that there is a medicine you can see that there is a very strong correlation between how very strong correlation between how very strong correlation between how accessible an organ is and how many accessible an organ is and how many accessible an organ is and how many cures or therapies we actually have. cures or therapies we actually have. cures or therapies we actually have. Think even just in cancer, right? Think even just in cancer, right? Think even just in cancer, right? Think about in cancer, you know, which used to about in cancer, you know, which used to about in cancer, you know, which used to be, of course, uh an incurable disease, be, of course, uh an incurable disease, be, of course, uh an incurable disease, right? A century ago, think about like right? A century ago, think about like right? A century ago, think about like uh leukemas in children. They are like uh leukemas in children. They are like uh leukemas in children. They are like 90% lethal in the 50s and the 60s. 90% lethal in the 50s and the 60s. 90% lethal in the 50s and the 60s. Today, there are maybe 10% lethal. And Today, there are maybe 10% lethal. And Today, there are maybe 10% lethal. And that is because a lot from this that is because a lot from this that is because a lot from this patients, right? It's very easy to patients, right? It's very easy to patients, right? It's very easy to collect. we've been bringing it to the collect. we've been bringing it to the collect. we've been bringing it to the lab, studying it like what goes lab, studying it like what goes lab, studying it like what goes wrong and then deploying molecular uh wrong and then deploying molecular uh wrong and then deploying molecular uh biology to develop therapeutics with the biology to develop therapeutics with the biology to develop therapeutics with the brain. Sadly, you know, there's no way brain. Sadly, you know, there's no way brain. Sadly, you know, there's no way of doing it. And so largely to, you of doing it. And so largely to, you of doing it. And so largely to, you know, what we've been trying to do is know, what we've been trying to do is know, what we've been trying to do is like find a way of shortcutting that like find a way of shortcutting that like find a way of shortcutting that process. But I do believe that the major process. But I do believe that the major process. But I do believe that the major challenges that we're facing in challenges that we're facing in challenges that we're facing in understanding brain disorders, whether understanding brain disorders, whether understanding brain disorders, whether they're neurological or psychiatric are they're neurological or psychiatric are they're neurological or psychiatric are on one hand, you know, the on one hand, you know, the on one hand, you know, the inaccessibility of the organ of inaccessibility of the organ of inaccessibility of the organ of interest, the brain, interest, the brain, interest, the brain, &gt;&gt; and on the other hand, our challenges &gt;&gt; and on the other hand, our challenges &gt;&gt; and on the other hand, our challenges are very often defining some of these are very often defining some of these are very often defining some of these conditions with biological markers conditions with biological markers conditions with biological markers because they're much more complex. The because they're much more complex. The because they're much more complex. The degree to which correlation has been degree to which correlation has been degree to which correlation has been leveraged to try and understand leveraged to try and understand leveraged to try and understand neurologic disease is kind of neurologic disease is kind of neurologic disease is kind of staggering. Um I'll just share a couple staggering. Um I'll just share a couple staggering. Um I'll just share a couple and I would love your reflections. I and I would love your reflections. I and I would love your reflections. I remember when I was an undergraduate and remember when I was an undergraduate and remember when I was an undergraduate and in graduate school there was this in graduate school there was this in graduate school there was this prominent theory that uh a mother who prominent theory that uh a mother who prominent theory that uh a mother who contracted influenza, the flu um toward contracted influenza, the flu um toward contracted influenza, the flu um toward the end of her second trimester had a the end of her second trimester had a the end of her second trimester had a much higher probability of having a much higher probability of having a much higher probability of having a schizophrenic child. schizophrenic child. schizophrenic child. &gt;&gt; And there was so much said of that and &gt;&gt; And there was so much said of that and &gt;&gt; And there was so much said of that and then now we barely hear anything about then now we barely hear anything about then now we barely hear anything about it at all. Although I think it at all. Although I think it at all. Although I think schizophrenia is more prominent at the schizophrenia is more prominent at the schizophrenia is more prominent at the toward the poles where you have harsher toward the poles where you have harsher toward the poles where you have harsher winters as opposed to around the winters as opposed to around the winters as opposed to around the equator. But someone needs to check me equator. But someone needs to check me equator. But someone needs to check me those uh on that because those uh on that because those uh on that because those statistics might have melted away with statistics might have melted away with statistics might have melted away with more careful analysis. I don't know. The more careful analysis. I don't know. The more careful analysis. I don't know. The other thing is that you'll nowadays hear other thing is that you'll nowadays hear other thing is that you'll nowadays hear a growing interest in uh populations for a growing interest in uh populations for a growing interest in uh populations for which a given disease is very rare. So which a given disease is very rare. So which a given disease is very rare. So one of the things that's circulating out one of the things that's circulating out one of the things that's circulating out there now uh that's related to the there now uh that's related to the there now uh that's related to the vaccine debate. And by the way, I'm just vaccine debate. And by the way, I'm just vaccine debate. And by the way, I'm just going to I'll myself go on record. I going to I'll myself go on record. I going to I'll myself go on record. I don't think there's any solid evidence don't think there's any solid evidence don't think there's any solid evidence that vaccines cause autism. that vaccines cause autism. that vaccines cause autism. &gt;&gt; And there's not epidemiologically. &gt;&gt; And there's not epidemiologically. &gt;&gt; And there's not epidemiologically. There's no evidence. There's no evidence. There's no evidence. &gt;&gt; There's not. I mean there's this open &gt;&gt; There's not. I mean there's this open &gt;&gt; There's not. I mean there's this open question as to whether or not vaccines question as to whether or not vaccines question as to whether or not vaccines of all kinds can increase inflammation of all kinds can increase inflammation of all kinds can increase inflammation and there might be things downstream of and there might be things downstream of and there might be things downstream of inflammation but for the record there inflammation but for the record there inflammation but for the record there right now there are no published papers right now there are no published papers right now there are no published papers that have not been retracted that uh that have not been retracted that uh that have not been retracted that uh that support the vaccine autism link. Uh that support the vaccine autism link. Uh that support the vaccine autism link. Uh I think those papers are being I think those papers are being I think those papers are being reinvestigated under the new reinvestigated under the new reinvestigated under the new administration but let's leave that administration but let's leave that administration but let's leave that aside for now. people will say um well aside for now. people will say um well aside for now. people will say um well you have groups like Amish populations you have groups like Amish populations you have groups like Amish populations um where the incidence of autism is um where the incidence of autism is um where the incidence of autism is significantly lower. Turns out it does significantly lower. Turns out it does significantly lower. Turns out it does exist. I looked at these data but it's exist. I looked at these data but it's exist. I looked at these data but it's significantly lower. And then people significantly lower. And then people significantly lower. And then people will say well it's the absence of food will say well it's the absence of food will say well it's the absence of food dies, it's the absence of vaccines dies, it's the absence of vaccines dies, it's the absence of vaccines perhaps, etc. But then as a genetic perhaps, etc. But then as a genetic perhaps, etc. But then as a genetic disease we could say well there's also disease we could say well there's also disease we could say well there's also uh there's a tendency for people in the uh there's a tendency for people in the uh there's a tendency for people in the Amish community to reproduce with other Amish community to reproduce with other Amish community to reproduce with other people in the Amish community. So, it's people in the Amish community. So, it's people in the Amish community. So, it's a more restricted genetic pool. a more restricted genetic pool. a more restricted genetic pool. &gt;&gt; And so, that could explain it as well. &gt;&gt; And so, that could explain it as well. &gt;&gt; And so, that could explain it as well. And I raised this not to um create any And I raised this not to um create any And I raised this not to um create any additional arguments. There are enough additional arguments. There are enough additional arguments. There are enough out there between people, but just out there between people, but just out there between people, but just because I think the correlative nature because I think the correlative nature because I think the correlative nature of all this is what kind of raises the of all this is what kind of raises the of all this is what kind of raises the opportunity for anything that's observed opportunity for anything that's observed opportunity for anything that's observed like a fever, they get better. Uh but as like a fever, they get better. Uh but as like a fever, they get better. Uh but as you said, healthy kids without profound you said, healthy kids without profound you said, healthy kids without profound autism also talk more when they have a autism also talk more when they have a autism also talk more when they have a fever. And so there's been so fever. And so there's been so fever. And so there's been so much made of autism and the various much made of autism and the various much made of autism and the various conditions that could create it. And I conditions that could create it. And I conditions that could create it. And I think it's been very confusing for the think it's been very confusing for the think it's been very confusing for the general public. Even as a as a you know general public. Even as a as a you know general public. Even as a as a you know trained scientist, it's been very trained scientist, it's been very trained scientist, it's been very confusing for me. I feel like every six confusing for me. I feel like every six confusing for me. I feel like every six months or so, every year we have a new months or so, every year we have a new months or so, every year we have a new uh pet hypothesis. Yeah. And um but uh pet hypothesis. Yeah. And um but uh pet hypothesis. Yeah. And um but nothing's really except for these nothing's really except for these nothing's really except for these genetic data, nothing really is rock genetic data, nothing really is rock genetic data, nothing really is rock solid, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And then of course it's the other &gt;&gt; And then of course it's the other &gt;&gt; And then of course it's the other issue is also that these conditions are issue is also that these conditions are issue is also that these conditions are disorders of the human brain, right? So disorders of the human brain, right? So disorders of the human brain, right? So if you think about it right even talking if you think about it right even talking if you think about it right even talking about schizophrenia right hallucinations about schizophrenia right hallucinations about schizophrenia right hallucinations right or phenomena that are very right or phenomena that are very right or phenomena that are very difficult to study and of course we difficult to study and of course we difficult to study and of course we don't know this we know that don't know this we know that don't know this we know that schizophrenia is present in almost every schizophrenia is present in almost every schizophrenia is present in almost every population that we know of even isolated population that we know of even isolated population that we know of even isolated population at 1%. Right? And again it's population at 1%. Right? And again it's population at 1%. Right? And again it's a little bit easier because it's done in a little bit easier because it's done in a little bit easier because it's done in adults right I think in children it's adults right I think in children it's adults right I think in children it's much more difficult and in fact many of much more difficult and in fact many of much more difficult and in fact many of the genes that were early on identify the genes that were early on identify the genes that were early on identify for autism were identified in this for autism were identified in this for autism were identified in this populations in the Amish populations for populations in the Amish populations for populations in the Amish populations for instance there is a very classic example instance there is a very classic example instance there is a very classic example of a gene that is associated with severe of a gene that is associated with severe of a gene that is associated with severe epilepsy and autism that was identified epilepsy and autism that was identified epilepsy and autism that was identified there for the first time it's present in there for the first time it's present in there for the first time it's present in other places as well so uh yeah I other places as well so uh yeah I other places as well so uh yeah I think of course the complexity of think of course the complexity of think of course the complexity of the problem is that you also want to the problem is that you also want to the problem is that you also want to make sure that you don't just associate make sure that you don't just associate make sure that you don't just associate something, you also want to reverse it something, you also want to reverse it something, you also want to reverse it in a way, right? So, you would want to in a way, right? So, you would want to in a way, right? So, you would want to do the other experiment where you change do the other experiment where you change do the other experiment where you change it and it goes away, it and it goes away, it and it goes away, &gt;&gt; but you can never do that in the human &gt;&gt; but you can never do that in the human &gt;&gt; but you can never do that in the human brain. We can't just turn things on and brain. We can't just turn things on and brain. We can't just turn things on and off to see whether they're truly causal. off to see whether they're truly causal. off to see whether they're truly causal. And then, of course, human brain And then, of course, human brain And then, of course, human brain developments also takes an incredibly developments also takes an incredibly developments also takes an incredibly long period of time, long period of time, long period of time, &gt;&gt; right? If anything, it seems that the &gt;&gt; right? If anything, it seems that the &gt;&gt; right? If anything, it seems that the human nervous system has done everything human nervous system has done everything human nervous system has done everything possible to slow down that process, possible to slow down that process, possible to slow down that process, right? I mean, we mileinate all the way right? I mean, we mileinate all the way right? I mean, we mileinate all the way to the third decade, right? like neurons to the third decade, right? like neurons to the third decade, right? like neurons are born and migrating through the are born and migrating through the are born and migrating through the nervous system into early postnatal uh nervous system into early postnatal uh nervous system into early postnatal uh years. &gt;&gt; Wait, you're telling me that our &gt;&gt; Wait, you're telling me that our &gt;&gt; Wait, you're telling me that our neurons continue to get mileelinated uh neurons continue to get mileelinated uh neurons continue to get mileelinated uh which of course for those that don't which of course for those that don't which of course for those that don't know is uh the building of the know is uh the building of the know is uh the building of the enchieathment that allows electrical enchieathment that allows electrical enchieathment that allows electrical signals to be passed down neurons more signals to be passed down neurons more signals to be passed down neurons more um efficiently uh in until we're 30 more um efficiently uh in until we're 30 more um efficiently uh in until we're 30 years old. years old. years old. &gt;&gt; Yes, there's evidence that myelination &gt;&gt; Yes, there's evidence that myelination &gt;&gt; Yes, there's evidence that myelination especially in the frontal areas of the especially in the frontal areas of the especially in the frontal areas of the brain are continuing up to the third brain are continuing up to the third brain are continuing up to the third decade. our uh unfortunately now decade. our uh unfortunately now decade. our uh unfortunately now deceased uh former colleague Ben Baris, deceased uh former colleague Ben Baris, deceased uh former colleague Ben Baris, he used to shout at people in labor lab he used to shout at people in labor lab he used to shout at people in labor lab meetings. Yeah. When they'd say meetings. Yeah. When they'd say meetings. Yeah. When they'd say something he didn't like, he'd say, something he didn't like, he'd say, something he didn't like, he'd say, "What do you know? You're not even "What do you know? You're not even "What do you know? You're not even milinated yet." So, he was right. milinated yet." So, he was right. milinated yet." So, he was right. &gt;&gt; He was absolutely right. &gt;&gt; He was absolutely right. &gt;&gt; He was absolutely right. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, if you're in a disagreement &gt;&gt; Okay. So, if you're in a disagreement &gt;&gt; Okay. So, if you're in a disagreement with somebody younger than 30 and you with somebody younger than 30 and you with somebody younger than 30 and you happen to be older than 30, you can um happen to be older than 30, you can um happen to be older than 30, you can um leverage the argument. What do you know? leverage the argument. What do you know? leverage the argument. What do you know? You're not even milinated yet. You're not even milinated yet. You're not even milinated yet. Completely milinated yet. Um, all Completely milinated yet. Um, all Completely milinated yet. Um, all kidding aside, before we get into the kidding aside, before we get into the kidding aside, before we get into the incredible experiments that you're doing incredible experiments that you're doing incredible experiments that you're doing and the direction that you're taking to and the direction that you're taking to and the direction that you're taking to tackle these really hard diseases, I tackle these really hard diseases, I tackle these really hard diseases, I have to ask two questions. First, is the have to ask two questions. First, is the have to ask two questions. First, is the incidence of autism also increasing incidence of autism also increasing incidence of autism also increasing outside of the United States or is this outside of the United States or is this outside of the United States or is this something unique to the United States something unique to the United States something unique to the United States and Northern Europe? Um, I don't know and Northern Europe? Um, I don't know and Northern Europe? Um, I don't know why we always pair those two or I should why we always pair those two or I should why we always pair those two or I should just be fair to the United States and just be fair to the United States and just be fair to the United States and Australia or whatever. Um or is there Australia or whatever. Um or is there Australia or whatever. Um or is there something going on in the United States something going on in the United States something going on in the United States in particular that autism is increasing in particular that autism is increasing in particular that autism is increasing faster here? faster here? faster here? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know this the you know the so &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know this the you know the so &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know this the you know the so like the prevalence for autism you know like the prevalence for autism you know like the prevalence for autism you know has been actually reported to be higher has been actually reported to be higher has been actually reported to be higher in other countries even before this. in other countries even before this. in other countries even before this. Some of the early reports many years ago Some of the early reports many years ago Some of the early reports many years ago show that in Korea for instance you know show that in Korea for instance you know show that in Korea for instance you know the prevalence was very high. uh now the prevalence was very high. uh now the prevalence was very high. uh now that the studies are done uh also like that the studies are done uh also like that the studies are done uh also like in Scandinavian countries it shows that in Scandinavian countries it shows that in Scandinavian countries it shows that it's probably around the same um you it's probably around the same um you it's probably around the same um you know kind like rate one in 30 to one in know kind like rate one in 30 to one in know kind like rate one in 30 to one in 40 so somewhere between 40 so somewhere between 40 so somewhere between &gt;&gt; okay so it can't be whatever is uh &gt;&gt; okay so it can't be whatever is uh &gt;&gt; okay so it can't be whatever is uh attached to whatever United States attached to whatever United States attached to whatever United States specific um conditions I mean uh well specific um conditions I mean uh well specific um conditions I mean uh well because you hear these arguments oh you because you hear these arguments oh you because you hear these arguments oh you know it's the glyphosates in the in the know it's the glyphosates in the in the know it's the glyphosates in the in the crops in the United States and while the crops in the United States and while the crops in the United States and while I don't favor that argument. I do I don't favor that argument. I do I don't favor that argument. I do think we need to be cautious about think we need to be cautious about think we need to be cautious about what's in the food supply, but what's in the food supply, but what's in the food supply, but absolutely um those same people often absolutely um those same people often absolutely um those same people often will uh leverage the argument that well will uh leverage the argument that well will uh leverage the argument that well in Europe they're not using these in Europe they're not using these in Europe they're not using these things. Well, if the incidence of autism things. Well, if the incidence of autism things. Well, if the incidence of autism is the same and rising, that sort of is the same and rising, that sort of is the same and rising, that sort of does away with the at least the clean does away with the at least the clean does away with the at least the clean logic of that. logic of that. logic of that. &gt;&gt; And perhaps another argument which is &gt;&gt; And perhaps another argument which is &gt;&gt; And perhaps another argument which is very important to, you know, bring is very important to, you know, bring is very important to, you know, bring is that we find the same mutations, right? that we find the same mutations, right? that we find the same mutations, right? I mean, the same mutations if we're I mean, the same mutations if we're I mean, the same mutations if we're talking, let's say, a mutation, a talking, let's say, a mutation, a talking, let's say, a mutation, a specific calcium channel, you know, specific calcium channel, you know, specific calcium channel, you know, you'll find it in a patient in Denmark, you'll find it in a patient in Denmark, you'll find it in a patient in Denmark, right? As well as like one in Africa or right? As well as like one in Africa or right? As well as like one in Africa or in let's say Australia. So, I think some in let's say Australia. So, I think some in let's say Australia. So, I think some of the genetic mutations are sort of the genetic mutations are sort of the genetic mutations are sort of like the same. like the same. like the same. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Could we briefly talk about gene &gt;&gt; Yeah. Could we briefly talk about gene &gt;&gt; Yeah. Could we briefly talk about gene therapy and crisper just briefly because therapy and crisper just briefly because therapy and crisper just briefly because I think in the context of a discussion I think in the context of a discussion I think in the context of a discussion about these neurologic diseases for about these neurologic diseases for about these neurologic diseases for which currently there aren't which currently there aren't which currently there aren't &gt;&gt; perfect cures or even cures in many &gt;&gt; perfect cures or even cures in many &gt;&gt; perfect cures or even cures in many cases uh gene therapy does hold some cases uh gene therapy does hold some cases uh gene therapy does hold some promise. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um in simple terms uh that I and &gt;&gt; Um in simple terms uh that I and &gt;&gt; Um in simple terms uh that I and everyone else uh can understand could everyone else uh can understand could everyone else uh can understand could you just explain what crisper allows you just explain what crisper allows you just explain what crisper allows physicians potentially to do? In other physicians potentially to do? In other physicians potentially to do? In other words, can genes be fixed in adulthood? words, can genes be fixed in adulthood? words, can genes be fixed in adulthood? Do they have to be fixed in the embryo? Do they have to be fixed in the embryo? Do they have to be fixed in the embryo? Um, just give your thoughts generally Um, just give your thoughts generally Um, just give your thoughts generally about crisper and gene therapy about crisper and gene therapy about crisper and gene therapy because I think most people have heard because I think most people have heard because I think most people have heard of it. Yeah. But I think most people of it. Yeah. But I think most people of it. Yeah. But I think most people don't have an intuitive sense for don't have an intuitive sense for don't have an intuitive sense for how it how it works. how it how it works. how it how it works. &gt;&gt; So gene therapy is a rather actually &gt;&gt; So gene therapy is a rather actually &gt;&gt; So gene therapy is a rather actually broad term and it covers many ways in broad term and it covers many ways in broad term and it covers many ways in which you can correct generally a gene which you can correct generally a gene which you can correct generally a gene or a genetic defect that we think it's or a genetic defect that we think it's or a genetic defect that we think it's causal. So on one extreme for instance causal. So on one extreme for instance causal. So on one extreme for instance you can envision a gene is broken has a you can envision a gene is broken has a you can envision a gene is broken has a mutation. So what you want to do is you mutation. So what you want to do is you mutation. So what you want to do is you want to put it back. So those were some want to put it back. So those were some want to put it back. So those were some of the early efforts where you would put of the early efforts where you would put of the early efforts where you would put it in a virus and deliver it to the it in a virus and deliver it to the it in a virus and deliver it to the patient an adult patient an adult patient an adult &gt;&gt; in an adult or in a child depending on &gt;&gt; in an adult or in a child depending on &gt;&gt; in an adult or in a child depending on like the condition with the idea is that like the condition with the idea is that like the condition with the idea is that the gene is not there or like there's the gene is not there or like there's the gene is not there or like there's not enough of it so I'm just going to not enough of it so I'm just going to not enough of it so I'm just going to deliver more. That's one extreme. Does deliver more. That's one extreme. Does deliver more. That's one extreme. Does it inject into the blood or do you have it inject into the blood or do you have it inject into the blood or do you have to go into the specific cell type that's to go into the specific cell type that's to go into the specific cell type that's lacking the gene? lacking the gene? lacking the gene? &gt;&gt; Many of the studies were done for uh &gt;&gt; Many of the studies were done for uh &gt;&gt; Many of the studies were done for uh blood disorders of course because it was blood disorders of course because it was blood disorders of course because it was easier. So you would inject them. Uh uh easier. So you would inject them. Uh uh easier. So you would inject them. Uh uh of course the other possibility of course the other possibility of course the other possibility sometimes you don't want to put the gene sometimes you don't want to put the gene sometimes you don't want to put the gene you want to put the protein already you want to put the protein already you want to put the protein already made. And that is the case for many made. And that is the case for many made. And that is the case for many conditions where an enzyme so a protein conditions where an enzyme so a protein conditions where an enzyme so a protein that you know does some interesting that you know does some interesting that you know does some interesting chemical reactions that are essential to chemical reactions that are essential to chemical reactions that are essential to a cell is missing. So sometimes you just a cell is missing. So sometimes you just a cell is missing. So sometimes you just make that enzyme and then you deliver make that enzyme and then you deliver make that enzyme and then you deliver that. It's not always working but in that. It's not always working but in that. It's not always working but in some cases actually uh works really some cases actually uh works really some cases actually uh works really well. Now the other thing that you can well. Now the other thing that you can well. Now the other thing that you can do is you can try to correct that defect do is you can try to correct that defect do is you can try to correct that defect directly. That means you need to operate directly. That means you need to operate directly. That means you need to operate at the DNA level. So somehow you need to at the DNA level. So somehow you need to at the DNA level. So somehow you need to get into every single cell that is get into every single cell that is get into every single cell that is affected uh and correct that. And that's where uh and correct that. And that's where uh and correct that. And that's where crisper uh comes into play where crisper uh comes into play where crisper uh comes into play where presumably you could at one point uh presumably you could at one point uh presumably you could at one point uh deliver um you know the guides so the deliver um you know the guides so the deliver um you know the guides so the tiny pieces of nucleic acid that tell tiny pieces of nucleic acid that tell tiny pieces of nucleic acid that tell you where to go on the DNA and then an you where to go on the DNA and then an you where to go on the DNA and then an enzyme they will do the cutting and then enzyme they will do the cutting and then enzyme they will do the cutting and then the putting back or various other the putting back or various other the putting back or various other versions of this that you would correct. versions of this that you would correct. versions of this that you would correct. Of course there are challenges with Of course there are challenges with Of course there are challenges with that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Where do you put it? I mean so &gt;&gt; Yeah. Where do you put it? I mean so &gt;&gt; Yeah. Where do you put it? I mean so like for cickle cell anemia I know like for cickle cell anemia I know like for cickle cell anemia I know they've essentially reversed cickle cell they've essentially reversed cickle cell they've essentially reversed cickle cell an anemia using crisper technology an anemia using crisper technology an anemia using crisper technology that's in the blood right in the blood that's in the blood right in the blood that's in the blood right in the blood it's of the blood right but if for it's of the blood right but if for it's of the blood right but if for instance we know about a genetic instance we know about a genetic instance we know about a genetic defect of let's say a mut we'll talk defect of let's say a mut we'll talk defect of let's say a mut we'll talk more about this soon but a mutated more about this soon but a mutated more about this soon but a mutated calcium channel that disrupts heart calcium channel that disrupts heart calcium channel that disrupts heart function and brain function and brain function and brain function &gt;&gt; and you come in with crisper you know &gt;&gt; and you come in with crisper you know &gt;&gt; and you come in with crisper you know what the what gene is mutated you have what the what gene is mutated you have what the what gene is mutated you have the healthy gene that potentially you the healthy gene that potentially you the healthy gene that potentially you can put back where do you put it do you can put back where do you put it do you can put back where do you put it do you inject it I mean injecting into the inject it I mean injecting into the inject it I mean injecting into the heart is possible heart is possible heart is possible um into the blood supply obviously um into the blood supply obviously um into the blood supply obviously easier. Um getting it directed to the easier. Um getting it directed to the easier. Um getting it directed to the bone marrow bone marrow bone marrow &gt;&gt; um but to the brain is hard. &gt;&gt; um but to the brain is hard. &gt;&gt; um but to the brain is hard. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, presumably you could inject &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, presumably you could inject &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, presumably you could inject into the brain as well, right? There are into the brain as well, right? There are into the brain as well, right? There are ways in which you can inject through ways in which you can inject through ways in which you can inject through either surgery or through an injection either surgery or through an injection either surgery or through an injection in the spinal canal like intrathecally. in the spinal canal like intrathecally. in the spinal canal like intrathecally. So that's certainly one way in which you So that's certainly one way in which you So that's certainly one way in which you can do it. It is very challenging though can do it. It is very challenging though can do it. It is very challenging though because of course the brain has a lot of because of course the brain has a lot of because of course the brain has a lot of cell types and you know you very often cell types and you know you very often cell types and you know you very often the way you deliver this like through a the way you deliver this like through a the way you deliver this like through a virus or through other modalities you virus or through other modalities you virus or through other modalities you know there's only so much of that virus know there's only so much of that virus know there's only so much of that virus that you can actually put inside the that you can actually put inside the that you can actually put inside the nervous system and the efficiency is not nervous system and the efficiency is not nervous system and the efficiency is not yet like very high. So another way is to yet like very high. So another way is to yet like very high. So another way is to go like one level down so that gene will go like one level down so that gene will go like one level down so that gene will produce an RNA that will produce a produce an RNA that will produce a produce an RNA that will produce a protein. So perhaps we don't have to protein. So perhaps we don't have to protein. So perhaps we don't have to correct the DNA everywhere, but perhaps correct the DNA everywhere, but perhaps correct the DNA everywhere, but perhaps we can correct something that happens we can correct something that happens we can correct something that happens downstream. And that's so like been the downstream. And that's so like been the downstream. And that's so like been the strategy that we've been using primarily strategy that we've been using primarily strategy that we've been using primarily just mostly because at this point and just mostly because at this point and just mostly because at this point and probably in the future it will be probably in the future it will be probably in the future it will be possible. who knows like in 10 years or possible. who knows like in 10 years or possible. who knows like in 10 years or maybe even earlier we'll be able to maybe even earlier we'll be able to maybe even earlier we'll be able to deliver very uh effectively some of the deliver very uh effectively some of the deliver very uh effectively some of the genetic therapies using crisper genetic therapies using crisper genetic therapies using crisper &gt;&gt; because certainly in um non-human &gt;&gt; because certainly in um non-human &gt;&gt; because certainly in um non-human primate models things like um primate models things like um primate models things like um &gt;&gt; color blindness have been rescued by &gt;&gt; color blindness have been rescued by &gt;&gt; color blindness have been rescued by introducing a gene through a when we introducing a gene through a when we introducing a gene through a when we talk about viruses people often will talk about viruses people often will talk about viruses people often will think oh goodness why would I want to think oh goodness why would I want to think oh goodness why would I want to get injected with a virus but we should get injected with a virus but we should get injected with a virus but we should just mention there are things like adn just mention there are things like adn just mention there are things like adn noiruses which cold viruses are adn no noiruses which cold viruses are adn no noiruses which cold viruses are adn no viruses that can be um engineered so viruses that can be um engineered so viruses that can be um engineered so that they don't make you sick, but they that they don't make you sick, but they that they don't make you sick, but they can carry a cargo like a gene you want can carry a cargo like a gene you want can carry a cargo like a gene you want to put into a nervous system or body to put into a nervous system or body to put into a nervous system or body that lacks that gene. So when we say that lacks that gene. So when we say that lacks that gene. So when we say using viruses to deliver genes, it's uh using viruses to deliver genes, it's uh using viruses to deliver genes, it's uh it's of the benevolent type or at least it's of the benevolent type or at least it's of the benevolent type or at least benevolent motivation. We think that benevolent motivation. We think that benevolent motivation. We think that those adnoiruses can live in our that those adnoiruses can live in our that those adnoiruses can live in our body for a long time without causing body for a long time without causing body for a long time without causing additional trouble additional trouble additional trouble &gt;&gt; and they're very often modified to make &gt;&gt; and they're very often modified to make &gt;&gt; and they're very often modified to make sure that they don't cause disease. M of sure that they don't cause disease. M of sure that they don't cause disease. M of course another limitation of that is course another limitation of that is course another limitation of that is that if the gene is really large it that if the gene is really large it that if the gene is really large it simply won't fit in a virus. So for simply won't fit in a virus. So for simply won't fit in a virus. So for instance that would be the case if you instance that would be the case if you instance that would be the case if you think about a calcium channel. Calcium think about a calcium channel. Calcium think about a calcium channel. Calcium channel is a gigantic gene. It will be channel is a gigantic gene. It will be channel is a gigantic gene. It will be very difficult to fit uh inside a virus. very difficult to fit uh inside a virus. very difficult to fit uh inside a virus. Then of course the other thing is like Then of course the other thing is like Then of course the other thing is like with these viruses very often especially with these viruses very often especially with these viruses very often especially with the adeno viruses or aavs is that with the adeno viruses or aavs is that with the adeno viruses or aavs is that you will have one shot meaning that you will have one shot meaning that you will have one shot meaning that you have to inject once uh and hopefully have to inject once uh and hopefully have to inject once uh and hopefully would work because next time you know uh would work because next time you know uh would work because next time you know uh you may have an immune reaction right you may have an immune reaction right you may have an immune reaction right you'll have you'll produce antibodies you'll have you'll produce antibodies you'll have you'll produce antibodies and so you won't be able to deliver and so you won't be able to deliver and so you won't be able to deliver again. So there again there are all kind again. So there again there are all kind again. So there again there are all kind of challenges that you know people are of challenges that you know people are of challenges that you know people are working really hard to solve and I have working really hard to solve and I have working really hard to solve and I have no doubt that in the next decade we'll no doubt that in the next decade we'll no doubt that in the next decade we'll see you know therapies or you know see you know therapies or you know see you know therapies or you know perhaps even cures for some of these perhaps even cures for some of these perhaps even cures for some of these conditions of course and I think you conditions of course and I think you conditions of course and I think you were bringing this up one of the were bringing this up one of the were bringing this up one of the challenges like when we do this challenges like when we do this challenges like when we do this &gt;&gt; because especially for disorders of the &gt;&gt; because especially for disorders of the &gt;&gt; because especially for disorders of the brain neurodedevelopmental disorders so brain neurodedevelopmental disorders so brain neurodedevelopmental disorders so autism and other neurodedevelopmental autism and other neurodedevelopmental autism and other neurodedevelopmental disorders the question is always how disorders the question is always how disorders the question is always how early it is too late early it is too late early it is too late &gt;&gt; you know how much damage has it done &gt;&gt; you know how much damage has it done &gt;&gt; you know how much damage has it done has it been done and how much can I has it been done and how much can I has it been done and how much can I actually correct and that's one of the actually correct and that's one of the actually correct and that's one of the things that you know we're only now things that you know we're only now things that you know we're only now starting to really explore as we're starting to really explore as we're starting to really explore as we're thinking about some of the first thinking about some of the first thinking about some of the first clinical trials in the space clinical trials in the space clinical trials in the space &gt;&gt; this might shock you a bit but um folks &gt;&gt; this might shock you a bit but um folks &gt;&gt; this might shock you a bit but um folks in the quoteunquote biohacking community in the quoteunquote biohacking community in the quoteunquote biohacking community not me um are getting I know some that not me um are getting I know some that not me um are getting I know some that have gotten folstatin gene therapy as a have gotten folstatin gene therapy as a have gotten folstatin gene therapy as a body enhancement thing so they're body enhancement thing so they're body enhancement thing so they're leaving the country because you can't do leaving the country because you can't do leaving the country because you can't do it in the United States and literally it in the United States and literally it in the United States and literally getting injection of a of folstatin gene getting injection of a of folstatin gene getting injection of a of folstatin gene uh therapy um to I guess have more uh therapy um to I guess have more uh therapy um to I guess have more muscle to you know improve that. Uh I muscle to you know improve that. Uh I muscle to you know improve that. Uh I wouldn't do it personally. Um I also I wouldn't do it personally. Um I also I wouldn't do it personally. Um I also I like working out so I don't need a like working out so I don't need a like working out so I don't need a full statatin uh gene therapy but it's full statatin uh gene therapy but it's full statatin uh gene therapy but it's interesting to note that people are interesting to note that people are interesting to note that people are doing this and I'm raising this as a doing this and I'm raising this as a doing this and I'm raising this as a segue into a discussion about stem cells segue into a discussion about stem cells segue into a discussion about stem cells um because people around the world are um because people around the world are um because people around the world are getting injected with stem cells in the getting injected with stem cells in the getting injected with stem cells in the United States. It's still not allowed by United States. It's still not allowed by United States. It's still not allowed by FDA for most things. Um, but I think FDA for most things. Um, but I think FDA for most things. Um, but I think gene therapy has started. gene therapy has started. gene therapy has started. &gt;&gt; It it's certainly begun. It's but it's &gt;&gt; It it's certainly begun. It's but it's &gt;&gt; It it's certainly begun. It's but it's not the sort of thing that your not the sort of thing that your not the sort of thing that your physician offers up uh early. It's still physician offers up uh early. It's still physician offers up uh early. It's still very experimental for most things. very experimental for most things. very experimental for most things. &gt;&gt; And then for gene therapies again in the &gt;&gt; And then for gene therapies again in the &gt;&gt; And then for gene therapies again in the context of what you're mentioning is context of what you're mentioning is context of what you're mentioning is some of this again they're irreversible. some of this again they're irreversible. some of this again they're irreversible. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So once you put the gene in, you know, &gt;&gt; So once you put the gene in, you know, &gt;&gt; So once you put the gene in, you know, and it goes into a cell, let's say and it goes into a cell, let's say and it goes into a cell, let's say through a lentivirus that will through a lentivirus that will through a lentivirus that will integrate, you can't take it out integrate, you can't take it out integrate, you can't take it out anymore, right? That would be very anymore, right? That would be very anymore, right? That would be very difficult. It would get inactivated over difficult. It would get inactivated over difficult. It would get inactivated over time, but so that's why we have to be time, but so that's why we have to be time, but so that's why we have to be extra careful with some of this extra careful with some of this extra careful with some of this therapies and, you know, make sure that therapies and, you know, make sure that therapies and, you know, make sure that we don't do more harm, right? Which I we don't do more harm, right? Which I we don't do more harm, right? Which I guess it's always what we try. guess it's always what we try. guess it's always what we try. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for more than 13 years now. I AG1 for more than 13 years now. I AG1 for more than 13 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been drinking it every day since. For been drinking it every day since. For been drinking it every day since. For the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same original flavor. They've updated the original flavor. They've updated the original flavor. They've updated the formulation, but the flavor has always formulation, but the flavor has always formulation, but the flavor has always remained the same. And now, for the remained the same. And now, for the remained the same. And now, for the first time, AG1 is available in three first time, AG1 is available in three first time, AG1 is available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and new flavors: berry, citrus, and new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. All the flavors include the tropical. All the flavors include the tropical. All the flavors include the highest quality ingredients in exactly highest quality ingredients in exactly highest quality ingredients in exactly the right doses to together provide the right doses to together provide the right doses to together provide support for your gut microbiome, support for your gut microbiome, support for your gut microbiome, support for your immune health, and support for your immune health, and support for your immune health, and support for better energy and more. So now you can better energy and more. So now you can better energy and more. So now you can find the flavor of AG1 that you like the find the flavor of AG1 that you like the find the flavor of AG1 that you like the most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially when I mix original flavor, especially when I mix original flavor, especially when I mix it with water and a little bit of lemon it with water and a little bit of lemon it with water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice. That's how I've been or lime juice. That's how I've been or lime juice. That's how I've been doing it for basically 13 years now. I doing it for basically 13 years now. I doing it for basically 13 years now. I really enjoy the new berry flavor in really enjoy the new berry flavor in really enjoy the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great and I don't particular. It tastes great and I don't particular. It tastes great and I don't have to add any lemon or lime juice. I have to add any lemon or lime juice. I have to add any lemon or lime juice. I just mix it up with water. If you'd like just mix it up with water. If you'd like just mix it up with water. If you'd like to try AG1 and these new flavors, you to try AG1 and these new flavors, you to try AG1 and these new flavors, you can go to drinkaga1.com/huberman can go to drinkaga1.com/huberman can go to drinkaga1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that includes five free travel packs and a includes five free travel packs and a includes five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to drinkag1.com/huberman to drinkag1.com/huberman to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the special welcome kit of five to claim the special welcome kit of five to claim the special welcome kit of five free travel packs and a free bottle of free travel packs and a free bottle of free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I personally have been doing online. I personally have been doing online. I personally have been doing therapy for well over 35 years. I find therapy for well over 35 years. I find therapy for well over 35 years. I find it to be an extremely important it to be an extremely important it to be an extremely important component to overall health. In fact, I component to overall health. In fact, I component to overall health. In fact, I consider doing regular therapy just as consider doing regular therapy just as consider doing regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise, important as getting regular exercise, important as getting regular exercise, including cardiovascular exercise and including cardiovascular exercise and including cardiovascular exercise and resistance training, which of course I resistance training, which of course I resistance training, which of course I also do every week. There are also do every week. There are also do every week. There are essentially three things that make up essentially three things that make up essentially three things that make up great therapy. First of all, it provides great therapy. First of all, it provides great therapy. First of all, it provides the opportunity to have a really good the opportunity to have a really good the opportunity to have a really good rapport with somebody that you can rapport with somebody that you can rapport with somebody that you can really trust and talk to about really trust and talk to about really trust and talk to about essentially any issue that you want. essentially any issue that you want. essentially any issue that you want. Second of all, it can provide support in Second of all, it can provide support in Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or directed guidance or of course both. And directed guidance or of course both. And directed guidance or of course both. And third, expert therapy should provide you third, expert therapy should provide you third, expert therapy should provide you useful insights. Insights that can help useful insights. Insights that can help useful insights. Insights that can help you improve in your work life, your you improve in your work life, your you improve in your work life, your relationships, and in your relationship relationships, and in your relationship relationships, and in your relationship with yourself. With Better Help, they with yourself. With Better Help, they with yourself. With Better Help, they make it very easy for you to find an make it very easy for you to find an make it very easy for you to find an expert therapist who you resonate with expert therapist who you resonate with expert therapist who you resonate with and that can provide those three and that can provide those three and that can provide those three benefits that come from expert therapy. benefits that come from expert therapy. benefits that come from expert therapy. Interestingly, in a recent survey, 72% Interestingly, in a recent survey, 72% Interestingly, in a recent survey, 72% of BetterHelp members reported a of BetterHelp members reported a of BetterHelp members reported a reduction in negative symptoms as a reduction in negative symptoms as a reduction in negative symptoms as a result of their BetterHelp therapy result of their BetterHelp therapy result of their BetterHelp therapy sessions. If you'd like to try sessions. If you'd like to try sessions. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Let's talk about stem cells, organoids, Let's talk about stem cells, organoids, Let's talk about stem cells, organoids, and assemblids, and you'll explain what and assemblids, and you'll explain what and assemblids, and you'll explain what those are. Um but let's we wade into those are. Um but let's we wade into those are. Um but let's we wade into this through the uh the way it happened this through the uh the way it happened this through the uh the way it happened chronologically. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Um most people have heard of stem cells, &gt;&gt; Um most people have heard of stem cells, &gt;&gt; Um most people have heard of stem cells, cells that could become other things. Uh cells that could become other things. Uh cells that could become other things. Uh when I was a posttock, when I was a posttock, when I was a posttock, any laboratory that worked on human stem any laboratory that worked on human stem any laboratory that worked on human stem cells worked on human embryionic stem cells worked on human embryionic stem cells worked on human embryionic stem cells. Literally cells that were cells. Literally cells that were cells. Literally cells that were collected from aborted fetuses. This was collected from aborted fetuses. This was collected from aborted fetuses. This was and given for a medical study. there was and given for a medical study. there was and given for a medical study. there was an incredible discovery which you'll an incredible discovery which you'll an incredible discovery which you'll tell us about which basically made that tell us about which basically made that tell us about which basically made that technology obsolete and also allowed um technology obsolete and also allowed um technology obsolete and also allowed um scientists to bypass a lot of the scientists to bypass a lot of the scientists to bypass a lot of the ethical considerations serious ethical considerations serious ethical considerations serious ethical considerations regardless of where you considerations regardless of where you considerations regardless of where you sit on that debate. I mean you're using sit on that debate. I mean you're using sit on that debate. I mean you're using the &gt;&gt; the tissue from a human embryo to &gt;&gt; the tissue from a human embryo to &gt;&gt; the tissue from a human embryo to study things. You could say some people study things. You could say some people study things. You could say some people will support that some people won't but will support that some people won't but will support that some people won't but then a new technology comes along. then a new technology comes along. then a new technology comes along. &gt;&gt; Yeah. and basically makes that &gt;&gt; Yeah. and basically makes that &gt;&gt; Yeah. and basically makes that technology obsolete allowing you and technology obsolete allowing you and technology obsolete allowing you and others to do the work on stem cells and others to do the work on stem cells and others to do the work on stem cells and assemblids and so forth without having assemblids and so forth without having assemblids and so forth without having to take cells from human embryos which to take cells from human embryos which to take cells from human embryos which is spectacular. So could you please tell is spectacular. So could you please tell is spectacular. So could you please tell us about that discovery of the uh stem us about that discovery of the uh stem us about that discovery of the uh stem cell technology that really changed the cell technology that really changed the cell technology that really changed the entire game and did away with this entire game and did away with this entire game and did away with this ethical um serious ethical battle. Let's ethical um serious ethical battle. Let's ethical um serious ethical battle. Let's call it what it was. Let's start first call it what it was. Let's start first call it what it was. Let's start first with stem cells and what they are with stem cells and what they are with stem cells and what they are because I think it's also important uh because I think it's also important uh because I think it's also important uh to define them. So stem cells are cells to define them. So stem cells are cells to define them. So stem cells are cells that have two properties. First of all, that have two properties. First of all, that have two properties. First of all, they in principle can become other cells they in principle can become other cells they in principle can become other cells and if they are of the most potent type, and if they are of the most potent type, and if they are of the most potent type, they will be totally potent. So they can they will be totally potent. So they can they will be totally potent. So they can make everything. If they're plur potent, make everything. If they're plur potent, make everything. If they're plur potent, they can make almost everything. And they can make almost everything. And they can make almost everything. And then of course there are, you know, then of course there are, you know, then of course there are, you know, lower levels of potency for the cells. lower levels of potency for the cells. lower levels of potency for the cells. So we all carry stem cells in us right So we all carry stem cells in us right So we all carry stem cells in us right not in the brain or few are in the brain not in the brain or few are in the brain not in the brain or few are in the brain for sure but you know in the liver and for sure but you know in the liver and for sure but you know in the liver and in other organs like in the gut as we in other organs like in the gut as we in other organs like in the gut as we renew the gut uh you know every few renew the gut uh you know every few renew the gut uh you know every few weeks that is done primarily through the weeks that is done primarily through the weeks that is done primarily through the stem cells but those are restricted they stem cells but those are restricted they stem cells but those are restricted they can make everything they can make mostly can make everything they can make mostly can make everything they can make mostly that specialized cell type for which that specialized cell type for which that specialized cell type for which they have been so like primed. Now the they have been so like primed. Now the they have been so like primed. Now the earliest of stem cells like earliest of stem cells like earliest of stem cells like those pur potent that are very important those pur potent that are very important those pur potent that are very important those are present at early stages of those are present at early stages of those are present at early stages of development of the embryo. Um and of development of the embryo. Um and of development of the embryo. Um and of course that happens postconception. So course that happens postconception. So course that happens postconception. So the challenge has been that you have to the challenge has been that you have to the challenge has been that you have to remove them from a fertilized uh egg and remove them from a fertilized uh egg and remove them from a fertilized uh egg and if conception if life starts at if conception if life starts at if conception if life starts at conception then of course you're conception then of course you're conception then of course you're interfering. So I think a lot of the interfering. So I think a lot of the interfering. So I think a lot of the ethical debates have started because of ethical debates have started because of ethical debates have started because of that but you know in early days even if that but you know in early days even if that but you know in early days even if you were to do that you wouldn't be able you were to do that you wouldn't be able you were to do that you wouldn't be able to keep those cells. Turns out that the to keep those cells. Turns out that the to keep those cells. Turns out that the cells are very difficult to maintain. cells are very difficult to maintain. cells are very difficult to maintain. And this brings us actually to the And this brings us actually to the And this brings us actually to the second property of the cells, which is second property of the cells, which is second property of the cells, which is that in principle they can be maintained that in principle they can be maintained that in principle they can be maintained forever. If you provide the right forever. If you provide the right forever. If you provide the right conditions, they will divide and stay conditions, they will divide and stay conditions, they will divide and stay the same forever. Those are the two the same forever. Those are the two the same forever. Those are the two properties. So, uh you know, you can properties. So, uh you know, you can properties. So, uh you know, you can keep them forever. You can freeze them keep them forever. You can freeze them keep them forever. You can freeze them down, put them in a you know, liquid down, put them in a you know, liquid down, put them in a you know, liquid nitrogen, bring them out any time, and nitrogen, bring them out any time, and nitrogen, bring them out any time, and they'll start exactly where they left. they'll start exactly where they left. they'll start exactly where they left. And then with the right guidance they And then with the right guidance they And then with the right guidance they can become other cell types. can become other cell types. can become other cell types. So only around you know 1998 So only around you know 1998 So only around you know 1998 that it was that when we could actually that it was that when we could actually that it was that when we could actually maintain some of the cells in a dish. So maintain some of the cells in a dish. So maintain some of the cells in a dish. So somebody figured out a soup of chemicals somebody figured out a soup of chemicals somebody figured out a soup of chemicals that you can add and the cells will that you can add and the cells will that you can add and the cells will survive because after that point it was survive because after that point it was survive because after that point it was not possible. So that triggered of not possible. So that triggered of not possible. So that triggered of course the promise of this field that course the promise of this field that course the promise of this field that now would be able to take those cells now would be able to take those cells now would be able to take those cells and derive various organs right perhaps and derive various organs right perhaps and derive various organs right perhaps transplant them replace organs. Uh of transplant them replace organs. Uh of transplant them replace organs. Uh of course that ended up being much more course that ended up being much more course that ended up being much more complicated and of course there were all complicated and of course there were all complicated and of course there were all this ethical debates related to the this ethical debates related to the this ethical debates related to the source of those cells and what does it source of those cells and what does it source of those cells and what does it actually mean to use this embionic stem actually mean to use this embionic stem actually mean to use this embionic stem cells and yet we've learned a lot about cells and yet we've learned a lot about cells and yet we've learned a lot about those cells in early days. what are the those cells in early days. what are the those cells in early days. what are the properties of those cells? And then properties of those cells? And then properties of those cells? And then almost 20 years ago, uh Shiny Yamanako almost 20 years ago, uh Shiny Yamanako almost 20 years ago, uh Shiny Yamanako is a scientist in Japan at the UCSF came is a scientist in Japan at the UCSF came is a scientist in Japan at the UCSF came up with an absolutely brilliant idea. up with an absolutely brilliant idea. up with an absolutely brilliant idea. You know, we were always thought that You know, we were always thought that You know, we were always thought that the development the development of the development the development of the development the development of the human or of any it's a one-way human or of any it's a one-way human or of any it's a one-way street. Once you go down development, street. Once you go down development, street. Once you go down development, you never come back. So once you start you never come back. So once you start you never come back. So once you start making you know a stem cell that is more making you know a stem cell that is more making you know a stem cell that is more restricted and then at the end you make restricted and then at the end you make restricted and then at the end you make let's say a liver cell you can never go let's say a liver cell you can never go let's say a liver cell you can never go back and become that plur potent stem back and become that plur potent stem back and become that plur potent stem cell again and that generally is thought cell again and that generally is thought cell again and that generally is thought to be useful to protect us from like to be useful to protect us from like to be useful to protect us from like cancer or like any others where we don't cancer or like any others where we don't cancer or like any others where we don't have you know parts of our hands like have you know parts of our hands like have you know parts of our hands like differentiating into something else differentiating into something else differentiating into something else and he thought that maybe you could do and he thought that maybe you could do and he thought that maybe you could do that not in a natural way in an that not in a natural way in an that not in a natural way in an artificial way and that of course would artificial way and that of course would artificial way and that of course would be very useful. So what he did is he be very useful. So what he did is he be very useful. So what he did is he went and he looked at the genes that are went and he looked at the genes that are went and he looked at the genes that are expressed in plur potent stem cells at expressed in plur potent stem cells at expressed in plur potent stem cells at very high levels. So very high very high levels. So very high very high levels. So very high levels and almost as gene therapy levels and almost as gene therapy levels and almost as gene therapy because we were talking about gene because we were talking about gene because we were talking about gene therapy. He took like the top therapy. He took like the top therapy. He took like the top couple of dozens of these genes and then couple of dozens of these genes and then couple of dozens of these genes and then started adding them inside skin cells. started adding them inside skin cells. started adding them inside skin cells. So he took skin cells initially from So he took skin cells initially from So he took skin cells initially from mice and then from human and then mice and then from human and then mice and then from human and then started adding them one by one, 2x2, started adding them one by one, 2x2, started adding them one by one, 2x2, 3x3, 4x4, 5x5, 6x6 to see whether any of 3x3, 4x4, 5x5, 6x6 to see whether any of 3x3, 4x4, 5x5, 6x6 to see whether any of those cells once they have this those cells once they have this those cells once they have this combination of genes that are expressed combination of genes that are expressed combination of genes that are expressed in purip potent stem cells would somehow in purip potent stem cells would somehow in purip potent stem cells would somehow get confused and think that they're get confused and think that they're get confused and think that they're actually a pur potent stem cell and then actually a pur potent stem cell and then actually a pur potent stem cell and then go back in time and actually become a go back in time and actually become a go back in time and actually become a plur potent stem cells. And he showed plur potent stem cells. And he showed plur potent stem cells. And he showed indeed that a combination of four is indeed that a combination of four is indeed that a combination of four is enough. Of course you can have six. And enough. Of course you can have six. And enough. Of course you can have six. And that ended up being what we today call that ended up being what we today call that ended up being what we today call the Yamanaka factor. Uh in a way it the Yamanaka factor. Uh in a way it the Yamanaka factor. Uh in a way it was like it was almost like alchemy, was like it was almost like alchemy, was like it was almost like alchemy, right? Where you sort of like, you know, right? Where you sort of like, you know, right? Where you sort of like, you know, transform something into something else, transform something into something else, transform something into something else, right? You make out of this metal, you right? You make out of this metal, you right? You make out of this metal, you make gold. It was pretty much like that. make gold. It was pretty much like that. make gold. It was pretty much like that. It was like the essence of alchemy. It was like the essence of alchemy. It was like the essence of alchemy. And it turns out that discovery was And it turns out that discovery was And it turns out that discovery was so profound because suddenly you could so profound because suddenly you could so profound because suddenly you could take a skin cell from anybody and put take a skin cell from anybody and put take a skin cell from anybody and put those genetic factors in, turn those genetic factors in, turn those genetic factors in, turn those cells into plur potent stem cells that cells into plur potent stem cells that cells into plur potent stem cells that would later on learn they're almost would later on learn they're almost would later on learn they're almost identical to those embryionic stem cells identical to those embryionic stem cells identical to those embryionic stem cells and now have those cells from any of us and now have those cells from any of us and now have those cells from any of us and use them for various purposes and use them for various purposes and use them for various purposes perhaps for let's say making blood cells perhaps for let's say making blood cells perhaps for let's say making blood cells in the future or perhaps to you know in the future or perhaps to you know in the future or perhaps to you know model something outside of the body and model something outside of the body and model something outside of the body and I was finishing my clinical training I was finishing my clinical training I was finishing my clinical training around that time and I remember even around that time and I remember even around that time and I remember even seeing that paper and of course in my seeing that paper and of course in my seeing that paper and of course in my naive at that time I thought wow this is naive at that time I thought wow this is naive at that time I thought wow this is it this is going to be you know the it this is going to be you know the it this is going to be you know the entry point for studying human entry point for studying human entry point for studying human neuroscience I was doing experiments at neuroscience I was doing experiments at neuroscience I was doing experiments at that time studying actually the cortex that time studying actually the cortex that time studying actually the cortex and recording from animals electrical and recording from animals electrical and recording from animals electrical activity of those neurons and always activity of those neurons and always activity of those neurons and always like thought it's like saw this like thought it's like saw this like thought it's like saw this disconnect between what I was seeing in disconnect between what I was seeing in disconnect between what I was seeing in the clinic which were these patients the clinic which were these patients the clinic which were these patients with severe profound autism with severe profound autism with severe profound autism and then recordings from the brain and then recordings from the brain and then recordings from the brain and thinking we're never going to be able to thinking we're never going to be able to thinking we're never going to be able to do that, how are we going to understand do that, how are we going to understand do that, how are we going to understand this complex disorder of the brain. If this complex disorder of the brain. If this complex disorder of the brain. If we cannot even listen to the activity of we cannot even listen to the activity of we cannot even listen to the activity of those cells live and then suddenly like those cells live and then suddenly like those cells live and then suddenly like seeing that discovery uh you know again seeing that discovery uh you know again seeing that discovery uh you know again naive at that time thought well that naive at that time thought well that naive at that time thought well that could be perhaps the way in which we could be perhaps the way in which we could be perhaps the way in which we could make neurons from any patient. And could make neurons from any patient. And could make neurons from any patient. And so very soon after I came to Stanford so very soon after I came to Stanford so very soon after I came to Stanford which I guess where we met uh with sort which I guess where we met uh with sort which I guess where we met uh with sort of like this idea in mind that we will of like this idea in mind that we will of like this idea in mind that we will be able to make neurons from this be able to make neurons from this be able to make neurons from this patient and rebuild maybe some of the patient and rebuild maybe some of the patient and rebuild maybe some of the cells or some of the circuits of the cells or some of the circuits of the cells or some of the circuits of the brain outside of the body without doing brain outside of the body without doing brain outside of the body without doing any harm because we're not doing a any harm because we're not doing a any harm because we're not doing a biopsy of the brain or anything biopsy of the brain or anything biopsy of the brain or anything invasive. just essentially creating a invasive. just essentially creating a invasive. just essentially creating a replica of some of those cells outside replica of some of those cells outside replica of some of those cells outside of the body and then finally study them of the body and then finally study them of the body and then finally study them at will in a dish and do all kind of at will in a dish and do all kind of at will in a dish and do all kind of experiments where you remove things and experiments where you remove things and experiments where you remove things and add things and perhaps at one day even add things and perhaps at one day even add things and perhaps at one day even develop therapeutics. And here we are 16 develop therapeutics. And here we are 16 develop therapeutics. And here we are 16 years later uh since that process really years later uh since that process really years later uh since that process really started. took a long time, but now for started. took a long time, but now for started. took a long time, but now for the first time we've gotten such a good the first time we've gotten such a good the first time we've gotten such a good understanding of some of these understanding of some of these understanding of some of these conditions and one of them in particular conditions and one of them in particular conditions and one of them in particular that actually a therapeutic is insight that actually a therapeutic is insight that actually a therapeutic is insight and we're preparing for the first and we're preparing for the first and we're preparing for the first clinical trial that is really arising clinical trial that is really arising clinical trial that is really arising exclusively through studies done with exclusively through studies done with exclusively through studies done with this human stem cell models without this human stem cell models without this human stem cell models without actually using any animal models just actually using any animal models just actually using any animal models just essentially creating recreating cells essentially creating recreating cells essentially creating recreating cells and circuits outside of the brain of and circuits outside of the brain of and circuits outside of the brain of those patients. It's amazing because it those patients. It's amazing because it those patients. It's amazing because it allows you to study human cells which allows you to study human cells which allows you to study human cells which has immense benefit. Um they're has immense benefit. Um they're has immense benefit. Um they're essentially limitless in number essentially limitless in number essentially limitless in number &gt;&gt; because all you need is one fiberblast, &gt;&gt; because all you need is one fiberblast, &gt;&gt; because all you need is one fiberblast, one skin cell or some cell that one skin cell or some cell that one skin cell or some cell that you can you can you can &gt;&gt; provide these Yamanaka factors &gt;&gt; provide these Yamanaka factors &gt;&gt; provide these Yamanaka factors &gt;&gt; uh to and essentially grow other cells. &gt;&gt; uh to and essentially grow other cells. &gt;&gt; uh to and essentially grow other cells. Um, and we'll talk about what those Um, and we'll talk about what those Um, and we'll talk about what those cells that you create are capable of cells that you create are capable of cells that you create are capable of becoming, not just cells, but circuits. becoming, not just cells, but circuits. becoming, not just cells, but circuits. Yes. In a few moments. But, um, I know Yes. In a few moments. But, um, I know Yes. In a few moments. But, um, I know it's going to be in the back of people's it's going to be in the back of people's it's going to be in the back of people's minds and certainly in the back of my minds and certainly in the back of my minds and certainly in the back of my mind. Uh, this idea that when one has a mind. Uh, this idea that when one has a mind. Uh, this idea that when one has a baby that you should, uh, keep the baby that you should, uh, keep the baby that you should, uh, keep the umbilical cord because the umbilical cord because the umbilical cord because the umbilical cord uh, contains stem cells. Usually, I cord uh, contains stem cells. Usually, I cord uh, contains stem cells. Usually, I think the umbilical cord is discarded. think the umbilical cord is discarded. think the umbilical cord is discarded. Maybe some people keep it. I don't know. Maybe some people keep it. I don't know. Maybe some people keep it. I don't know. Um, what is the current thinking on stem Um, what is the current thinking on stem Um, what is the current thinking on stem cells that reside in the umbilical cord? cells that reside in the umbilical cord? cells that reside in the umbilical cord? People pay a lot of money to freeze People pay a lot of money to freeze People pay a lot of money to freeze those and most people don't have a those and most people don't have a those and most people don't have a minus80 uh freezer around so they pay to minus80 uh freezer around so they pay to minus80 uh freezer around so they pay to do that. What is the potential for do that. What is the potential for do that. What is the potential for umbilical stem cells in the future? Is umbilical stem cells in the future? Is umbilical stem cells in the future? Is it something that parents it something that parents it something that parents &gt;&gt; I don't want to say should invest in, &gt;&gt; I don't want to say should invest in, &gt;&gt; I don't want to say should invest in, but if they have the disposable income but if they have the disposable income but if they have the disposable income uh that they would be wise to do that? uh that they would be wise to do that? uh that they would be wise to do that? So those cells uh that are collected So those cells uh that are collected So those cells uh that are collected from the umbilical cord are stem cells from the umbilical cord are stem cells from the umbilical cord are stem cells but they're already quite restricted in but they're already quite restricted in but they're already quite restricted in what they can make. what they can make. what they can make. &gt;&gt; So their applications are also &gt;&gt; So their applications are also &gt;&gt; So their applications are also restricted mostly to blood disorders. So restricted mostly to blood disorders. So restricted mostly to blood disorders. So I think it's important to keep in I think it's important to keep in I think it's important to keep in mind that they're not so like a mind that they're not so like a mind that they're not so like a universal uh you know solution to anything that uh you know solution to anything that uh you know solution to anything that would ever involve plur potent stem would ever involve plur potent stem would ever involve plur potent stem cells in the future or stem cell cells in the future or stem cell cells in the future or stem cell therapies in the future. So again, I therapies in the future. So again, I therapies in the future. So again, I think it's important to know while that think it's important to know while that think it's important to know while that while they have certain applications and while they have certain applications and while they have certain applications and there have been quite clear cases where there have been quite clear cases where there have been quite clear cases where the availability of those cells were the availability of those cells were the availability of those cells were useful in a blood disorder in that child useful in a blood disorder in that child useful in a blood disorder in that child later on, um they're certainly not, you later on, um they're certainly not, you later on, um they're certainly not, you know, they have these universal uses as know, they have these universal uses as know, they have these universal uses as maybe sometimes they're being maybe sometimes they're being maybe sometimes they're being advertised. &gt;&gt; When we hear about people typically &gt;&gt; When we hear about people typically &gt;&gt; When we hear about people typically leaving the US uh to get quote unquote leaving the US uh to get quote unquote leaving the US uh to get quote unquote stem cell injections, where are those stem cell injections, where are those stem cell injections, where are those stem cells coming from? Are they coming stem cells coming from? Are they coming stem cells coming from? Are they coming from those patients? And I should from those patients? And I should from those patients? And I should mention that there was a clinic down in mention that there was a clinic down in mention that there was a clinic down in Florida um that was offering stem cell Florida um that was offering stem cell Florida um that was offering stem cell injections into the eye for people with injections into the eye for people with injections into the eye for people with um macular degeneration and that clinic um macular degeneration and that clinic um macular degeneration and that clinic was shut down. And all stem cell was shut down. And all stem cell was shut down. And all stem cell injections in the United States, to my injections in the United States, to my injections in the United States, to my knowledge, all were shut down because knowledge, all were shut down because knowledge, all were shut down because those patients uh not only did it uh those patients uh not only did it uh those patients uh not only did it uh fail to rescue their vision, it actually fail to rescue their vision, it actually fail to rescue their vision, it actually made them go blind very quickly. made them go blind very quickly. made them go blind very quickly. &gt;&gt; Uh so the FDA shut down uh commercial &gt;&gt; Uh so the FDA shut down uh commercial &gt;&gt; Uh so the FDA shut down uh commercial stem cell injections. I think there's stem cell injections. I think there's stem cell injections. I think there's still places where they do a kind of a still places where they do a kind of a still places where they do a kind of a workaround. Yeah. workaround. Yeah. workaround. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um and it's worth mentioning that PRP &gt;&gt; Um and it's worth mentioning that PRP &gt;&gt; Um and it's worth mentioning that PRP plateletri plasma is FDA approved. It plateletri plasma is FDA approved. It plateletri plasma is FDA approved. It does not contain many if any stem cells does not contain many if any stem cells does not contain many if any stem cells despite what you might read. Um but what despite what you might read. Um but what despite what you might read. Um but what are your thoughts on like when what are your thoughts on like when what are your thoughts on like when people go down to Colombia, it seems people go down to Colombia, it seems people go down to Colombia, it seems like they go down to Colombia uh or like they go down to Colombia uh or like they go down to Colombia uh or elsewhere to get or Mexico to get stem elsewhere to get or Mexico to get stem elsewhere to get or Mexico to get stem cell injections assuming the conditions cell injections assuming the conditions cell injections assuming the conditions are clean. Um, and I say that are clean. Um, and I say that are clean. Um, and I say that because I know of at least one patient because I know of at least one patient because I know of at least one patient who was paralyzed from an injection of who was paralyzed from an injection of who was paralyzed from an injection of stem cells into their uh spinal disc, stem cells into their uh spinal disc, stem cells into their uh spinal disc, &gt;&gt; paralyzed, almost died. &gt;&gt; paralyzed, almost died. &gt;&gt; paralyzed, almost died. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Fortunately, is doing better now and it &gt;&gt; Fortunately, is doing better now and it &gt;&gt; Fortunately, is doing better now and it was because it went septic that got was because it went septic that got was because it went septic that got infected. &gt;&gt; But well, that's one of the problems &gt;&gt; But well, that's one of the problems &gt;&gt; But well, that's one of the problems very often we don't even know what is very often we don't even know what is very often we don't even know what is being injected. being injected. being injected. &gt;&gt; I think that is like a very important &gt;&gt; I think that is like a very important &gt;&gt; I think that is like a very important aspect. We don't know what is in aspect. We don't know what is in aspect. We don't know what is in sometimes are the cells from the patient sometimes are the cells from the patient sometimes are the cells from the patient that are being collected. Mhm. that are being collected. Mhm. that are being collected. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Sometimes some of this umbilical cells &gt;&gt; Sometimes some of this umbilical cells &gt;&gt; Sometimes some of this umbilical cells sometimes we don't even know what cells sometimes we don't even know what cells sometimes we don't even know what cells are being injected. are being injected. are being injected. &gt;&gt; Like it could be cells from somebody &gt;&gt; Like it could be cells from somebody &gt;&gt; Like it could be cells from somebody else. &gt;&gt; Yeah. They're incredibly risky &gt;&gt; Yeah. They're incredibly risky &gt;&gt; Yeah. They're incredibly risky procedures of course that never really procedures of course that never really procedures of course that never really been observed. There have been very few been observed. There have been very few been observed. There have been very few of any clinical trials trying to really of any clinical trials trying to really of any clinical trials trying to really address it in a very systematic way. And address it in a very systematic way. And address it in a very systematic way. And very often that's also the case you know very often that's also the case you know very often that's also the case you know that's also because they're not really that's also because they're not really that's also because they're not really justified. So in the context of autism justified. So in the context of autism justified. So in the context of autism this is very often like done uh you know this is very often like done uh you know this is very often like done uh you know and it's done not just in South America. and it's done not just in South America. and it's done not just in South America. Sometimes there are places in Europe Sometimes there are places in Europe Sometimes there are places in Europe where you can get an injection of some where you can get an injection of some where you can get an injection of some stem cells for autism. stem cells for autism. stem cells for autism. &gt;&gt; Wait, parents are taking their kids to &gt;&gt; Wait, parents are taking their kids to &gt;&gt; Wait, parents are taking their kids to these clinics and getting them injected these clinics and getting them injected these clinics and getting them injected with stem cells that come from some with stem cells that come from some with stem cells that come from some other patient. other patient. other patient. &gt;&gt; Some some cells that are collected &gt;&gt; Some some cells that are collected &gt;&gt; Some some cells that are collected either from the patient, you know, it either from the patient, you know, it either from the patient, you know, it depends a little bit on where it's done depends a little bit on where it's done depends a little bit on where it's done and how it's actually done. and how it's actually done. and how it's actually done. &gt;&gt; But again, even from a biological point &gt;&gt; But again, even from a biological point &gt;&gt; But again, even from a biological point of view, you know, what are those stem of view, you know, what are those stem of view, you know, what are those stem cells presumably doing? Let's say in cells presumably doing? Let's say in cells presumably doing? Let's say in autism, you know, we don't think that autism, you know, we don't think that autism, you know, we don't think that there is a cell type that is missing in there is a cell type that is missing in there is a cell type that is missing in the brain. So, it's not like those cells the brain. So, it's not like those cells the brain. So, it's not like those cells can go. And I think as I was mentioning can go. And I think as I was mentioning can go. And I think as I was mentioning before most of the cells already before most of the cells already before most of the cells already restricted in their potential they can restricted in their potential they can restricted in their potential they can no longer make any cell type. So you no longer make any cell type. So you no longer make any cell type. So you know the idea that you take these plur know the idea that you take these plur know the idea that you take these plur potent stem cells uh and you just inject potent stem cells uh and you just inject potent stem cells uh and you just inject them let's say in the knee and it will them let's say in the knee and it will them let's say in the knee and it will like miraculously grow you know like miraculously grow you know like miraculously grow you know cartilage it's uh very often not really cartilage it's uh very often not really cartilage it's uh very often not really the case because those cells are not the case because those cells are not the case because those cells are not even capable of making cartilage. So I even capable of making cartilage. So I even capable of making cartilage. So I think there's you know very often um you think there's you know very often um you think there's you know very often um you know a lack of understanding of what know a lack of understanding of what know a lack of understanding of what these therapies really are and then of these therapies really are and then of these therapies really are and then of course there is sadly a lack of course there is sadly a lack of course there is sadly a lack of understanding what of what is actually understanding what of what is actually understanding what of what is actually being injected. So uh you know for being injected. So uh you know for being injected. So uh you know for autism this is unfortunately happening autism this is unfortunately happening autism this is unfortunately happening much more often that you would think. much more often that you would think. much more often that you would think. &gt;&gt; So I very often get like parents uh or &gt;&gt; So I very often get like parents uh or &gt;&gt; So I very often get like parents uh or families that are asking me desperately families that are asking me desperately families that are asking me desperately you know we've like exhausted all you know we've like exhausted all you know we've like exhausted all resource we don't know what else to do. resource we don't know what else to do. resource we don't know what else to do. We've tried behavioral therapy. we've We've tried behavioral therapy. we've We've tried behavioral therapy. we've tried this therapist, nothing works and tried this therapist, nothing works and tried this therapist, nothing works and everybody's recommended that we should everybody's recommended that we should everybody's recommended that we should just go now to South America and do this just go now to South America and do this just go now to South America and do this injection. Should we do it or not? injection. Should we do it or not? injection. Should we do it or not? Right? And of course, my answer is Right? And of course, my answer is Right? And of course, my answer is always like no because again there's no always like no because again there's no always like no because again there's no reason that would work. Some reason that would work. Some reason that would work. Some parents come back and of course they parents come back and of course they parents come back and of course they report an improvement report an improvement report an improvement and uh which is generally uh temporary and uh which is generally uh temporary and uh which is generally uh temporary uh to the extent that we know of course uh to the extent that we know of course uh to the extent that we know of course it's never really been studied in a very it's never really been studied in a very it's never really been studied in a very systematic way. Partly it's of course systematic way. Partly it's of course systematic way. Partly it's of course there's a very strong placebo effect uh there's a very strong placebo effect uh there's a very strong placebo effect uh which you can you know especially in which you can you know especially in which you can you know especially in parents like by proxy when you have a parents like by proxy when you have a parents like by proxy when you have a child who's like very sick those placebo child who's like very sick those placebo child who's like very sick those placebo effects are very strong. These effects are very strong. These effects are very strong. These parents really want those kids to parents really want those kids to parents really want those kids to improve. So they will see things that improve. So they will see things that improve. So they will see things that are improving plus those are still are improving plus those are still are improving plus those are still developing kids. So week by week they developing kids. So week by week they developing kids. So week by week they may acquire new milestones. And then the may acquire new milestones. And then the may acquire new milestones. And then the other thing uh which of course could be other thing uh which of course could be other thing uh which of course could be part of this is that there is an part of this is that there is an part of this is that there is an inflammatory effect very often and so inflammatory effect very often and so inflammatory effect very often and so that's almost like the fever in a way that's almost like the fever in a way that's almost like the fever in a way right like would increase perhaps some right like would increase perhaps some right like would increase perhaps some of the cytoines will create a fever of the cytoines will create a fever of the cytoines will create a fever perhaps that is associated we don't perhaps that is associated we don't perhaps that is associated we don't really know but certainly there are really know but certainly there are really know but certainly there are dangers uh associated with the you know dangers uh associated with the you know dangers uh associated with the you know with like procedures like this that are with like procedures like this that are with like procedures like this that are you know lack the rationale first of all you know lack the rationale first of all you know lack the rationale first of all and then of course then they lack any and then of course then they lack any and then of course then they lack any regulatory uh um you know framework regulatory uh um you know framework regulatory uh um you know framework work. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I think the concern is &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I think the concern is &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I think the concern is very real for stem cell injections into very real for stem cell injections into very real for stem cell injections into all tissues, but when it comes to eyes all tissues, but when it comes to eyes all tissues, but when it comes to eyes or brain, and of course, eyes are brain. or brain, and of course, eyes are brain. or brain, and of course, eyes are brain. Yes. &gt;&gt; Uh that's where I just, you know, take a &gt;&gt; Uh that's where I just, you know, take a &gt;&gt; Uh that's where I just, you know, take a big deep breath and hold it and like big deep breath and hold it and like big deep breath and hold it and like wide eye like, oh my goodness, no. wide eye like, oh my goodness, no. wide eye like, oh my goodness, no. Because &gt;&gt; we don't get new neurons. Uh you lose &gt;&gt; we don't get new neurons. Uh you lose &gt;&gt; we don't get new neurons. Uh you lose neurons, they're gone. I mean, we get a neurons, they're gone. I mean, we get a neurons, they're gone. I mean, we get a few in the alactory bulb in the dentate few in the alactory bulb in the dentate few in the alactory bulb in the dentate gyus of the hippocampus, a few. But, you gyus of the hippocampus, a few. But, you gyus of the hippocampus, a few. But, you know, once they're gone, that's it, know, once they're gone, that's it, know, once they're gone, that's it, &gt;&gt; right? And um injecting something into &gt;&gt; right? And um injecting something into &gt;&gt; right? And um injecting something into the brain, the probability of tumor the brain, the probability of tumor the brain, the probability of tumor growth is incredibly high. growth is incredibly high. growth is incredibly high. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And especially when it is in &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And especially when it is in &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And especially when it is in the brain where there's not enough the brain where there's not enough the brain where there's not enough space, right? So we know that anything space, right? So we know that anything space, right? So we know that anything that grows in the cranial cavity will that grows in the cranial cavity will that grows in the cranial cavity will actually push down right vital center. actually push down right vital center. actually push down right vital center. So there are certainly risks associated So there are certainly risks associated So there are certainly risks associated with that. with that. with that. &gt;&gt; So let's talk about the other approach &gt;&gt; So let's talk about the other approach &gt;&gt; So let's talk about the other approach uh which is the one that you are uh which is the one that you are uh which is the one that you are uh you've been embarking on. I'll never you've been embarking on. I'll never you've been embarking on. I'll never forget when we were posttos folks. We forget when we were posttos folks. We forget when we were posttos folks. We were posttos in the same room. It was were posttos in the same room. It was were posttos in the same room. It was D222. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Uh we had a lot of pride in that room. &gt;&gt; Uh we had a lot of pride in that room. &gt;&gt; Uh we had a lot of pride in that room. We had benches on opposite sides of the We had benches on opposite sides of the We had benches on opposite sides of the room and room and room and &gt;&gt; we sort of uh took over that room as an &gt;&gt; we sort of uh took over that room as an &gt;&gt; we sort of uh took over that room as an empty room. This is you probably empty room. This is you probably empty room. This is you probably couldn't do this anymore, but was like couldn't do this anymore, but was like couldn't do this anymore, but was like there's an empty room. Let's bring some there's an empty room. Let's bring some there's an empty room. Let's bring some microscopes in there. We just started microscopes in there. We just started microscopes in there. We just started doing experiments there. And I'll never doing experiments there. And I'll never doing experiments there. And I'll never forget um when you forget um when you forget um when you started building organoids, you started building organoids, you started building organoids, you started building nervous systems in a dish building nervous systems in a dish building nervous systems in a dish and how excited you were and uh and it's and how excited you were and uh and it's and how excited you were and uh and it's been remarkable to see your arc uh been remarkable to see your arc uh been remarkable to see your arc uh to from that. Um and it's not lost on me to from that. Um and it's not lost on me to from that. Um and it's not lost on me that you were working extremely hard that you were working extremely hard that you were working extremely hard then continue to become what really then continue to become what really then continue to become what really one of the luminaries of this field. Um one of the luminaries of this field. Um one of the luminaries of this field. Um tell us what organoids are. tell us why tell us what organoids are. tell us why tell us what organoids are. tell us why they're useful and they're useful and they're useful and what they're telling us already about what they're telling us already about what they're telling us already about how the brain develops and their how the brain develops and their how the brain develops and their therapeutic potential. therapeutic potential. therapeutic potential. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So let's start from the beginning. So &gt;&gt; So let's start from the beginning. So &gt;&gt; So let's start from the beginning. So around like you know 15 16 years ago we around like you know 15 16 years ago we around like you know 15 16 years ago we were able for the first time to get some were able for the first time to get some were able for the first time to get some of the cells that are now known as of the cells that are now known as of the cells that are now known as induced puripotent stem cells. induced puripotent stem cells. induced puripotent stem cells. &gt;&gt; These are the Yamanaka. &gt;&gt; These are the Yamanaka. &gt;&gt; These are the Yamanaka. &gt;&gt; Yes. Or IPS cells. IPS. So induced &gt;&gt; Yes. Or IPS cells. IPS. So induced &gt;&gt; Yes. Or IPS cells. IPS. So induced because they've been induced to become because they've been induced to become because they've been induced to become plur potent in an artificial way but plur potent in an artificial way but plur potent in an artificial way but again they stay like that. So you can again they stay like that. So you can again they stay like that. So you can share them with anybody else like share them with anybody else like share them with anybody else like afterwards. So we got some of those afterwards. So we got some of those afterwards. So we got some of those first cells in those early days and now first cells in those early days and now first cells in those early days and now the question was how do we make neurons the question was how do we make neurons the question was how do we make neurons and what you do is you really kind like and what you do is you really kind like and what you do is you really kind like leverage the everything that is known in leverage the everything that is known in leverage the everything that is known in developmental biology. Right? So we developmental biology. Right? So we developmental biology. Right? So we already know that there are certain already know that there are certain already know that there are certain molecules that are very important for molecules that are very important for molecules that are very important for making neurons. So all you do is you put making neurons. So all you do is you put making neurons. So all you do is you put those cells in a dish, right? In a those cells in a dish, right? In a those cells in a dish, right? In a plastic dish, in a petri dish, and then plastic dish, in a petri dish, and then plastic dish, in a petri dish, and then you start almost like when you cook, you start almost like when you cook, you start almost like when you cook, you start adding various molecules on top start adding various molecules on top start adding various molecules on top and you see what happens. And we knew and you see what happens. And we knew and you see what happens. And we knew that it's actually quite easy to make that it's actually quite easy to make that it's actually quite easy to make neurons. That was already known. There neurons. That was already known. There neurons. That was already known. There have been a lot of experiments done the have been a lot of experiments done the have been a lot of experiments done the decade before that showed that even if decade before that showed that even if decade before that showed that even if you just remove some of the factors that you just remove some of the factors that you just remove some of the factors that maintain those cells pur potent those maintain those cells pur potent those maintain those cells pur potent those pur potent stem cell will start not to pur potent stem cell will start not to pur potent stem cell will start not to differentiate and they like to become differentiate and they like to become differentiate and they like to become neural cells neural cells neural cells &gt;&gt; by default &gt;&gt; by default &gt;&gt; by default &gt;&gt; almost by default. So it's actually not &gt;&gt; almost by default. So it's actually not &gt;&gt; almost by default. So it's actually not that difficult to make neurons. So in that difficult to make neurons. So in that difficult to make neurons. So in those early days you know you'll take those early days you know you'll take those early days you know you'll take those cells play them nicely those plur those cells play them nicely those plur those cells play them nicely those plur potent stem cells in a dish and then potent stem cells in a dish and then potent stem cells in a dish and then remove some of these factors and then remove some of these factors and then remove some of these factors and then within a few days you'll see that within a few days you'll see that within a few days you'll see that they'll change shape and within a few they'll change shape and within a few they'll change shape and within a few weeks some of them will really look like weeks some of them will really look like weeks some of them will really look like neurons and uh when you look at them you can and uh when you look at them you can and uh when you look at them you can even sort of like look at proteins that even sort of like look at proteins that even sort of like look at proteins that only neurons will have you can actually only neurons will have you can actually only neurons will have you can actually get an electrode inside a cell and get an electrode inside a cell and get an electrode inside a cell and listen to the electrical activity. So it listen to the electrical activity. So it listen to the electrical activity. So it was very exciting as maybe you remember was very exciting as maybe you remember was very exciting as maybe you remember in those days. Uh I mean you know this in those days. Uh I mean you know this in those days. Uh I mean you know this uh bursting curiosity is always sort of uh bursting curiosity is always sort of uh bursting curiosity is always sort of like uh you know the ATP of the li the like uh you know the ATP of the li the like uh you know the ATP of the li the you know the life in the lab so to you know the life in the lab so to you know the life in the lab so to speak. It is speak. It is speak. It is &gt;&gt; right. I mean you just like want to &gt;&gt; right. I mean you just like want to &gt;&gt; right. I mean you just like want to wake up right and want to go see what wake up right and want to go see what wake up right and want to go see what happened to those cells. happened to those cells. happened to those cells. &gt;&gt; And it was clear in those days that you &gt;&gt; And it was clear in those days that you &gt;&gt; And it was clear in those days that you know we would be able to make those know we would be able to make those know we would be able to make those cells but would we actually see any cells but would we actually see any cells but would we actually see any abnormalities in those cells? I think it abnormalities in those cells? I think it abnormalities in those cells? I think it was like the question, you know, how was like the question, you know, how was like the question, you know, how would you know if you derive cells from would you know if you derive cells from would you know if you derive cells from a patient with autism, how would you a patient with autism, how would you a patient with autism, how would you know that you found anything abnormal? I know that you found anything abnormal? I know that you found anything abnormal? I think that was like uh the question think that was like uh the question think that was like uh the question what, you know, we didn't even know what what, you know, we didn't even know what what, you know, we didn't even know what would be abnormal in the brain. And so would be abnormal in the brain. And so would be abnormal in the brain. And so that's when we decided actually to focus that's when we decided actually to focus that's when we decided actually to focus on something that would be relatively on something that would be relatively on something that would be relatively predictable. And that was this mutation predictable. And that was this mutation predictable. And that was this mutation in a calcium channel which was in a calcium channel which was in a calcium channel which was discovered just a few years before in discovered just a few years before in discovered just a few years before in very few patients that had essentially very few patients that had essentially very few patients that had essentially one single letter in their entire genome one single letter in their entire genome one single letter in their entire genome changed in a gene that makes a protein changed in a gene that makes a protein changed in a gene that makes a protein known as a calcium channel sits in known as a calcium channel sits in known as a calcium channel sits in excitable cells meaning cardiac cells excitable cells meaning cardiac cells excitable cells meaning cardiac cells and brain cells. And every time a cell and brain cells. And every time a cell and brain cells. And every time a cell receives electrical input, this protein receives electrical input, this protein receives electrical input, this protein opens up and lets calcium go inside the opens up and lets calcium go inside the opens up and lets calcium go inside the cell. And that's very important because cell. And that's very important because cell. And that's very important because it couples electrical activity of the it couples electrical activity of the it couples electrical activity of the network with chemical activity inside network with chemical activity inside network with chemical activity inside the cells. And what we knew about that the cells. And what we knew about that the cells. And what we knew about that mutation at that point, that's pretty mutation at that point, that's pretty mutation at that point, that's pretty much all we knew in those early days is much all we knew in those early days is much all we knew in those early days is that it probably that it probably that it probably allows the channels to stay open allows the channels to stay open allows the channels to stay open slightly longer, just a little bit slightly longer, just a little bit slightly longer, just a little bit longer, so more calcium would go inside longer, so more calcium would go inside longer, so more calcium would go inside the cells. Of course, there would be no the cells. Of course, there would be no the cells. Of course, there would be no way to know because you can't get a way to know because you can't get a way to know because you can't get a neuron or a cardiac cell from those neuron or a cardiac cell from those neuron or a cardiac cell from those patients to actually test it. So, what patients to actually test it. So, what patients to actually test it. So, what we did is essentially we made uh we did is essentially we made uh we did is essentially we made uh we recruited some of these patients, we recruited some of these patients, we recruited some of these patients, we flew them to Stanford. Uh then we got a flew them to Stanford. Uh then we got a flew them to Stanford. Uh then we got a tiny skin biopsy, made this IPS cells. tiny skin biopsy, made this IPS cells. tiny skin biopsy, made this IPS cells. This takes months. This takes already This takes months. This takes already This takes months. This takes already like four or five months. And then we like four or five months. And then we like four or five months. And then we took those cells in a dish, started to took those cells in a dish, started to took those cells in a dish, started to deriving neurons. And after about 5 6 7 deriving neurons. And after about 5 6 7 deriving neurons. And after about 5 6 7 weeks then we put them under a weeks then we put them under a weeks then we put them under a microscope and we started looking at microscope and we started looking at microscope and we started looking at calcium. You can measure calcium inside calcium. You can measure calcium inside calcium. You can measure calcium inside cells through a microscope and just cells through a microscope and just cells through a microscope and just literally look at it. And I'll never literally look at it. And I'll never literally look at it. And I'll never forget that day um you know when we did forget that day um you know when we did forget that day um you know when we did that experiment was looking down the that experiment was looking down the that experiment was looking down the microscope and we essentially stimulated microscope and we essentially stimulated microscope and we essentially stimulated the neurons and you could just see how the neurons and you could just see how the neurons and you could just see how control cells will go calcium goes control cells will go calcium goes control cells will go calcium goes inside the cells and then it goes out. inside the cells and then it goes out. inside the cells and then it goes out. And then in patients that had timidity And then in patients that had timidity And then in patients that had timidity syndromes in timothy syndrome derived syndromes in timothy syndrome derived syndromes in timothy syndrome derived neurons you could see how the calcium neurons you could see how the calcium neurons you could see how the calcium will go and then it will stay longer. It will go and then it will stay longer. It will go and then it will stay longer. It takes longer to go out. So it's like the takes longer to go out. So it's like the takes longer to go out. So it's like the first defect that we saw in patientder first defect that we saw in patientder first defect that we saw in patientder derived neurons that were actually not derived neurons that were actually not derived neurons that were actually not coming from a biopsy. They were not coming from a biopsy. They were not coming from a biopsy. They were not coming. So that was incredibly exciting coming. So that was incredibly exciting coming. So that was incredibly exciting as you can imagine but it was still as you can imagine but it was still as you can imagine but it was still relatively simplistic. Just a few relatively simplistic. Just a few relatively simplistic. Just a few neurons at a bottom of a dish. Of neurons at a bottom of a dish. Of neurons at a bottom of a dish. Of course, for me, what was particularly course, for me, what was particularly course, for me, what was particularly frustrating was that we couldn't go very frustrating was that we couldn't go very frustrating was that we couldn't go very far in development. So, think about the far in development. So, think about the far in development. So, think about the cerebral cortex, the outer layer of the cerebral cortex, the outer layer of the cerebral cortex, the outer layer of the brain that presumably makes us human, brain that presumably makes us human, brain that presumably makes us human, right? Has multiple layers, a large right? Has multiple layers, a large right? Has multiple layers, a large diversity of neurons. You know, it takes diversity of neurons. You know, it takes diversity of neurons. You know, it takes 27 weeks to make all those cells in the 27 weeks to make all those cells in the 27 weeks to make all those cells in the cortex. 27 weeks to make all those cortex. 27 weeks to make all those cortex. 27 weeks to make all those neurons. And we're not even talking neurons. And we're not even talking neurons. And we're not even talking about gal cells, the supporting cells about gal cells, the supporting cells about gal cells, the supporting cells that are coming much later for several that are coming much later for several that are coming much later for several years afterwards. But just making those years afterwards. But just making those years afterwards. But just making those cells takes about 27 weeks. And it turns cells takes about 27 weeks. And it turns cells takes about 27 weeks. And it turns out something that we discovered in a uh out something that we discovered in a uh out something that we discovered in a uh through experiments done in a dish is through experiments done in a dish is through experiments done in a dish is that the timing of the development of that the timing of the development of that the timing of the development of those cells, it's actually recapitulated those cells, it's actually recapitulated those cells, it's actually recapitulated in a dish as well. So if you keep the in a dish as well. So if you keep the in a dish as well. So if you keep the cells in a dish, they'll actually cells in a dish, they'll actually cells in a dish, they'll actually essentially develop at the same pace. essentially develop at the same pace. essentially develop at the same pace. They're not like much faster. And it's They're not like much faster. And it's They're not like much faster. And it's very difficult to keep neurons in a dish very difficult to keep neurons in a dish very difficult to keep neurons in a dish for 27 weeks to get all the neurons. for 27 weeks to get all the neurons. for 27 weeks to get all the neurons. essentially they peel off, you know, essentially they peel off, you know, essentially they peel off, you know, every time you start to move them to every time you start to move them to every time you start to move them to another plate and at one point they just another plate and at one point they just another plate and at one point they just die. And so then we thought, how about die. And so then we thought, how about die. And so then we thought, how about like never letting them to sit down on a like never letting them to sit down on a like never letting them to sit down on a surface? How about just essentially surface? How about just essentially surface? How about just essentially aggregating them as bowls of cells and aggregating them as bowls of cells and aggregating them as bowls of cells and then letting those float? And in those then letting those float? And in those then letting those float? And in those early days there was this uh amazing uh early days there was this uh amazing uh early days there was this uh amazing uh scientist from Japan, Yoshiki Sasai who scientist from Japan, Yoshiki Sasai who scientist from Japan, Yoshiki Sasai who started doing uh really beautiful started doing uh really beautiful started doing uh really beautiful experiments where he was already moving experiments where he was already moving experiments where he was already moving some of this studies that he was doing some of this studies that he was doing some of this studies that he was doing of development in 3D cultures. So he of development in 3D cultures. So he of development in 3D cultures. So he show you can make an optic cup a part of show you can make an optic cup a part of show you can make an optic cup a part of the eye. And so it was clear it was in the eye. And so it was clear it was in the eye. And so it was clear it was in the air this revolution of actually the air this revolution of actually the air this revolution of actually moving cells from 2D flat cultures to 3D moving cells from 2D flat cultures to 3D moving cells from 2D flat cultures to 3D self-organizing. And that actually self-organizing. And that actually self-organizing. And that actually unleashed amazing uh new properties of unleashed amazing uh new properties of unleashed amazing uh new properties of the cells. So essentially all we did in the cells. So essentially all we did in the cells. So essentially all we did in those days is I ordered from Germany those days is I ordered from Germany those days is I ordered from Germany this plates that were counterintuitively this plates that were counterintuitively this plates that were counterintuitively coded so the cells never stick right. I coded so the cells never stick right. I coded so the cells never stick right. I mean every time we keep cells in a dish mean every time we keep cells in a dish mean every time we keep cells in a dish you want them to stick. That's the major you want them to stick. That's the major you want them to stick. That's the major problem. So they were actually coated so problem. So they were actually coated so problem. So they were actually coated so the cells will never stick. And then the cells will never stick. And then the cells will never stick. And then there were like this bowls of cells. there were like this bowls of cells. there were like this bowls of cells. They were floating there. And of course They were floating there. And of course They were floating there. And of course I remember uh talking in the lab and I remember uh talking in the lab and I remember uh talking in the lab and everybody was like oh they're not going everybody was like oh they're not going everybody was like oh they're not going to survive. It's going to be a couple of to survive. It's going to be a couple of to survive. It's going to be a couple of weeks and they're gonna and then a week weeks and they're gonna and then a week weeks and they're gonna and then a week passed and two week passed and then they passed and two week passed and then they passed and two week passed and then they kept growing and growing and of course kept growing and growing and of course kept growing and growing and of course the enthusiasm of every day to see the enthusiasm of every day to see the enthusiasm of every day to see are they still alive right and then we are they still alive right and then we are they still alive right and then we discovered that we can keep them for discovered that we can keep them for discovered that we can keep them for months. Uh and this three-dimensional months. Uh and this three-dimensional months. Uh and this three-dimensional cultures uh are now known as organoids cultures uh are now known as organoids cultures uh are now known as organoids which is perhaps not the most fortunate which is perhaps not the most fortunate which is perhaps not the most fortunate name because it suggests that it's name because it suggests that it's name because it suggests that it's organike and of course they're not an organike and of course they're not an organike and of course they're not an entire organ. So they're not a entire organ. So they're not a entire organ. So they're not a representation of the entire brain, but representation of the entire brain, but representation of the entire brain, but that's sort of like the term that we that's sort of like the term that we that's sort of like the term that we refer these days to anything that is so refer these days to anything that is so refer these days to anything that is so like three-dimensional and organizing in like three-dimensional and organizing in like three-dimensional and organizing in some way. And so we started keeping some way. And so we started keeping some way. And so we started keeping these cultures. And then at one point these cultures. And then at one point these cultures. And then at one point actually we discovered that we can actually we discovered that we can actually we discovered that we can pretty much keep them indefinitely. My pretty much keep them indefinitely. My pretty much keep them indefinitely. My lab maintained the longest cultures that lab maintained the longest cultures that lab maintained the longest cultures that have ever been reported like literally have ever been reported like literally have ever been reported like literally going for years for two three years in a going for years for two three years in a going for years for two three years in a dish. And at one point uh in those early dish. And at one point uh in those early dish. And at one point uh in those early days when actually I was running out of days when actually I was running out of days when actually I was running out of funds in the lab and I came one day in funds in the lab and I came one day in funds in the lab and I came one day in lab meeting really lab meeting really lab meeting really uh you know determined to for us to uh you know determined to for us to uh you know determined to for us to actually like cut cost. So I've told actually like cut cost. So I've told actually like cut cost. So I've told everybody go into your incubators everybody go into your incubators everybody go into your incubators because we're spending so much money in because we're spending so much money in because we're spending so much money in feeding the cells and everybody throws feeding the cells and everybody throws feeding the cells and everybody throws out 20% of your cultures. And then out 20% of your cultures. And then out 20% of your cultures. And then people started saying so should I throw people started saying so should I throw people started saying so should I throw the ones that are like 500 days old? and the ones that are like 500 days old? and the ones that are like 500 days old? and somebody else was like the ones that are somebody else was like the ones that are somebody else was like the ones that are 800 days old and I said what you guys 800 days old and I said what you guys 800 days old and I said what you guys are keeping them for such long yeah are keeping them for such long yeah are keeping them for such long yeah they're just keep growing they're in the they're just keep growing they're in the they're just keep growing they're in the incubator. So then we actually did the incubator. So then we actually did the incubator. So then we actually did the first study and then we had a series of first study and then we had a series of first study and then we had a series of three studies done over the years of three studies done over the years of three studies done over the years of like trying to ask how far do they go in like trying to ask how far do they go in like trying to ask how far do they go in development. So if you have a clump of development. So if you have a clump of development. So if you have a clump of human neurons that you've made from human neurons that you've made from human neurons that you've made from pluropotent stem cells and you keep pluropotent stem cells and you keep pluropotent stem cells and you keep feeding them in a dish how far do they feeding them in a dish how far do they feeding them in a dish how far do they go in development? Do they move much go in development? Do they move much go in development? Do they move much faster? Do they move much slower? Are faster? Do they move much slower? Are faster? Do they move much slower? Are they stuck at one point in development? they stuck at one point in development? they stuck at one point in development? And it turns out that they actually keep And it turns out that they actually keep And it turns out that they actually keep track of development beautifully to such track of development beautifully to such track of development beautifully to such an extent that for instance we discover an extent that for instance we discover an extent that for instance we discover when they reach nine months of keeping when they reach nine months of keeping when they reach nine months of keeping them in a dish. So about the time of them in a dish. So about the time of them in a dish. So about the time of birth they literally switch to a birth they literally switch to a birth they literally switch to a post-natal signature post-natal signature post-natal signature &gt;&gt; really &gt;&gt; really &gt;&gt; really &gt;&gt; on their own in a dish &gt;&gt; on their own in a dish &gt;&gt; on their own in a dish &gt;&gt; in a dish. So you know there's this &gt;&gt; in a dish. So you know there's this &gt;&gt; in a dish. So you know there's this classic example in developmental classic example in developmental classic example in developmental neurobiology. There is this uh neurobiology. There is this uh neurobiology. There is this uh there's this uh protein that usually there's this uh protein that usually there's this uh protein that usually changes around the time of birth. It's changes around the time of birth. It's changes around the time of birth. It's an NNDA receptor. So maybe some people an NNDA receptor. So maybe some people an NNDA receptor. So maybe some people know about NNDA receptors. They're know about NNDA receptors. They're know about NNDA receptors. They're binding glutamate. They're very binding glutamate. They're very binding glutamate. They're very important, but they change a lot during important, but they change a lot during important, but they change a lot during development. They're made out of development. They're made out of development. They're made out of different units. And the units change. different units. And the units change. different units. And the units change. And it was very well known that during And it was very well known that during And it was very well known that during early development, so prenatal before early development, so prenatal before early development, so prenatal before birth, you primarily have 2B subunits. birth, you primarily have 2B subunits. birth, you primarily have 2B subunits. And then after birth, they're primarily And then after birth, they're primarily And then after birth, they're primarily 2 A. So if you look in brain 2 A. So if you look in brain 2 A. So if you look in brain development, you just see how development, you just see how development, you just see how essentially 2B goes up and then it goes essentially 2B goes up and then it goes essentially 2B goes up and then it goes down and 2 A goes up. And when you look, down and 2 A goes up. And when you look, down and 2 A goes up. And when you look, they meet around birth. So very often they meet around birth. So very often they meet around birth. So very often people thought that it's birth itself people thought that it's birth itself people thought that it's birth itself that triggers that switch. That that triggers that switch. That that triggers that switch. That canonical, it's called a canonical canonical, it's called a canonical canonical, it's called a canonical switch cuz we all thought that it was switch cuz we all thought that it was switch cuz we all thought that it was like so classic. And then you take an like so classic. And then you take an like so classic. And then you take an organoid that you maintain in the dish organoid that you maintain in the dish organoid that you maintain in the dish for 600 days. for 600 days. for 600 days. And of course, we're not inducing birth. And of course, we're not inducing birth. And of course, we're not inducing birth. We're not changing media. We're not We're not changing media. We're not We're not changing media. We're not doing anything special. doing anything special. doing anything special. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No hormones from &gt;&gt; Yeah. No hormones from &gt;&gt; Yeah. No hormones from &gt;&gt; no hormones changes like you know we &gt;&gt; no hormones changes like you know we &gt;&gt; no hormones changes like you know we keep exactly the same media which is keep exactly the same media which is keep exactly the same media which is certainly a very simplistic uh you certainly a very simplistic uh you certainly a very simplistic uh you know kind of like soup of chemicals but know kind of like soup of chemicals but know kind of like soup of chemicals but we don't change it and then you just we don't change it and then you just we don't change it and then you just look at these two subunits and you see look at these two subunits and you see look at these two subunits and you see how like 2B goes down and 2 A goes up how like 2B goes down and 2 A goes up how like 2B goes down and 2 A goes up and they pretty much meet that nine and they pretty much meet that nine and they pretty much meet that nine months of keeping them in a dish. months of keeping them in a dish. months of keeping them in a dish. &gt;&gt; It's amazing. &gt;&gt; It's amazing. &gt;&gt; It's amazing. &gt;&gt; So that tells us that there's some sort &gt;&gt; So that tells us that there's some sort &gt;&gt; So that tells us that there's some sort of intrinsic clock once you start a of intrinsic clock once you start a of intrinsic clock once you start a development the cells measure really development the cells measure really development the cells measure really well the time of development. really well the time of development. really well the time of development. That does not mean that all aspects of That does not mean that all aspects of That does not mean that all aspects of development are going to now be development are going to now be development are going to now be recapitulating in a dish. But it tells recapitulating in a dish. But it tells recapitulating in a dish. But it tells us that there is this incredible ability us that there is this incredible ability us that there is this incredible ability of cells especially in the nervous of cells especially in the nervous of cells especially in the nervous system because of course those cells system because of course those cells system because of course those cells will keep for the rest of our lives. will keep for the rest of our lives. will keep for the rest of our lives. We're not never going to renew neurons. We're not never going to renew neurons. We're not never going to renew neurons. It's going to be different for liver It's going to be different for liver It's going to be different for liver cells or gut cell but for neurons cells or gut cell but for neurons cells or gut cell but for neurons probably in particular they'll need to probably in particular they'll need to probably in particular they'll need to keep track of time really well. keep track of time really well. keep track of time really well. So that was like the first discovery So that was like the first discovery So that was like the first discovery that we've sort of like made which is that we've sort of like made which is that we've sort of like made which is still stunning today. We still don't still stunning today. We still don't still stunning today. We still don't know the mechanism. We're still working know the mechanism. We're still working know the mechanism. We're still working really hard on figuring out exactly how really hard on figuring out exactly how really hard on figuring out exactly how the cells are keeping track of time the cells are keeping track of time the cells are keeping track of time because as you can imagine if we because as you can imagine if we because as you can imagine if we understand what that molecular machinery understand what that molecular machinery understand what that molecular machinery is. We used to call it the clock. We now is. We used to call it the clock. We now is. We used to call it the clock. We now call it a timer. We think it's more of a call it a timer. We think it's more of a call it a timer. We think it's more of a timer than an actual clock. Uh but timer than an actual clock. Uh but timer than an actual clock. Uh but understanding what the molecular biology understanding what the molecular biology understanding what the molecular biology of that is will allow us actually to of that is will allow us actually to of that is will allow us actually to play with that clock. Right? So if you play with that clock. Right? So if you play with that clock. Right? So if you want to make neurons that are you know want to make neurons that are you know want to make neurons that are you know 70 years old neuron from a patient with 70 years old neuron from a patient with 70 years old neuron from a patient with Parkinson, you know I don't have to wait Parkinson, you know I don't have to wait Parkinson, you know I don't have to wait 70 years in a dish. Could I make it in 70 years in a dish. Could I make it in 70 years in a dish. Could I make it in like a few weeks? Or perhaps could I like a few weeks? Or perhaps could I like a few weeks? Or perhaps could I take an aging neuron and somehow, you take an aging neuron and somehow, you take an aging neuron and somehow, you know, rejuvenate it by playing with that know, rejuvenate it by playing with that know, rejuvenate it by playing with that with that timer? But just to make it with that timer? But just to make it with that timer? But just to make it clear, we still don't know that, you clear, we still don't know that, you clear, we still don't know that, you know, we have some clues about like what know, we have some clues about like what know, we have some clues about like what it may be, but I think it's still early it may be, but I think it's still early it may be, but I think it's still early days. And I think that was like one of days. And I think that was like one of days. And I think that was like one of the first things that this cultures the first things that this cultures the first things that this cultures allowed us uh to do uh just watch allowed us uh to do uh just watch allowed us uh to do uh just watch development, human brain development development, human brain development development, human brain development outside of the human body in a dish and outside of the human body in a dish and outside of the human body in a dish and actually witness that some fundamental actually witness that some fundamental actually witness that some fundamental aspects of brain development are aspects of brain development are aspects of brain development are actually recapitulated even outside of actually recapitulated even outside of actually recapitulated even outside of the uterus and of course of the prey. So the uterus and of course of the prey. So the uterus and of course of the prey. So that was like the first and then of that was like the first and then of that was like the first and then of course I guess I'm a developmental course I guess I'm a developmental course I guess I'm a developmental neurobiologist by training and you know neurobiologist by training and you know neurobiologist by training and you know I've done a lot of circuit work in early I've done a lot of circuit work in early I've done a lot of circuit work in early days of course an obsession of mine was days of course an obsession of mine was days of course an obsession of mine was that especially for conditions as that especially for conditions as that especially for conditions as complex as autism and schizophrenia we complex as autism and schizophrenia we complex as autism and schizophrenia we need to recapitulate some of the circuit need to recapitulate some of the circuit need to recapitulate some of the circuit properties of the brain right so we now properties of the brain right so we now properties of the brain right so we now know that you know probably both for know that you know probably both for know that you know probably both for schizophrenia or and for autism it is schizophrenia or and for autism it is schizophrenia or and for autism it is very unlikely based on the evidence that very unlikely based on the evidence that very unlikely based on the evidence that we have so far that there cells really we have so far that there cells really we have so far that there cells really missing from the brain. You know, we missing from the brain. You know, we missing from the brain. You know, we thought for a while that maybe some thought for a while that maybe some thought for a while that maybe some cells are missing or maybe other cells are missing or maybe other cells are missing or maybe other cells are in, you know, in excess, but now the are in, you know, in excess, but now the are in, you know, in excess, but now the studies that have been done, especially studies that have been done, especially studies that have been done, especially with single cell profiling of brains of with single cell profiling of brains of with single cell profiling of brains of patients that have already died showed patients that have already died showed patients that have already died showed us that the composition of the brain of us that the composition of the brain of us that the composition of the brain of the cortex in particular, it's very the cortex in particular, it's very the cortex in particular, it's very similar. So, it's unlikely that the similar. So, it's unlikely that the similar. So, it's unlikely that the cells are missing or like uh but likely cells are missing or like uh but likely cells are missing or like uh but likely the way they're connecting with each the way they're connecting with each the way they're connecting with each other is that makes a difference. And of other is that makes a difference. And of other is that makes a difference. And of course, in the beginning, we were just course, in the beginning, we were just course, in the beginning, we were just making this clump of cells. They're all making this clump of cells. They're all making this clump of cells. They're all for the cortex, but they're like not for the cortex, but they're like not for the cortex, but they're like not connected to anything else. So then uh connected to anything else. So then uh connected to anything else. So then uh came the idea of assemblides came the idea of assemblides came the idea of assemblides because most of the cells in the brain because most of the cells in the brain because most of the cells in the brain connect with cells across the nervous connect with cells across the nervous connect with cells across the nervous system. And in fact, even more system. And in fact, even more system. And in fact, even more interestingly, cells do not reside in interestingly, cells do not reside in interestingly, cells do not reside in the place in which they're born in the place in which they're born in the place in which they're born in the nervous system. We have the largest cell nervous system. We have the largest cell nervous system. We have the largest cell diversity of any other organ. Almost diversity of any other organ. Almost diversity of any other organ. Almost 2,000 cell types. By the end of the 2,000 cell types. By the end of the 2,000 cell types. By the end of the first trimester, there are about 600 first trimester, there are about 600 first trimester, there are about 600 cell types in the human brain. You know, cell types in the human brain. You know, cell types in the human brain. You know, think about the liver, right? Maybe a think about the liver, right? Maybe a think about the liver, right? Maybe a couple of dozens. The brain has to make, couple of dozens. The brain has to make, couple of dozens. The brain has to make, you know, hundreds of times more. So, you know, hundreds of times more. So, you know, hundreds of times more. So, how do you do that? The only way is to how do you do that? The only way is to how do you do that? The only way is to actually make the cell types in actually make the cell types in actually make the cell types in different parts of the brain, provide different parts of the brain, provide different parts of the brain, provide local cues there, and then once the local cues there, and then once the local cues there, and then once the cells have been specified, let them move cells have been specified, let them move cells have been specified, let them move and find their final position. So the and find their final position. So the and find their final position. So the first assembly that we've actually made first assembly that we've actually made first assembly that we've actually made were of a very stereotypical canonical were of a very stereotypical canonical were of a very stereotypical canonical movement of cells in the nervous system movement of cells in the nervous system movement of cells in the nervous system which has to do again with the cortex. which has to do again with the cortex. which has to do again with the cortex. So the cortex again the outer layer of So the cortex again the outer layer of So the cortex again the outer layer of the brain has both excitatory and the brain has both excitatory and the brain has both excitatory and inhibitory neurons. It turns out that inhibitory neurons. It turns out that inhibitory neurons. It turns out that most inhibitory neurons are not born in most inhibitory neurons are not born in most inhibitory neurons are not born in the cortex but they're born deep in the cortex but they're born deep in the cortex but they're born deep in the brain. So essentially all we did is we brain. So essentially all we did is we brain. So essentially all we did is we made two brain regions. the ones that made two brain regions. the ones that made two brain regions. the ones that has excitatory neurons and the one that has excitatory neurons and the one that has excitatory neurons and the one that has inhibitory neurons and the plan was has inhibitory neurons and the plan was has inhibitory neurons and the plan was to put them together hoping that at one to put them together hoping that at one to put them together hoping that at one point you know the cells will like so point you know the cells will like so point you know the cells will like so like know what to do and in fact that like know what to do and in fact that like know what to do and in fact that was like one of the first projects in my was like one of the first projects in my was like one of the first projects in my lab kind like planning that and I lab kind like planning that and I lab kind like planning that and I remember gave to one of the students remember gave to one of the students remember gave to one of the students like this very difficult task of like this very difficult task of like this very difficult task of figuring out how we're going to fuse figuring out how we're going to fuse figuring out how we're going to fuse these two cultures and they're about 3 these two cultures and they're about 3 these two cultures and they're about 3 mm in size so you can see them by eye mm in size so you can see them by eye mm in size so you can see them by eye and I thought it's going to be very and I thought it's going to be very and I thought it's going to be very difficult to put them together so the difficult to put them together so the difficult to put them together so the student worked for months trying to student worked for months trying to student worked for months trying to figure out like biological glues figure out like biological glues figure out like biological glues you know, kind of like using various uh you know, kind of like using various uh you know, kind of like using various uh electrodes and impaling them and electrodes and impaling them and electrodes and impaling them and everything else until somebody else came everything else until somebody else came everything else until somebody else came one day and said, "Look, it's very one day and said, "Look, it's very one day and said, "Look, it's very simple. You just put them at the bottom simple. You just put them at the bottom simple. You just put them at the bottom of a tiny ependorf tube, which is the of a tiny ependorf tube, which is the of a tiny ependorf tube, which is the tiniest like of tubes that you get. You tiniest like of tubes that you get. You tiniest like of tubes that you get. You put them there overnight and next day put them there overnight and next day put them there overnight and next day they're completely fused. But they're completely fused. But they're completely fused. But they're not just fused because now if you look not just fused because now if you look not just fused because now if you look inside within a few days, the cells that inside within a few days, the cells that inside within a few days, the cells that are supposed to move start to actually are supposed to move start to actually are supposed to move start to actually point out towards the cortex. They point out towards the cortex. They point out towards the cortex. They literally smell the chemicals from the literally smell the chemicals from the literally smell the chemicals from the cortex and they start to move in this cortex and they start to move in this cortex and they start to move in this very stereotypical way towards the very stereotypical way towards the very stereotypical way towards the cortex. And so that was the first cortex. And so that was the first cortex. And so that was the first assemblid made around 2015. And I still assemblid made around 2015. And I still assemblid made around 2015. And I still remember it was Ben actually. Ben was so remember it was Ben actually. Ben was so remember it was Ben actually. Ben was so excited. Ben Baris was so excited about excited. Ben Baris was so excited about excited. Ben Baris was so excited about like seeing the cells. So he wanted to like seeing the cells. So he wanted to like seeing the cells. So he wanted to look at these movies every day. And then look at these movies every day. And then look at these movies every day. And then um he said I still have this email from um he said I still have this email from um he said I still have this email from him where he was very preoccupied that him where he was very preoccupied that him where he was very preoccupied that he kept saying like this new preparation he kept saying like this new preparation he kept saying like this new preparation is not an organoid. It's not a steroid. is not an organoid. It's not a steroid. is not an organoid. It's not a steroid. It's something else. It's something else. It's something else. &gt;&gt; You have to find another name. &gt;&gt; You have to find another name. &gt;&gt; You have to find another name. &gt;&gt; He loved naming things. &gt;&gt; He loved naming things. &gt;&gt; He loved naming things. &gt;&gt; He loved naming things and he understood &gt;&gt; He loved naming things and he understood &gt;&gt; He loved naming things and he understood the importance of naming things. Not the importance of naming things. Not the importance of naming things. Not just for like career reasons, although just for like career reasons, although just for like career reasons, although he understood a lot about how to build a he understood a lot about how to build a he understood a lot about how to build a career, but because naming career, but because naming career, but because naming like Yamanaka factors made sense to name like Yamanaka factors made sense to name like Yamanaka factors made sense to name it after Yamanaka, he got a Nobel uh and it after Yamanaka, he got a Nobel uh and it after Yamanaka, he got a Nobel uh and uh is immortalized that way like stem uh is immortalized that way like stem uh is immortalized that way like stem cells immortalized. Um but I think the cells immortalized. Um but I think the cells immortalized. Um but I think the naming is essential because otherwise um naming is essential because otherwise um naming is essential because otherwise um things can get lost in the technical things can get lost in the technical things can get lost in the technical details. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; So who came up with the name &gt;&gt; So who came up with the name &gt;&gt; So who came up with the name essentially? So, so he kept insisting essentially? So, so he kept insisting essentially? So, so he kept insisting that I should find the name. So, I made that I should find the name. So, I made that I should find the name. So, I made this long list. I still have like the in this long list. I still have like the in this long list. I still have like the in my notebook like I had a long list of my notebook like I had a long list of my notebook like I had a long list of about 20 and I would like keep sending about 20 and I would like keep sending about 20 and I would like keep sending Ben one and you know like Ben was always Ben one and you know like Ben was always Ben one and you know like Ben was always awake like 24 hours. awake like 24 hours. awake like 24 hours. &gt;&gt; Yeah. He didn't sleep much. &gt;&gt; Yeah. He didn't sleep much. &gt;&gt; Yeah. He didn't sleep much. &gt;&gt; He never slept. No. So, I remember one &gt;&gt; He never slept. No. So, I remember one &gt;&gt; He never slept. No. So, I remember one after sending many emails going back and after sending many emails going back and after sending many emails going back and forth and he was just like no bad name. forth and he was just like no bad name. forth and he was just like no bad name. Bad name. I don't like it. And then at Bad name. I don't like it. And then at Bad name. I don't like it. And then at one point I thought well oid because one point I thought well oid because one point I thought well oid because it's like and then assemble because it's like and then assemble because it's like and then assemble because we're assemble the circuits. So I we're assemble the circuits. So I we're assemble the circuits. So I thought Assemblid and I sent this and thought Assemblid and I sent this and thought Assemblid and I sent this and says perfect. I love it. says perfect. I love it. says perfect. I love it. &gt;&gt; So you named assemblids. &gt;&gt; So you named assemblids. &gt;&gt; So you named assemblids. &gt;&gt; I name assemblids and Ben sort of like &gt;&gt; I name assemblids and Ben sort of like &gt;&gt; I name assemblids and Ben sort of like uh blessed like one night at like 3:00 uh blessed like one night at like 3:00 uh blessed like one night at like 3:00 a.m. &gt;&gt; And so that was the first assembly and &gt;&gt; And so that was the first assembly and &gt;&gt; And so that was the first assembly and the first assembly was for cells the first assembly was for cells the first assembly was for cells migrating. But then the question was migrating. But then the question was migrating. But then the question was cells have to find each other and form cells have to find each other and form cells have to find each other and form circuits. And so within a couple of circuits. And so within a couple of circuits. And so within a couple of years we started making assemblies that years we started making assemblies that years we started making assemblies that will have exxons. So the long will have exxons. So the long will have exxons. So the long projections of neurons finding other projections of neurons finding other projections of neurons finding other partners and uh you know how forgot who said this and uh you know how forgot who said this and uh you know how forgot who said this must have been Rodolf Felinas or you must have been Rodolf Felinas or you must have been Rodolf Felinas or you know who said that the brain is sort of know who said that the brain is sort of know who said that the brain is sort of um you know the next evolutionary step um you know the next evolutionary step um you know the next evolutionary step towards movement towards movement towards movement &gt;&gt; you know so like the nervous system &gt;&gt; you know so like the nervous system &gt;&gt; you know so like the nervous system there's been this theories that has there's been this theories that has there's been this theories that has evolved as a way of like moving around evolved as a way of like moving around evolved as a way of like moving around &gt;&gt; that was Sharington said the &gt;&gt; that was Sharington said the &gt;&gt; that was Sharington said the final common path is movement he was a final common path is movement he was a final common path is movement he was a physiologist he was kind of vague in physiologist he was kind of vague in physiologist he was kind of vague in statement, but I think he was statement, but I think he was statement, but I think he was sharantine. And I don't doubt that sharantine. And I don't doubt that sharantine. And I don't doubt that Ralpho said something about it, too. I'm Ralpho said something about it, too. I'm Ralpho said something about it, too. I'm not going to try and take anything away not going to try and take anything away not going to try and take anything away from Ralpho. Anyone that knows who from Ralpho. Anyone that knows who from Ralpho. Anyone that knows who Ralpho is. He's not somebody you want to Ralpho is. He's not somebody you want to Ralpho is. He's not somebody you want to piss off. piss off. piss off. &gt;&gt; Well, we should check it like who &gt;&gt; Well, we should check it like who &gt;&gt; Well, we should check it like who actually said it. actually said it. actually said it. &gt;&gt; Yeah, give him credit. I like Ralpho. &gt;&gt; Yeah, give him credit. I like Ralpho. &gt;&gt; Yeah, give him credit. I like Ralpho. &gt;&gt; But but for us that became like the next &gt;&gt; But but for us that became like the next &gt;&gt; But but for us that became like the next objective like can we actually build a objective like can we actually build a objective like can we actually build a circuit that will have a very clear circuit that will have a very clear circuit that will have a very clear output so we would know that we've output so we would know that we've output so we would know that we've actually built that circuit. So what we actually built that circuit. So what we actually built that circuit. So what we did is essentially we thought about like did is essentially we thought about like did is essentially we thought about like the simplest circuit for movement which the simplest circuit for movement which the simplest circuit for movement which is like the cortical spinal tract. is like the cortical spinal tract. is like the cortical spinal tract. Right? So that means that a neuron in Right? So that means that a neuron in Right? So that means that a neuron in deep layers of the cortex, sends a long deep layers of the cortex, sends a long deep layers of the cortex, sends a long axons all the way to the spinal cord, axons all the way to the spinal cord, axons all the way to the spinal cord, finds a motor neuron, makes a finds a motor neuron, makes a finds a motor neuron, makes a connection, then the motor neuron leaves connection, then the motor neuron leaves connection, then the motor neuron leaves the spinal cord, goes to the muscle. And the spinal cord, goes to the muscle. And the spinal cord, goes to the muscle. And essentially, you only have these two essentially, you only have these two essentially, you only have these two neurons, right, that are connecting with neurons, right, that are connecting with neurons, right, that are connecting with each other with the muscle. Two each other with the muscle. Two each other with the muscle. Two connections, one between the two of them connections, one between the two of them connections, one between the two of them and one with the muscle. So the simplest and one with the muscle. So the simplest and one with the muscle. So the simplest of circuits that you can have. of circuits that you can have. of circuits that you can have. &gt;&gt; No, let me move my big toe, &gt;&gt; No, let me move my big toe, &gt;&gt; No, let me move my big toe, &gt;&gt; right? Exactly. &gt;&gt; right? Exactly. &gt;&gt; right? Exactly. &gt;&gt; It's pretty long distance if you &gt;&gt; It's pretty long distance if you &gt;&gt; It's pretty long distance if you think. It's a very simple and of course think. It's a very simple and of course think. It's a very simple and of course like in other species a little bit more like in other species a little bit more like in other species a little bit more complicated. It turns out that in mice complicated. It turns out that in mice complicated. It turns out that in mice there's an additional neuron there. So there's an additional neuron there. So there's an additional neuron there. So there are some changes that uh you know there are some changes that uh you know there are some changes that uh you know happened over evolution but for us and happened over evolution but for us and happened over evolution but for us and in primates it's as is as simple as in primates it's as is as simple as in primates it's as is as simple as this. So what we did was we essentially this. So what we did was we essentially this. So what we did was we essentially made an organoid that resembles the made an organoid that resembles the made an organoid that resembles the cortex and has some of those neurons and cortex and has some of those neurons and cortex and has some of those neurons and then we made an organoid that resembles then we made an organoid that resembles then we made an organoid that resembles the spinal cord and has some motor the spinal cord and has some motor the spinal cord and has some motor neurons in it. And then we made a ball neurons in it. And then we made a ball neurons in it. And then we made a ball of human muscle that you can make from a of human muscle that you can make from a of human muscle that you can make from a biopsy. You can literally biopsy a biopsy. You can literally biopsy a biopsy. You can literally biopsy a muscle, you get the myoblast, you grow muscle, you get the myoblast, you grow muscle, you get the myoblast, you grow them and you get a nice bowl of them and you get a nice bowl of them and you get a nice bowl of muscle. And then of course the muscle. And then of course the muscle. And then of course the challenge was that you know the reality challenge was that you know the reality challenge was that you know the reality is that we don't know how those cells is that we don't know how those cells is that we don't know how those cells find each other. Like in development we find each other. Like in development we find each other. Like in development we know some of the molecular cues that know some of the molecular cues that know some of the molecular cues that they use but it's we're far from having they use but it's we're far from having they use but it's we're far from having a comprehensive understanding of how a comprehensive understanding of how a comprehensive understanding of how they find each other. And I remember we they find each other. And I remember we they find each other. And I remember we were sitting down in the lab and kind were sitting down in the lab and kind were sitting down in the lab and kind like thinking I resisted actually doing like thinking I resisted actually doing like thinking I resisted actually doing this as the first assembly in the lab this as the first assembly in the lab this as the first assembly in the lab for a while because the probability was for a while because the probability was for a while because the probability was like against us like those cells in the like against us like those cells in the like against us like those cells in the cortical organoid that are less than 5% cortical organoid that are less than 5% cortical organoid that are less than 5% the motors are less than 10%. So the motors are less than 10%. So the motors are less than 10%. So the probability that they find each other probability that they find each other probability that they find each other perfectly and in enough numbers to perfectly and in enough numbers to perfectly and in enough numbers to trigger muscle contraction was close to trigger muscle contraction was close to trigger muscle contraction was close to zero. And yet you do it. You put the zero. And yet you do it. You put the zero. And yet you do it. You put the three parts together. You let them three parts together. You let them three parts together. You let them assemble and within a few weeks you can assemble and within a few weeks you can assemble and within a few weeks you can actually now stimulate the cortex with actually now stimulate the cortex with actually now stimulate the cortex with whatever you want to use with an whatever you want to use with an whatever you want to use with an electrode with light and then the muscle electrode with light and then the muscle electrode with light and then the muscle starts to contract. And in fact the more starts to contract. And in fact the more starts to contract. And in fact the more you do it the more reliable the process you do it the more reliable the process you do it the more reliable the process is. And then of course we went on to is. And then of course we went on to is. And then of course we went on to like reverse engineering it and figure like reverse engineering it and figure like reverse engineering it and figure out that indeed the cells have connected out that indeed the cells have connected out that indeed the cells have connected in that precise way. in that precise way. in that precise way. So I think what we started actually to So I think what we started actually to So I think what we started actually to realize was that of course a lot of stem realize was that of course a lot of stem realize was that of course a lot of stem cell biology was you know and I think a cell biology was you know and I think a cell biology was you know and I think a lot of biology was based on chemical and lot of biology was based on chemical and lot of biology was based on chemical and physical factors that we were leveraging physical factors that we were leveraging physical factors that we were leveraging but we've never truly leveraged this but we've never truly leveraged this but we've never truly leveraged this kind like next level of um law or power kind like next level of um law or power kind like next level of um law or power in biology which is self-organization. in biology which is self-organization. in biology which is self-organization. The ability of a biological system of The ability of a biological system of The ability of a biological system of build it itself. If you think about it, build it itself. If you think about it, build it itself. If you think about it, the human brain builds itself, right? the human brain builds itself, right? the human brain builds itself, right? There's, of course, there are There's, of course, there are There's, of course, there are instructions, but there's no blueprint. instructions, but there's no blueprint. instructions, but there's no blueprint. There's no plan that the brain There's no plan that the brain There's no plan that the brain constantly looks to make sure that it constantly looks to make sure that it constantly looks to make sure that it actually made all the connections actually made all the connections actually made all the connections properly, right? Instructions are sort properly, right? Instructions are sort properly, right? Instructions are sort of revealed at every step for kind like of revealed at every step for kind like of revealed at every step for kind like the next step. Uh, and it mostly comes the next step. Uh, and it mostly comes the next step. Uh, and it mostly comes from the cells uh finding each other. So from the cells uh finding each other. So from the cells uh finding each other. So I think what we also started to learn I think what we also started to learn I think what we also started to learn from this was that all we need to do is from this was that all we need to do is from this was that all we need to do is make the parts and if we make the parts make the parts and if we make the parts make the parts and if we make the parts right then the parts will come with the right then the parts will come with the right then the parts will come with the instructions and then the circuits will instructions and then the circuits will instructions and then the circuits will assemble on their own. And so that has assemble on their own. And so that has assemble on their own. And so that has been really kind like the beginning been really kind like the beginning been really kind like the beginning of it. And of course it became of it. And of course it became of it. And of course it became progressively more difficult to build progressively more difficult to build progressively more difficult to build circuits. And so of course if you put circuits. And so of course if you put circuits. And so of course if you put two you may think oh let's make three two you may think oh let's make three two you may think oh let's make three and if you make three can you make four. and if you make three can you make four. and if you make three can you make four. So actually we just published a few So actually we just published a few So actually we just published a few months ago the first four-part assemblid months ago the first four-part assemblid months ago the first four-part assemblid uh that actually now reconstitutes the uh that actually now reconstitutes the uh that actually now reconstitutes the pathway that processes sensory pathway that processes sensory pathway that processes sensory information in the nervous system. So information in the nervous system. So information in the nervous system. So you think about the cortex, you know, you think about the cortex, you know, you think about the cortex, you know, sends out uh to control movement and has sends out uh to control movement and has sends out uh to control movement and has an output, but it receives information an output, but it receives information an output, but it receives information from the outside constantly and that from the outside constantly and that from the outside constantly and that happens through neurons that sit close happens through neurons that sit close happens through neurons that sit close to the spinal cord, have projections in to the spinal cord, have projections in to the spinal cord, have projections in the skin where they sense uh tactile the skin where they sense uh tactile the skin where they sense uh tactile vibrations or pain stimuli, send that vibrations or pain stimuli, send that vibrations or pain stimuli, send that information to the spinal cord. From the information to the spinal cord. From the information to the spinal cord. From the spinal cord, they cross, they go up to spinal cord, they cross, they go up to spinal cord, they cross, they go up to the phalamus in the middle of the brain, the phalamus in the middle of the brain, the phalamus in the middle of the brain, and from the phalamus, they go to the and from the phalamus, they go to the and from the phalamus, they go to the cortex. So this is a four-part pathway. cortex. So this is a four-part pathway. cortex. So this is a four-part pathway. So it took us years first of all to make So it took us years first of all to make So it took us years first of all to make the parts um and then to put them the parts um and then to put them the parts um and then to put them together and then again the beautiful together and then again the beautiful together and then again the beautiful thing about it is that while we still thing about it is that while we still thing about it is that while we still don't know all the rules of assembly you don't know all the rules of assembly you don't know all the rules of assembly you can make this fourpart we call it the can make this fourpart we call it the can make this fourpart we call it the sensory assembly or a somat sensory assembly or a somat sensory assembly or a somat sensory assembly because it turns out that the assembly because it turns out that the assembly because it turns out that the sensory neurons that we can make are sensory neurons that we can make are sensory neurons that we can make are mostly sensory neurons that sense pain mostly sensory neurons that sense pain mostly sensory neurons that sense pain stimuli and so uh you can actually put stimuli and so uh you can actually put stimuli and so uh you can actually put the four parts together. So the sensory, the four parts together. So the sensory, the four parts together. So the sensory, the spinal cord, the phalamus and the spinal cord, the phalamus and the spinal cord, the phalamus and the cortex. And you have to put them in that cortex. And you have to put them in that cortex. And you have to put them in that order. If you change the order, the order. If you change the order, the order. If you change the order, the cells will not find each other. So you cells will not find each other. So you cells will not find each other. So you just have to create the minimal just have to create the minimal just have to create the minimal conditions for them, making the right conditions for them, making the right conditions for them, making the right cell types, putting them in the right cell types, putting them in the right cell types, putting them in the right order, and then they'll find each other. order, and then they'll find each other. order, and then they'll find each other. And within a few weeks, it takes, you And within a few weeks, it takes, you And within a few weeks, it takes, you know, hundreds of days to build a know, hundreds of days to build a know, hundreds of days to build a circuit like this. But the beauty of it circuit like this. But the beauty of it circuit like this. But the beauty of it is that suddenly you look at it and you is that suddenly you look at it and you is that suddenly you look at it and you just see spontaneous activity that just see spontaneous activity that just see spontaneous activity that arises in the entire pathway just starts arises in the entire pathway just starts arises in the entire pathway just starts to flicker all in sync. Can you use this to flicker all in sync. Can you use this to flicker all in sync. Can you use this assembly to study the effects of assembly to study the effects of assembly to study the effects of different pain medications? different pain medications? different pain medications? &gt;&gt; Yes. So that is certainly one potential. &gt;&gt; Yes. So that is certainly one potential. &gt;&gt; Yes. So that is certainly one potential. The other thing that you can do and the The other thing that you can do and the The other thing that you can do and the first application that we've had was for first application that we've had was for first application that we've had was for genetic forms of pain condition. So we genetic forms of pain condition. So we genetic forms of pain condition. So we very often think that genetic very often think that genetic very often think that genetic conditions. So where you have a very conditions. So where you have a very conditions. So where you have a very clear cause so like entry points like clear cause so like entry points like clear cause so like entry points like Rosetta stones for understanding like Rosetta stones for understanding like Rosetta stones for understanding anything. So there are this interesting anything. So there are this interesting anything. So there are this interesting mutations in a sodium channel. So mutations in a sodium channel. So mutations in a sodium channel. So another channel but the sodium channel another channel but the sodium channel another channel but the sodium channel turns out that if the channel is turns out that if the channel is turns out that if the channel is overactive because of a mutation you'll overactive because of a mutation you'll overactive because of a mutation you'll have excessive pain. So this patients have excessive pain. So this patients have excessive pain. So this patients are highly sensitive but then if the are highly sensitive but then if the are highly sensitive but then if the channel is essentially unable to channel is essentially unable to channel is essentially unable to function then this pain that these function then this pain that these function then this pain that these patients have loss of pain and that's patients have loss of pain and that's patients have loss of pain and that's equally bad. Many of these patients equally bad. Many of these patients equally bad. Many of these patients actually will die because they can't actually will die because they can't actually will die because they can't sense pain at all. sense pain at all. sense pain at all. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think people don't realize that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think people don't realize that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think people don't realize that in mutations where people can't sense in mutations where people can't sense in mutations where people can't sense pain um people fail to make the postural pain um people fail to make the postural pain um people fail to make the postural adjustments &gt;&gt; that um allow you to stay alive and or &gt;&gt; that um allow you to stay alive and or &gt;&gt; that um allow you to stay alive and or to because you uh they unfortunately to because you uh they unfortunately to because you uh they unfortunately they can be resting a little bit too they can be resting a little bit too they can be resting a little bit too much on their right leg. We we normally much on their right leg. We we normally much on their right leg. We we normally think okay no big deal but you're think okay no big deal but you're think okay no big deal but you're constantly making these postural constantly making these postural constantly making these postural adjustments. If you don't do that, you adjustments. If you don't do that, you adjustments. If you don't do that, you actually uh can damage, right, actually uh can damage, right, actually uh can damage, right, &gt;&gt; the legs that you're, you know, you're &gt;&gt; the legs that you're, you know, you're &gt;&gt; the legs that you're, you know, you're pushing down too hard on. Seems like a pushing down too hard on. Seems like a pushing down too hard on. Seems like a trivial amount of weight, right? It's trivial amount of weight, right? It's trivial amount of weight, right? It's your own body weight, right? But we fail your own body weight, right? But we fail your own body weight, right? But we fail to recognize just how often we're to recognize just how often we're to recognize just how often we're redistributing our u our position. redistributing our u our position. redistributing our u our position. &gt;&gt; No, no, no. And it's absolutely true. &gt;&gt; No, no, no. And it's absolutely true. &gt;&gt; No, no, no. And it's absolutely true. Like feedback in general is very Like feedback in general is very Like feedback in general is very important, including through like this important, including through like this important, including through like this uh painful stimuli through all stimuli uh painful stimuli through all stimuli uh painful stimuli through all stimuli in general. And it turns out that if you in general. And it turns out that if you in general. And it turns out that if you now make essentially a four-part now make essentially a four-part now make essentially a four-part assemblid that carries the mutation that assemblid that carries the mutation that assemblid that carries the mutation that causes excessive pain, now the sensory causes excessive pain, now the sensory causes excessive pain, now the sensory neurons are excessively active. So they neurons are excessively active. So they neurons are excessively active. So they keep bursting with activity throughout. keep bursting with activity throughout. keep bursting with activity throughout. And then we thought we're going to take And then we thought we're going to take And then we thought we're going to take it out. And of course in these patients it out. And of course in these patients it out. And of course in these patients they can fire. It turns out it's not they can fire. It turns out it's not they can fire. It turns out it's not true that they can fire for some reason. true that they can fire for some reason. true that they can fire for some reason. There probably other channels that are There probably other channels that are There probably other channels that are helping them compensate, but they fail helping them compensate, but they fail helping them compensate, but they fail to engage the rest of the pathway in a to engage the rest of the pathway in a to engage the rest of the pathway in a synchronized way. So that's why we need synchronized way. So that's why we need synchronized way. So that's why we need the four parts and I think that's why the four parts and I think that's why the four parts and I think that's why assemblies generally are going to be assemblies generally are going to be assemblies generally are going to be very useful because they're emerging very useful because they're emerging very useful because they're emerging properties that are arising from the properties that are arising from the properties that are arising from the interactions of the cells at distance in interactions of the cells at distance in interactions of the cells at distance in the brain and likely many disorders and the brain and likely many disorders and the brain and likely many disorders and of course are very far from of course are very far from of course are very far from understanding complex disorders such as understanding complex disorders such as understanding complex disorders such as autism. Uh but certainly this autism. Uh but certainly this autism. Uh but certainly this interactions fault interactions at a interactions fault interactions at a interactions fault interactions at a distance in the circuits are probably distance in the circuits are probably distance in the circuits are probably going to be you know key to going to be you know key to going to be you know key to understanding the biology of these understanding the biology of these understanding the biology of these conditions and hopefully at one point conditions and hopefully at one point conditions and hopefully at one point like reversing them. I'd like to take a like reversing them. I'd like to take a like reversing them. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became sponsors, Function. Last year, I became sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for a Function member after searching for a Function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab the most comprehensive approach to lab the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 testing. Function provides over 100 testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for from harmful plastics and tests for from harmful plastics and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 only provides testing of over 100 only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. function not only helped me my blood. function not only helped me my blood. function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of consumption. I'd been eating a lot of consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can knack and acetylcyine, both of which can knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. So, I to get early access to function. So, I to get early access to function. So, I want to discuss an ethical consideration want to discuss an ethical consideration want to discuss an ethical consideration concern. But before we do that, I want concern. But before we do that, I want concern. But before we do that, I want to um take a step back and um just have to um take a step back and um just have to um take a step back and um just have you reflect. I mean, I will never you reflect. I mean, I will never you reflect. I mean, I will never forget the first time I learned neural forget the first time I learned neural forget the first time I learned neural development like sperm meets egg and development like sperm meets egg and development like sperm meets egg and then you get cell duplications and then you get cell duplications and then you get cell duplications and then the embryo figures out what's going to the embryo figures out what's going to the embryo figures out what's going to become muscle, what's going to become muscle, what's going to become muscle, what's going to become nervous system. And it's really a um nervous system. And it's really a um nervous system. And it's really a um it's a humbling thing. it's a humbling thing. it's a humbling thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; To be able to realize that we understand &gt;&gt; To be able to realize that we understand &gt;&gt; To be able to realize that we understand even a small bit of that. Yeah. even a small bit of that. Yeah. even a small bit of that. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um and very little was known until you &gt;&gt; Um and very little was known until you &gt;&gt; Um and very little was known until you know the uh sort of early parts of the know the uh sort of early parts of the know the uh sort of early parts of the last century really is uh where some of last century really is uh where some of last century really is uh where some of the defining tissues and interactions the defining tissues and interactions the defining tissues and interactions were first discovered. It was a were first discovered. It was a were first discovered. It was a relatively young science. Um nowadays relatively young science. Um nowadays relatively young science. Um nowadays I'm even more humbled by it I'm even more humbled by it I'm even more humbled by it &gt;&gt; because um one only has to see a child &gt;&gt; because um one only has to see a child &gt;&gt; because um one only has to see a child that you know nine months ago didn't that you know nine months ago didn't that you know nine months ago didn't exist and you and you really start I exist and you and you really start I exist and you and you really start I mean most people understand how babies mean most people understand how babies mean most people understand how babies are made um and yet are made um and yet are made um and yet &gt;&gt; it just kind of it's staggering and I &gt;&gt; it just kind of it's staggering and I &gt;&gt; it just kind of it's staggering and I think what's so staggering about it think what's so staggering about it think what's so staggering about it what's so miraculous it really is what's so miraculous it really is what's so miraculous it really is it's a miracle is the self-organizing it's a miracle is the self-organizing it's a miracle is the self-organizing aspect of it and now I'm hearing that aspect of it and now I'm hearing that aspect of it and now I'm hearing that these self-organization these self-organization these self-organization knowledge of the cell's own knowledge of the cell's own knowledge of the cell's own knowledge about what they should do and when is about what they should do and when is about what they should do and when is maintained. Uh, and I also have to just maintained. Uh, and I also have to just maintained. Uh, and I also have to just um both um both um both highlight again and um applaud the fact highlight again and um applaud the fact highlight again and um applaud the fact that regardless of where one stood on that regardless of where one stood on that regardless of where one stood on the uh embryionic stem cell debate, the uh embryionic stem cell debate, the uh embryionic stem cell debate, you're describing assemblids that were you're describing assemblids that were you're describing assemblids that were made from essentially taking a made from essentially taking a made from essentially taking a fibroblast, a skin cell exactly from a fibroblast, a skin cell exactly from a fibroblast, a skin cell exactly from a patient or from a non-patient, a patient or from a non-patient, a patient or from a non-patient, a healthy person that doesn't at least healthy person that doesn't at least healthy person that doesn't at least doesn't have that mutation, putting them doesn't have that mutation, putting them doesn't have that mutation, putting them in a dish, reverting them to stemness in a dish, reverting them to stemness in a dish, reverting them to stemness through the Yamanaka factors, then through the Yamanaka factors, then through the Yamanaka factors, then giving them certain things to drive them giving them certain things to drive them giving them certain things to drive them towards neuronal fates and then other towards neuronal fates and then other towards neuronal fates and then other fates, putting them together. And none fates, putting them together. And none fates, putting them together. And none of this involves the use of aborted of this involves the use of aborted of this involves the use of aborted tissues. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; May I ask you this? If today &gt;&gt; May I ask you this? If today &gt;&gt; May I ask you this? If today you could bank your fibroblasts turned you could bank your fibroblasts turned you could bank your fibroblasts turned into a few neurons, um would you do it? into a few neurons, um would you do it? into a few neurons, um would you do it? um knowing that those cells could um knowing that those cells could um knowing that those cells could eventually be used to create any tissue eventually be used to create any tissue eventually be used to create any tissue like I hope you live a very long like I hope you live a very long like I hope you live a very long life Sergio but let's say when you're a life Sergio but let's say when you're a life Sergio but let's say when you're a hundred your heart has an issue we hundred your heart has an issue we hundred your heart has an issue we humans can do heart transplants humans can do heart transplants humans can do heart transplants &gt;&gt; um from another human there immune &gt;&gt; um from another human there immune &gt;&gt; um from another human there immune rejection issues there um pig hearts rejection issues there um pig hearts rejection issues there um pig hearts have been transferred into humans but we have been transferred into humans but we have been transferred into humans but we could potentially you could potentially could potentially you could potentially could potentially you could potentially build a heart that is of your cells no build a heart that is of your cells no build a heart that is of your cells no immune rejection why wouldn't you bank immune rejection why wouldn't you bank immune rejection why wouldn't you bank your cells your cells your cells &gt;&gt; I think you can collect them at &gt;&gt; I think you can collect them at &gt;&gt; I think you can collect them at anytime in principle as long as you anytime in principle as long as you anytime in principle as long as you &gt;&gt; can get them on your 99th birthday. &gt;&gt; can get them on your 99th birthday. &gt;&gt; can get them on your 99th birthday. &gt;&gt; I think you can still get them for sure. &gt;&gt; I think you can still get them for sure. &gt;&gt; I think you can still get them for sure. It could be an argument It could be an argument It could be an argument &gt;&gt; time folks, &gt;&gt; time folks, &gt;&gt; time folks, &gt;&gt; right? So it could be an argument made &gt;&gt; right? So it could be an argument made &gt;&gt; right? So it could be an argument made that all the cells are going to be aging that all the cells are going to be aging that all the cells are going to be aging so they're going to be some changes so they're going to be some changes so they're going to be some changes happening in those cells. Maybe they happening in those cells. Maybe they happening in those cells. Maybe they have some Yeah, that could be an have some Yeah, that could be an have some Yeah, that could be an argument made about it. argument made about it. argument made about it. &gt;&gt; On the other hand, what we're also &gt;&gt; On the other hand, what we're also &gt;&gt; On the other hand, what we're also seeing with some of the cell therapies seeing with some of the cell therapies seeing with some of the cell therapies that are just being developed now more that are just being developed now more that are just being developed now more broadly is that um they don't have to be broadly is that um they don't have to be broadly is that um they don't have to be necessarily personalized. So they don't necessarily personalized. So they don't necessarily personalized. So they don't have to be made from your own cells. Uh have to be made from your own cells. Uh have to be made from your own cells. Uh because uh you know you can use because uh you know you can use because uh you know you can use imunosuppression. That's one way in imunosuppression. That's one way in imunosuppression. That's one way in which you can do it. So you can which you can do it. So you can which you can do it. So you can transplant the cells from somebody else. transplant the cells from somebody else. transplant the cells from somebody else. &gt;&gt; Uh of course that poses more challenges &gt;&gt; Uh of course that poses more challenges &gt;&gt; Uh of course that poses more challenges if you think about the brain. Um if you think about the brain. Um if you think about the brain. Um replacing large parts of the brain which replacing large parts of the brain which replacing large parts of the brain which certainly is like certainly is like certainly is like &gt;&gt; you know far into the future. Careful &gt;&gt; you know far into the future. Careful &gt;&gt; you know far into the future. Careful whose brain you're talking about. Yeah whose brain you're talking about. Yeah whose brain you're talking about. Yeah certainly. But in general like uh you certainly. But in general like uh you certainly. But in general like uh you know you can see how in the future we know you can see how in the future we know you can see how in the future we may have like offtheshelf may have like offtheshelf may have like offtheshelf right. uh cells that have been made uh right. uh cells that have been made uh right. uh cells that have been made uh from a generic individual uh that you from a generic individual uh that you from a generic individual uh that you transplant with imunosuppression or transplant with imunosuppression or transplant with imunosuppression or cells that have been genetically cells that have been genetically cells that have been genetically modified so that they're not rejected by modified so that they're not rejected by modified so that they're not rejected by the immune system. So they're compatible the immune system. So they're compatible the immune system. So they're compatible with all of us that it's much more with all of us that it's much more with all of us that it's much more likely to become a therapy that is likely to become a therapy that is likely to become a therapy that is broadly used. Uh I think so that's why broadly used. Uh I think so that's why broadly used. Uh I think so that's why I'm not that worried about like I'm not that worried about like I'm not that worried about like harvesting my own cells like right now. harvesting my own cells like right now. harvesting my own cells like right now. Where do you sit on this idea that at Where do you sit on this idea that at Where do you sit on this idea that at some point in the not too distant future some point in the not too distant future some point in the not too distant future uh we will be able to immortalize entire uh we will be able to immortalize entire uh we will be able to immortalize entire organs within our body? Perhaps not organs within our body? Perhaps not organs within our body? Perhaps not ourselves, but our colleague Michael ourselves, but our colleague Michael ourselves, but our colleague Michael Snyder, chair of genetics at Stanford, Snyder, chair of genetics at Stanford, Snyder, chair of genetics at Stanford, told me um that he thinks that at least told me um that he thinks that at least told me um that he thinks that at least in my lifetime, I'm a little bit younger in my lifetime, I'm a little bit younger in my lifetime, I'm a little bit younger than he is. Um I'm almost 50. uh forget than he is. Um I'm almost 50. uh forget than he is. Um I'm almost 50. uh forget how old Mike is almost 70 but he said at how old Mike is almost 70 but he said at how old Mike is almost 70 but he said at least in my lifetime um that least in my lifetime um that least in my lifetime um that immortalization of tissues human tissues immortalization of tissues human tissues immortalization of tissues human tissues will be possible he doesn't think that's will be possible he doesn't think that's will be possible he doesn't think that's a fantasy a fantasy a fantasy &gt;&gt; yeah I think different people mean &gt;&gt; yeah I think different people mean &gt;&gt; yeah I think different people mean different things by immortalizing different things by immortalizing different things by immortalizing something we generally something we generally something we generally you know think like for in vitro studies you know think like for in vitro studies you know think like for in vitro studies or for an addition study when you or for an addition study when you or for an addition study when you immortalize something it means that the immortalize something it means that the immortalize something it means that the cell is maintained forever but it cell is maintained forever but it cell is maintained forever but it generally involves using a cancer like generally involves using a cancer like generally involves using a cancer like factor giving them cancer properties. I factor giving them cancer properties. I factor giving them cancer properties. I mean the cells that are immortalized if mean the cells that are immortalized if mean the cells that are immortalized if you think about it are either the stem you think about it are either the stem you think about it are either the stem cells &gt;&gt; that we talked about or the cancer &gt;&gt; that we talked about or the cancer &gt;&gt; that we talked about or the cancer cells. So we always have to be careful cells. So we always have to be careful cells. So we always have to be careful about like what it means to actually about like what it means to actually about like what it means to actually immortalize a cell immortalize a cell immortalize a cell rejuvenate cells. That's kind of like an rejuvenate cells. That's kind of like an rejuvenate cells. That's kind of like an interesting concept. Will we be able to interesting concept. Will we be able to interesting concept. Will we be able to actually rejuvenate ourselves even if actually rejuvenate ourselves even if actually rejuvenate ourselves even if they're aged? So a lot of discussions they're aged? So a lot of discussions they're aged? So a lot of discussions have been um happening lately whether have been um happening lately whether have been um happening lately whether you can actually use the Yamanaka you can actually use the Yamanaka you can actually use the Yamanaka factors not to the extent that you completely not to the extent that you completely not to the extent that you completely reprogram a cell but that you just use reprogram a cell but that you just use reprogram a cell but that you just use them you know just a little bit so that them you know just a little bit so that them you know just a little bit so that you rejuvenate the cells uh not fully you rejuvenate the cells uh not fully you rejuvenate the cells uh not fully but as you can imagine those are but as you can imagine those are but as you can imagine those are complicated experiments right they're complicated experiments right they're complicated experiments right they're going to have to be tuned you need to going to have to be tuned you need to going to have to be tuned you need to control very carefully the dial there control very carefully the dial there control very carefully the dial there &gt;&gt; micro doing yamanaka factors &gt;&gt; micro doing yamanaka factors &gt;&gt; micro doing yamanaka factors &gt;&gt; right because you would actually you &gt;&gt; right because you would actually you &gt;&gt; right because you would actually you risk moving into another uh state. Uh risk moving into another uh state. Uh risk moving into another uh state. Uh but you know you know that may be but you know you know that may be but you know you know that may be possible at one point. possible at one point. possible at one point. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I thought that at one point one of &gt;&gt; Yeah. I thought that at one point one of &gt;&gt; Yeah. I thought that at one point one of the concerns of using Yamanaka factors the concerns of using Yamanaka factors the concerns of using Yamanaka factors and this whole technology and this whole technology and this whole technology therapeutically was that you could set therapeutically was that you could set therapeutically was that you could set the reversal in age of cells back to the reversal in age of cells back to the reversal in age of cells back to stemness back to stem cells but then how stemness back to stem cells but then how stemness back to stem cells but then how do you stop them there? Um and also how do you stop them there? Um and also how do you stop them there? Um and also how do you send them? I mean ultimately it's do you send them? I mean ultimately it's do you send them? I mean ultimately it's not a stem cell that you want. You want not a stem cell that you want. You want not a stem cell that you want. You want a fully differentiated heart cell or a fully differentiated heart cell or a fully differentiated heart cell or neuron. You want to stop there, right? I neuron. You want to stop there, right? I neuron. You want to stop there, right? I mean the idea being uh for anyone trying mean the idea being uh for anyone trying mean the idea being uh for anyone trying to reverse their age. I mean how far to reverse their age. I mean how far to reverse their age. I mean how far back are you willing to go? back are you willing to go? back are you willing to go? &gt;&gt; Right. And it's true when you use &gt;&gt; Right. And it's true when you use &gt;&gt; Right. And it's true when you use the Yamanaka factors or a combination of the Yamanaka factors or a combination of the Yamanaka factors or a combination of them because you know we've discovered them because you know we've discovered them because you know we've discovered afterwards that it's not just those afterwards that it's not just those afterwards that it's not just those factors that can do that. There are factors that can do that. There are factors that can do that. There are combinations of other factors that can combinations of other factors that can combinations of other factors that can do the same. do the same. do the same. &gt;&gt; So there are various combinations. There &gt;&gt; So there are various combinations. There &gt;&gt; So there are various combinations. There is a lot of redundancy in that pathway. is a lot of redundancy in that pathway. is a lot of redundancy in that pathway. Okay. And if you hit the right Okay. And if you hit the right Okay. And if you hit the right combinations in a cell at the right combinations in a cell at the right combinations in a cell at the right time, you can push it back in time. time, you can push it back in time. time, you can push it back in time. &gt;&gt; Uh now of course the challenge is that &gt;&gt; Uh now of course the challenge is that &gt;&gt; Uh now of course the challenge is that uh you know that reprogramming is full uh you know that reprogramming is full uh you know that reprogramming is full in the sense that everything is going to in the sense that everything is going to in the sense that everything is going to be erased if the reprogramming is be erased if the reprogramming is be erased if the reprogramming is done properly directly all the done properly directly all the done properly directly all the metilation. So all these metal groups metilation. So all these metal groups metilation. So all these metal groups that you put across DNA that you know that you put across DNA that you know that you put across DNA that you know accumulate with age are going to be accumulate with age are going to be accumulate with age are going to be removed. uh all the sort of like the all removed. uh all the sort of like the all removed. uh all the sort of like the all the signatures of you know are the signatures of you know are the signatures of you know are essentially removed so the cell is truly essentially removed so the cell is truly essentially removed so the cell is truly rejuvenated as like in the beginning and rejuvenated as like in the beginning and rejuvenated as like in the beginning and as you mentioned you know perhaps you as you mentioned you know perhaps you as you mentioned you know perhaps you don't want to do that right fully don't want to do that right fully don't want to do that right fully &gt;&gt; uh can you do it in a way that is a &gt;&gt; uh can you do it in a way that is a &gt;&gt; uh can you do it in a way that is a partial reprogramming as some people partial reprogramming as some people partial reprogramming as some people refer to refer to refer to &gt;&gt; um but certainly that these are &gt;&gt; um but certainly that these are &gt;&gt; um but certainly that these are still like early days for that certainly still like early days for that certainly still like early days for that certainly it's a possibility it's a possibility it's a possibility &gt;&gt; I think for most people if I said look &gt;&gt; I think for most people if I said look &gt;&gt; I think for most people if I said look uh scientists are developing um uh scientists are developing um uh scientists are developing um engineering ing eyes that can replace engineering ing eyes that can replace engineering ing eyes that can replace eyes for uh people that are blind. eyes for uh people that are blind. eyes for uh people that are blind. &gt;&gt; Maybe one eye, maybe both. They'd say &gt;&gt; Maybe one eye, maybe both. They'd say &gt;&gt; Maybe one eye, maybe both. They'd say great, &gt;&gt; you know, you're curing blindness &gt;&gt; you know, you're curing blindness &gt;&gt; you know, you're curing blindness effectively. &gt;&gt; Um and people are trying to do this. &gt;&gt; Um and people are trying to do this. &gt;&gt; Um and people are trying to do this. Neurolink is doing this. EJ Chashonki Neurolink is doing this. EJ Chashonki Neurolink is doing this. EJ Chashonki and Dan Pelanker at Stanford are trying and Dan Pelanker at Stanford are trying and Dan Pelanker at Stanford are trying to do this. Um if I said you know there to do this. Um if I said you know there to do this. Um if I said you know there are um scientists and companies trying are um scientists and companies trying are um scientists and companies trying to develop chips so that um paralyzed to develop chips so that um paralyzed to develop chips so that um paralyzed people can walk again or that people who people can walk again or that people who people can walk again or that people who have locked syndrome can speak again have locked syndrome can speak again have locked syndrome can speak again &gt;&gt; uh through one modality or another &gt;&gt; uh through one modality or another &gt;&gt; uh through one modality or another they'd say great but if I said they'd say great but if I said they'd say great but if I said there are scientists who are building there are scientists who are building there are scientists who are building assemblids in a dish so that maybe you assemblids in a dish so that maybe you assemblids in a dish so that maybe you don't have like two hippocampi you of don't have like two hippocampi you of don't have like two hippocampi you of three. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; You have a super memory. &gt;&gt; You have a super memory. &gt;&gt; You have a super memory. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I think most people be like, "Whoa, slow &gt;&gt; I think most people be like, "Whoa, slow &gt;&gt; I think most people be like, "Whoa, slow down. You're playing God. down. You're playing God. down. You're playing God. That's not okay." And as a parallel That's not okay." And as a parallel That's not okay." And as a parallel example crisper gene therapy, which we example crisper gene therapy, which we example crisper gene therapy, which we talked about earlier, talked about earlier, talked about earlier, &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; was employed by a Chinese scientist to I &gt;&gt; was employed by a Chinese scientist to I &gt;&gt; was employed by a Chinese scientist to I think it was to mutate the HIV receptor think it was to mutate the HIV receptor think it was to mutate the HIV receptor &gt;&gt; to modify Yeah. two individuals, two &gt;&gt; to modify Yeah. two individuals, two &gt;&gt; to modify Yeah. two individuals, two babies. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So there are at least two babies &gt;&gt; Yeah. So there are at least two babies &gt;&gt; Yeah. So there are at least two babies that we're aware of and probably more that we're aware of and probably more that we're aware of and probably more around the world but not terribly many around the world but not terribly many around the world but not terribly many who for whom crisper was used to make a who for whom crisper was used to make a who for whom crisper was used to make a genetic modification. Um those babies genetic modification. Um those babies genetic modification. Um those babies were carried to term and it wasn't to were carried to term and it wasn't to were carried to term and it wasn't to fix any particular disease. It was to fix any particular disease. It was to fix any particular disease. It was to confer them with something additional. confer them with something additional. confer them with something additional. &gt;&gt; Yeah. To to prevent in this case to &gt;&gt; Yeah. To to prevent in this case to &gt;&gt; Yeah. To to prevent in this case to prevent &gt;&gt; presumed transmission of HIV from the &gt;&gt; presumed transmission of HIV from the &gt;&gt; presumed transmission of HIV from the mother &gt;&gt; which is not necessarily justified in &gt;&gt; which is not necessarily justified in &gt;&gt; which is not necessarily justified in that case. So that case. So that case. So &gt;&gt; right uh did the mother have HIV? I &gt;&gt; right uh did the mother have HIV? I &gt;&gt; right uh did the mother have HIV? I think the idea was that yeah to avoid think the idea was that yeah to avoid think the idea was that yeah to avoid maternal transmission uh to the fetus maternal transmission uh to the fetus maternal transmission uh to the fetus &gt;&gt; you would like not have that but there &gt;&gt; you would like not have that but there &gt;&gt; you would like not have that but there are other ways in which that can are other ways in which that can are other ways in which that can actually be avoided so in this case it actually be avoided so in this case it actually be avoided so in this case it was not perhaps the best choice of a was not perhaps the best choice of a was not perhaps the best choice of a disease to correct and I think that's disease to correct and I think that's disease to correct and I think that's why the scientific community has been why the scientific community has been why the scientific community has been quite outraged by both guess the quite outraged by both guess the quite outraged by both guess the rationale and the way the experiment was rationale and the way the experiment was rationale and the way the experiment was done which was not following certainly done which was not following certainly done which was not following certainly &gt;&gt; yeah the uh the scientific &gt;&gt; yeah the uh the scientific &gt;&gt; yeah the uh the scientific community as you as you said um was very community as you as you said um was very community as you as you said um was very upset about that which brings us to the upset about that which brings us to the upset about that which brings us to the question of ethics. question of ethics. question of ethics. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; So I'm sure being really familiar with &gt;&gt; So I'm sure being really familiar with &gt;&gt; So I'm sure being really familiar with this technology that you've thought this technology that you've thought this technology that you've thought about a number of ethical issues that about a number of ethical issues that about a number of ethical issues that aren't going to occur to me or perhaps aren't going to occur to me or perhaps aren't going to occur to me or perhaps you've heard about things from the you've heard about things from the you've heard about things from the general public or from physicians and general public or from physicians and general public or from physicians and psychiatrists. What are some of the key psychiatrists. What are some of the key psychiatrists. What are some of the key ethical issues that come to mind when ethical issues that come to mind when ethical issues that come to mind when thinking about how assemblids are going thinking about how assemblids are going thinking about how assemblids are going to be implemented as eventually to be implemented as eventually to be implemented as eventually treatments for disease? Yeah. So we treatments for disease? Yeah. So we treatments for disease? Yeah. So we think a lot about like the ethical think a lot about like the ethical think a lot about like the ethical issues and we think this as a group at issues and we think this as a group at issues and we think this as a group at Stanford that's part of like my center. Stanford that's part of like my center. Stanford that's part of like my center. Uh we have like Hangley who's a Uh we have like Hangley who's a Uh we have like Hangley who's a professor of law and an ethicist. Uh but professor of law and an ethicist. Uh but professor of law and an ethicist. Uh but actually we've engaged uh many ethicists actually we've engaged uh many ethicists actually we've engaged uh many ethicists sociologists of religions. We're sociologists of religions. We're sociologists of religions. We're actually going to have the first meeting actually going to have the first meeting actually going to have the first meeting at aar this November on the ethics of at aar this November on the ethics of at aar this November on the ethics of neurorgonoids assemblids and their neurorgonoids assemblids and their neurorgonoids assemblids and their transplantation. And you know there are transplantation. And you know there are transplantation. And you know there are various ways of classifying the ethical various ways of classifying the ethical various ways of classifying the ethical issues. The way I sort like think about issues. The way I sort like think about issues. The way I sort like think about it is that on one hand there are ethical it is that on one hand there are ethical it is that on one hand there are ethical issues that are related to the cells. We issues that are related to the cells. We issues that are related to the cells. We are taking cells from a human and so you are taking cells from a human and so you are taking cells from a human and so you expect that you have received proper expect that you have received proper expect that you have received proper consent uh for the use of those cells consent uh for the use of those cells consent uh for the use of those cells whatever that is. On the other hand if whatever that is. On the other hand if whatever that is. On the other hand if for instance you put them into an animal for instance you put them into an animal for instance you put them into an animal then there are ethical issues related to then there are ethical issues related to then there are ethical issues related to that animal. Are you doing any harm? How that animal. Are you doing any harm? How that animal. Are you doing any harm? How do we manage pain in the in that animal do we manage pain in the in that animal do we manage pain in the in that animal that has been transplanted? And then that has been transplanted? And then that has been transplanted? And then there are sort of like issues that are there are sort of like issues that are there are sort of like issues that are at the interface between the two. So for at the interface between the two. So for at the interface between the two. So for instance, are there any emergent instance, are there any emergent instance, are there any emergent properties that are arising at one point properties that are arising at one point properties that are arising at one point whether they're like in a dish or maybe whether they're like in a dish or maybe whether they're like in a dish or maybe perhaps in an animal. How complex can a perhaps in an animal. How complex can a perhaps in an animal. How complex can a circuit like this become? Is there any circuit like this become? Is there any circuit like this become? Is there any form of learning of computation? Of form of learning of computation? Of form of learning of computation? Of course, some people have raised the course, some people have raised the course, some people have raised the issue that perhaps there is sentience or issue that perhaps there is sentience or issue that perhaps there is sentience or awareness, consciousness. Are they awareness, consciousness. Are they awareness, consciousness. Are they feeling pain? So for instance that has feeling pain? So for instance that has feeling pain? So for instance that has been like one critique for one of the been like one critique for one of the been like one critique for one of the recent work that we've done. Of course recent work that we've done. Of course recent work that we've done. Of course in that case we know you know the in that case we know you know the in that case we know you know the emotional component of uh pain is emotional component of uh pain is emotional component of uh pain is processed in different brain regions. We processed in different brain regions. We processed in different brain regions. We don't have those uh in a dish. So we don't have those uh in a dish. So we don't have those uh in a dish. So we know that they're not really feeling know that they're not really feeling know that they're not really feeling pain. We have the pathway of pain. But pain. We have the pathway of pain. But pain. We have the pathway of pain. But also speaks to the fact that we need to also speaks to the fact that we need to also speaks to the fact that we need to be very careful about how we communicate be very careful about how we communicate be very careful about how we communicate this type of research. Even just using this type of research. Even just using this type of research. Even just using terms that are trivializing can actually terms that are trivializing can actually terms that are trivializing can actually create a lot of confusion. And the create a lot of confusion. And the create a lot of confusion. And the classic example in our field has been to classic example in our field has been to classic example in our field has been to call this preparations this organator or call this preparations this organator or call this preparations this organator or assemblids to call them mini brains. assemblids to call them mini brains. assemblids to call them mini brains. Right? Then it may seem like as a Right? Then it may seem like as a Right? Then it may seem like as a trivial joke that it can do anything uh trivial joke that it can do anything uh trivial joke that it can do anything uh you know any harm. But you hear that for you know any harm. But you hear that for you know any harm. But you hear that for the first time scientists have made mini the first time scientists have made mini the first time scientists have made mini brains in a dish right and what do you brains in a dish right and what do you brains in a dish right and what do you think? You think oh it must be a think? You think oh it must be a think? You think oh it must be a miniature human brain that they're miniature human brain that they're miniature human brain that they're keeping in a dish right isolated. And of keeping in a dish right isolated. And of keeping in a dish right isolated. And of course that's not true. We have not made course that's not true. We have not made course that's not true. We have not made the entire nervous system. We can make the entire nervous system. We can make the entire nervous system. We can make parts of the nervous system. We can put parts of the nervous system. We can put parts of the nervous system. We can put them in various combinations, but we've them in various combinations, but we've them in various combinations, but we've never made the entire brain. Actually, I never made the entire brain. Actually, I never made the entire brain. Actually, I don't know of any scientist who has as a don't know of any scientist who has as a don't know of any scientist who has as a goal to try to build the entire nervous goal to try to build the entire nervous goal to try to build the entire nervous system as an exact replica uh of the system as an exact replica uh of the system as an exact replica uh of the brain. So, I think the words matter uh a brain. So, I think the words matter uh a brain. So, I think the words matter uh a lot and in fact that has been uh you lot and in fact that has been uh you lot and in fact that has been uh you know one of the things that we've done know one of the things that we've done know one of the things that we've done over the years. uh a few years ago I over the years. uh a few years ago I over the years. uh a few years ago I thought it would be really important to thought it would be really important to thought it would be really important to get most of the scientists in the field get most of the scientists in the field get most of the scientists in the field together and start thinking about these together and start thinking about these together and start thinking about these terms really carefully and so we got terms really carefully and so we got terms really carefully and so we got together created sort of like an ad hoc together created sort of like an ad hoc together created sort of like an ad hoc consortium and through many calls consortium and through many calls consortium and through many calls one-on-one in various groups we came up one-on-one in various groups we came up one-on-one in various groups we came up with one paper which was published in with one paper which was published in with one paper which was published in nature a couple of years ago really nature a couple of years ago really nature a couple of years ago really comes as a nomature for the field we as comes as a nomature for the field we as comes as a nomature for the field we as scientists decided these are like the scientists decided these are like the scientists decided these are like the way we classify them these are the terms way we classify them these are the terms way we classify them these are the terms that we all agreed should be used that we all agreed should be used that we all agreed should be used uh and not use not for instance uh and not use not for instance uh and not use not for instance um you know project let's say complex um you know project let's say complex um you know project let's say complex terms onto this. We'll never say that an terms onto this. We'll never say that an terms onto this. We'll never say that an organoid like sees just because there's organoid like sees just because there's organoid like sees just because there's a retina right? We'll never say that a retina right? We'll never say that a retina right? We'll never say that a cortical organoid has intelligence cortical organoid has intelligence cortical organoid has intelligence because that's a property of an entire because that's a property of an entire because that's a property of an entire nervous system. So we think that this is nervous system. So we think that this is nervous system. So we think that this is actually quite important especially in actually quite important especially in actually quite important especially in communicating with uh the public and communicating with uh the public and communicating with uh the public and that consortion turned out to be an that consortion turned out to be an that consortion turned out to be an actually great exercise of getting actually great exercise of getting actually great exercise of getting everybody together and now thinking what everybody together and now thinking what everybody together and now thinking what are some of the common practices that we are some of the common practices that we are some of the common practices that we should all use when we report this should all use when we report this should all use when we report this experiment. So we just had a few months experiment. So we just had a few months experiment. So we just had a few months ago another paper uh that came also as a ago another paper uh that came also as a ago another paper uh that came also as a perspective in science where in nature perspective in science where in nature perspective in science where in nature where we also uh lay out so like the where we also uh lay out so like the where we also uh lay out so like the framework for the field. I think this framework for the field. I think this framework for the field. I think this also speaks to the fact that we're also speaks to the fact that we're also speaks to the fact that we're entering sort of like a new era in entering sort of like a new era in entering sort of like a new era in science where I think you know you would science where I think you know you would science where I think you know you would say all these labs are working say all these labs are working say all these labs are working separately they're competing with each separately they're competing with each separately they're competing with each other and yet we all got together you other and yet we all got together you other and yet we all got together you know 25 or so labs discuss some of these know 25 or so labs discuss some of these know 25 or so labs discuss some of these issues reach some consensus you know and issues reach some consensus you know and issues reach some consensus you know and I think that moves the field forward and I think that moves the field forward and I think that moves the field forward and I think in general in science we will I think in general in science we will I think in general in science we will need more and more of this collaborative need more and more of this collaborative need more and more of this collaborative efforts because the science is getting efforts because the science is getting efforts because the science is getting more complex biology is getting really more complex biology is getting really more complex biology is getting really complex and there's no one single really complex and there's no one single really complex and there's no one single app that can solve all of Yeah. Yeah, I app that can solve all of Yeah. Yeah, I app that can solve all of Yeah. Yeah, I completely agree. I think uh some years completely agree. I think uh some years completely agree. I think uh some years back collaboration became the norm as back collaboration became the norm as back collaboration became the norm as opposed to the occasional thing. And uh opposed to the occasional thing. And uh opposed to the occasional thing. And uh I always thought that laboratories I always thought that laboratories I always thought that laboratories should be named after projects, missions should be named after projects, missions should be named after projects, missions as opposed to individuals. But that's a as opposed to individuals. But that's a as opposed to individuals. But that's a that's another story. Well, kudos to you that's another story. Well, kudos to you that's another story. Well, kudos to you for thinking about these issues so for thinking about these issues so for thinking about these issues so carefully and for gathering people carefully and for gathering people carefully and for gathering people around them um in order to come up with around them um in order to come up with around them um in order to come up with nomenclature. &gt;&gt; Going back to this issue of naming, what &gt;&gt; Going back to this issue of naming, what &gt;&gt; Going back to this issue of naming, what things are called is so critical. It's things are called is so critical. It's things are called is so critical. It's so critical and we see this in the so critical and we see this in the so critical and we see this in the public health sphere. Um you know when public health sphere. Um you know when public health sphere. Um you know when people talk about gain of function people talk about gain of function people talk about gain of function research now you know it's rarely research now you know it's rarely research now you know it's rarely mentioned that you know gain of function mentioned that you know gain of function mentioned that you know gain of function studies are critical for understanding studies are critical for understanding studies are critical for understanding things that it's not always the case things that it's not always the case things that it's not always the case you're mutating a virus. It's like gain you're mutating a virus. It's like gain you're mutating a virus. It's like gain of function as a general technology. of function as a general technology. of function as a general technology. More specificity of language I think is More specificity of language I think is More specificity of language I think is going to be immensely beneficial. So going to be immensely beneficial. So going to be immensely beneficial. So appreciate you doing that. appreciate you doing that. appreciate you doing that. &gt;&gt; And these terms change with time. I &gt;&gt; And these terms change with time. I &gt;&gt; And these terms change with time. I think it's also important to like think it's also important to like think it's also important to like mention that our understanding evolves. mention that our understanding evolves. mention that our understanding evolves. science progresses and sometimes there science progresses and sometimes there science progresses and sometimes there are things that we thought we understood are things that we thought we understood are things that we thought we understood and then new techniques come and change and then new techniques come and change and then new techniques come and change that. You know, I think it was Sydney that. You know, I think it was Sydney that. You know, I think it was Sydney Brener who said that progress in science Brener who said that progress in science Brener who said that progress in science usually comes from a new technique that usually comes from a new technique that usually comes from a new technique that will yield new discoveries and that will yield new discoveries and that will yield new discoveries and that will create new ideas. So you know you think create new ideas. So you know you think create new ideas. So you know you think you understand something and suddenly you understand something and suddenly you understand something and suddenly you have a new machine that can measure you have a new machine that can measure you have a new machine that can measure it much better with more precision or it much better with more precision or it much better with more precision or let's say you have this technology when let's say you have this technology when let's say you have this technology when you can now recreate some of the you can now recreate some of the you can now recreate some of the circuits and suddenly new ideas come out circuits and suddenly new ideas come out circuits and suddenly new ideas come out of it new discoveries and then we of it new discoveries and then we of it new discoveries and then we rethink and we adjust and I think that's rethink and we adjust and I think that's rethink and we adjust and I think that's the beauty of science that in a way it's the beauty of science that in a way it's the beauty of science that in a way it's selfcorrecting as we get a better and better as we get a better and better as we get a better and better understanding of the world around us understanding of the world around us understanding of the world around us &gt;&gt; also essential for people to hear &gt;&gt; also essential for people to hear &gt;&gt; also essential for people to hear because I think whenever science or because I think whenever science or because I think whenever science or medicine comes out and tries to correct medicine comes out and tries to correct medicine comes out and tries to correct itself Um, often the general public, not all, Um, often the general public, not all, Um, often the general public, not all, but components of the general public but components of the general public but components of the general public will go up in arms as, you know, similar will go up in arms as, you know, similar will go up in arms as, you know, similar to like a teenager realizing that their to like a teenager realizing that their to like a teenager realizing that their parents also um did some bad stuff when parents also um did some bad stuff when parents also um did some bad stuff when they were younger, and they're like, they were younger, and they're like, they were younger, and they're like, "See, I shouldn't believe anything you "See, I shouldn't believe anything you "See, I shouldn't believe anything you say." It turns out, um, science is a as say." It turns out, um, science is a as say." It turns out, um, science is a as a whole, I think, is a very a whole, I think, is a very a whole, I think, is a very well-intentioned endeavor. well-intentioned endeavor. well-intentioned endeavor. &gt;&gt; Um, you get your occasional bad apples, &gt;&gt; Um, you get your occasional bad apples, &gt;&gt; Um, you get your occasional bad apples, but I think that, um, this notion of but I think that, um, this notion of but I think that, um, this notion of selfcorrection is it's fundamental, just selfcorrection is it's fundamental, just selfcorrection is it's fundamental, just like engineering's gotten better. Yeah. like engineering's gotten better. Yeah. like engineering's gotten better. Yeah. the phone you use now doesn't look the phone you use now doesn't look the phone you use now doesn't look anything like right in terms of anything like right in terms of anything like right in terms of technology or speed of the phone you technology or speed of the phone you technology or speed of the phone you used 10 years ago likewise with any used 10 years ago likewise with any used 10 years ago likewise with any technology any technology any technology &gt;&gt; that's why it's so important that both &gt;&gt; that's why it's so important that both &gt;&gt; that's why it's so important that both when we communicate as scientists to the when we communicate as scientists to the when we communicate as scientists to the public we use terms that are not public we use terms that are not public we use terms that are not trivializing I think very often we're trivializing I think very often we're trivializing I think very often we're told like you know try to simplify we're told like you know try to simplify we're told like you know try to simplify so that the public understand the public so that the public understand the public so that the public understand the public understands much more than we think understands much more than we think understands much more than we think &gt;&gt; you know there are always ways in which &gt;&gt; you know there are always ways in which &gt;&gt; you know there are always ways in which you can explain something without you can explain something without you can explain something without trivializing it without using a new term trivializing it without using a new term trivializing it without using a new term or uh you know some comparison so that or uh you know some comparison so that or uh you know some comparison so that they understand that because very often they understand that because very often they understand that because very often an analogies can also be dangerous. Uh an analogies can also be dangerous. Uh an analogies can also be dangerous. Uh right but I think uh you know I always right but I think uh you know I always right but I think uh you know I always like assume and that has sort of like assume and that has sort of like assume and that has sort of like been my you know my mantra that you know been my you know my mantra that you know been my you know my mantra that you know somebody really has when you explain somebody really has when you explain somebody really has when you explain even to the general public that you know even to the general public that you know even to the general public that you know they have zero knowledge and yet you they have zero knowledge and yet you they have zero knowledge and yet you know infinite intelligence right I think know infinite intelligence right I think know infinite intelligence right I think as the saying goes in science. So I as the saying goes in science. So I as the saying goes in science. So I think there are always ways of think there are always ways of think there are always ways of explaining science very simply but also explaining science very simply but also explaining science very simply but also communicating that science changes over communicating that science changes over communicating that science changes over time that there are new understandings time that there are new understandings time that there are new understandings that are correcting the science and that are correcting the science and that are correcting the science and we've seen this of course in medicine we've seen this of course in medicine we've seen this of course in medicine we've sadly seen it in psychiatry right we've sadly seen it in psychiatry right we've sadly seen it in psychiatry right many times by labeling relabeling many times by labeling relabeling many times by labeling relabeling doing treatments that perhaps were like doing treatments that perhaps were like doing treatments that perhaps were like not the most uh you know fortunate not the most uh you know fortunate not the most uh you know fortunate right over time uh but I think it's right over time uh but I think it's right over time uh but I think it's important to tell the public that you important to tell the public that you important to tell the public that you know we're you know always trying to know we're you know always trying to know we're you know always trying to move towards I think most physicians move towards I think most physicians move towards I think most physicians that I know most psychiatrists that I that I know most psychiatrists that I that I know most psychiatrists that I know are really motivated by really know are really motivated by really know are really motivated by really trying to make their patient better. trying to make their patient better. trying to make their patient better. &gt;&gt; So let's play a uh &gt;&gt; So let's play a uh &gt;&gt; So let's play a uh a game where if I say um if you take two a game where if I say um if you take two a game where if I say um if you take two human cortical neurons human cortical neurons human cortical neurons &gt;&gt; Mhm. or three or five or 10 or a &gt;&gt; Mhm. or three or five or 10 or a &gt;&gt; Mhm. or three or five or 10 or a thousand that were you developed from, thousand that were you developed from, thousand that were you developed from, you know, one of my fibroblasts and you know, one of my fibroblasts and you know, one of my fibroblasts and you put it into a mouse or a non-human put it into a mouse or a non-human put it into a mouse or a non-human primate like a macac monkey. I think primate like a macac monkey. I think primate like a macac monkey. I think you've still got a mouse harboring a few you've still got a mouse harboring a few you've still got a mouse harboring a few of my neurons or a macac monkey of my neurons or a macac monkey of my neurons or a macac monkey harboring a few of my neurons. At what harboring a few of my neurons. At what harboring a few of my neurons. At what point does that animal no longer uh point does that animal no longer uh point does that animal no longer uh become strictly a mouse or strictly a become strictly a mouse or strictly a become strictly a mouse or strictly a primate? Um, and then the parallel primate? Um, and then the parallel primate? Um, and then the parallel example of course is let's say I could example of course is let's say I could example of course is let's say I could get some neurons from fiberblasts that get some neurons from fiberblasts that get some neurons from fiberblasts that were made from you and those were put were made from you and those were put were made from you and those were put into my brain, into my brain, into my brain, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um, at what point do I become more Sergu &gt;&gt; Um, at what point do I become more Sergu &gt;&gt; Um, at what point do I become more Sergu like than uh Andrew like? like than uh Andrew like? like than uh Andrew like? &gt;&gt; So, how do you think about those &gt;&gt; So, how do you think about those &gt;&gt; So, how do you think about those questions? And it while it might seem questions? And it while it might seem questions? And it while it might seem too early to consider those, we've too early to consider those, we've too early to consider those, we've learned through history that it's never learned through history that it's never learned through history that it's never too early to start thinking about the too early to start thinking about the too early to start thinking about the ethical implications of a technology ethical implications of a technology ethical implications of a technology like this where there's transplantation like this where there's transplantation like this where there's transplantation involved. No, it is absolutely not too involved. No, it is absolutely not too involved. No, it is absolutely not too early. Actually, it's uh the right time early. Actually, it's uh the right time early. Actually, it's uh the right time to think about this is as experiments to think about this is as experiments to think about this is as experiments are actually being planned, not when are actually being planned, not when are actually being planned, not when experiments have been done. A experiments have been done. A experiments have been done. A &gt;&gt; good point. &gt;&gt; good point. &gt;&gt; good point. &gt;&gt; And that's what we've been that's what &gt;&gt; And that's what we've been that's what &gt;&gt; And that's what we've been that's what we've been doing. And that's why we've been doing. And that's why we've been doing. And that's why actually, &gt;&gt; you know, all experiments that we do &gt;&gt; you know, all experiments that we do &gt;&gt; you know, all experiments that we do undergo ethical approval at Stanford. We undergo ethical approval at Stanford. We undergo ethical approval at Stanford. We uh you know, and I think at most major uh you know, and I think at most major uh you know, and I think at most major institutions, right, and certainly in institutions, right, and certainly in institutions, right, and certainly in the United States, you have to first the United States, you have to first the United States, you have to first propose what you're going to do uh propose what you're going to do uh propose what you're going to do uh especially with pluropotent stem cells especially with pluropotent stem cells especially with pluropotent stem cells and especially with animals. and a and especially with animals. and a and especially with animals. and a committee you know will decide whether committee you know will decide whether committee you know will decide whether that is acceptable or not. Now of course that is acceptable or not. Now of course that is acceptable or not. Now of course there are experiments that perhaps are there are experiments that perhaps are there are experiments that perhaps are not necessarily legal but you know when not necessarily legal but you know when not necessarily legal but you know when you like try to break a new frontier but you like try to break a new frontier but you like try to break a new frontier but I think what it's important to think I think what it's important to think I think what it's important to think about like this process of transplanting about like this process of transplanting about like this process of transplanting or transplantation that you take cells or transplantation that you take cells or transplantation that you take cells and you put them either in another and you put them either in another and you put them either in another individual or another species is that individual or another species is that individual or another species is that what really matters a lot we've learned what really matters a lot we've learned what really matters a lot we've learned now is the timing when you actually now is the timing when you actually now is the timing when you actually transplant those cells. So it turns out transplant those cells. So it turns out transplant those cells. So it turns out that the brain, that the brain, that the brain, the adult brain is not very permissive the adult brain is not very permissive the adult brain is not very permissive to forming new connections. We don't to forming new connections. We don't to forming new connections. We don't form that many. We may form small form that many. We may form small form that many. We may form small connections. There's a lot of plasticity connections. There's a lot of plasticity connections. There's a lot of plasticity at the connections, but we don't have, at the connections, but we don't have, at the connections, but we don't have, let's say, in our adult brains, we don't let's say, in our adult brains, we don't let's say, in our adult brains, we don't have cells that are moving now across have cells that are moving now across have cells that are moving now across the nervous system. We don't have entire the nervous system. We don't have entire the nervous system. We don't have entire pathways that are being rewired. You pathways that are being rewired. You pathways that are being rewired. You know, you're never going to have a know, you're never going to have a know, you're never going to have a cortical neuron that just simply regrows cortical neuron that just simply regrows cortical neuron that just simply regrows and now connects to a spinal cord and now connects to a spinal cord and now connects to a spinal cord neurons, which is why injury to the neurons, which is why injury to the neurons, which is why injury to the nervous system is so devastating, right? nervous system is so devastating, right? nervous system is so devastating, right? there's so little recovery because the there's so little recovery because the there's so little recovery because the cells are usually not um you know not cells are usually not um you know not cells are usually not um you know not essentially rejuvenating. There are no essentially rejuvenating. There are no essentially rejuvenating. There are no cells that are replenishing them. It's cells that are replenishing them. It's cells that are replenishing them. It's not just that there are no cells to not just that there are no cells to not just that there are no cells to actually replace them. It's also that actually replace them. It's also that actually replace them. It's also that the cells are just not that eager to the cells are just not that eager to the cells are just not that eager to connect with other cells as they are connect with other cells as they are connect with other cells as they are early in development. And so years ago, early in development. And so years ago, early in development. And so years ago, we've discovered that, you know, while we've discovered that, you know, while we've discovered that, you know, while we can keep some of these cultures in we can keep some of these cultures in we can keep some of these cultures in the dish for very long periods of time the dish for very long periods of time the dish for very long periods of time and connect them in ever more complex and connect them in ever more complex and connect them in ever more complex assembly like dozens and hundreds of assemblies like dozens and hundreds of assemblies like dozens and hundreds of assemblies that people have made and not just in that people have made and not just in that people have made and not just in the nervous system, actually even the nervous system, actually even the nervous system, actually even outside of the nervous system because outside of the nervous system because outside of the nervous system because now there are assemblids of cardiac now there are assemblids of cardiac now there are assemblids of cardiac assemblids and endometrial assemblids. assemblids and endometrial assemblids. assemblids and endometrial assemblids. And so the concept sort of like took And so the concept sort of like took And so the concept sort of like took over and I'm glad to talk about it. over and I'm glad to talk about it. over and I'm glad to talk about it. We're going to have the first conference We're going to have the first conference We're going to have the first conference on assemblies at Cole Spring Harbor this on assemblies at Cole Spring Harbor this on assemblies at Cole Spring Harbor this year which is sort of like to bridge year which is sort of like to bridge year which is sort of like to bridge across fields and try to understand across fields and try to understand across fields and try to understand complex cell set interactions. But even complex cell set interactions. But even complex cell set interactions. But even with this most complex assemblies we with this most complex assemblies we with this most complex assemblies we realized that the cells are still realized that the cells are still realized that the cells are still missing cues that are present in vitro. missing cues that are present in vitro. missing cues that are present in vitro. So a few years ago we were doing an So a few years ago we were doing an So a few years ago we were doing an experiment looking at some of the experiment looking at some of the experiment looking at some of the neurons that we made in a dish. And uh neurons that we made in a dish. And uh neurons that we made in a dish. And uh you know these neurons in the cortex are you know these neurons in the cortex are you know these neurons in the cortex are very often called pyramal because they very often called pyramal because they very often called pyramal because they look like a pyramid. They really have look like a pyramid. They really have look like a pyramid. They really have this beautiful triangular shape and this beautiful triangular shape and this beautiful triangular shape and we're looking at the neuron. It looked we're looking at the neuron. It looked we're looking at the neuron. It looked beautiful exact like a pyramal neuron. beautiful exact like a pyramal neuron. beautiful exact like a pyramal neuron. And then around that time we got a piece And then around that time we got a piece And then around that time we got a piece of tissue that was removed from a child of tissue that was removed from a child of tissue that was removed from a child who underwent surgery for epilepsy. So who underwent surgery for epilepsy. So who underwent surgery for epilepsy. So when you sometimes have to undergo the when you sometimes have to undergo the when you sometimes have to undergo the surgeries, intractable epilepsy is surgeries, intractable epilepsy is surgeries, intractable epilepsy is really severe. Uh maybe you talked about really severe. Uh maybe you talked about really severe. Uh maybe you talked about this like previously you have to remove this like previously you have to remove this like previously you have to remove some tissue and when you remove some of some tissue and when you remove some of some tissue and when you remove some of that tissue you also have to remove some that tissue you also have to remove some that tissue you also have to remove some healthy tissue. And so we got some of healthy tissue. And so we got some of healthy tissue. And so we got some of that healthy tissue and of course we're that healthy tissue and of course we're that healthy tissue and of course we're always like eager to understand how the always like eager to understand how the always like eager to understand how the cells that were made in a dish are cells that were made in a dish are cells that were made in a dish are similar or dissimilar to the ones in the similar or dissimilar to the ones in the similar or dissimilar to the ones in the actual brain. We like need to benchmark actual brain. We like need to benchmark actual brain. We like need to benchmark before we use that for a therapy or for before we use that for a therapy or for before we use that for a therapy or for anything else. And we compare one day anything else. And we compare one day anything else. And we compare one day some of the cells and we realize to our some of the cells and we realize to our some of the cells and we realize to our amazement and I don't know how we'd amazement and I don't know how we'd amazement and I don't know how we'd never noticed it or nobody has really never noticed it or nobody has really never noticed it or nobody has really like made a big deal out of it but the like made a big deal out of it but the like made a big deal out of it but the neurons that were making in the dish neurons that were making in the dish neurons that were making in the dish were about 10 times smaller than the were about 10 times smaller than the were about 10 times smaller than the ones in the cortex on average. I mean ones in the cortex on average. I mean ones in the cortex on average. I mean there are kind like miniature versions there are kind like miniature versions there are kind like miniature versions of what was happening and so it was like of what was happening and so it was like of what was happening and so it was like of course immediately was like what is of course immediately was like what is of course immediately was like what is happening in vivo? uh you know is there happening in vivo? uh you know is there happening in vivo? uh you know is there something you know as they say in vivo something you know as they say in vivo something you know as they say in vivo veritas very often right we know this veritas very often right we know this veritas very often right we know this has been the case for immunology that has been the case for immunology that has been the case for immunology that many experiments in vitro have not many experiments in vitro have not many experiments in vitro have not always panned once you actually study always panned once you actually study always panned once you actually study them in an actual patient so that's when them in an actual patient so that's when them in an actual patient so that's when we actually started to also use we actually started to also use we actually started to also use transplantation meaning we started transplantation meaning we started transplantation meaning we started thinking could we actually put some of thinking could we actually put some of thinking could we actually put some of the cells in an animal and see whether the cells in an animal and see whether the cells in an animal and see whether they acquire new properties or they look they acquire new properties or they look they acquire new properties or they look much more like this of course much more like this of course much more like this of course transplantation has been used for 40 transplantation has been used for 40 transplantation has been used for 40 years many of these experiments were years many of these experiments were years many of these experiments were done before I was born especially in done before I was born especially in done before I was born especially in Sweden uh when scientists will actually Sweden uh when scientists will actually Sweden uh when scientists will actually take various cells and transplant them take various cells and transplant them take various cells and transplant them into animals. And so what we did we into animals. And so what we did we into animals. And so what we did we started doing is like taking actual started doing is like taking actual started doing is like taking actual organoids cortical organoids and then organoids cortical organoids and then organoids cortical organoids and then transplanting them into a rat aborn rat transplanting them into a rat aborn rat transplanting them into a rat aborn rat in the in the somato sensory cortex. So in the in the somato sensory cortex. So in the in the somato sensory cortex. So the so like the part of the brain the so like the part of the brain the so like the part of the brain that senses uh it receives information that senses uh it receives information that senses uh it receives information from whiskers from whiskers from whiskers and done that we we've done that in the and done that we we've done that in the and done that we we've done that in the first few days after birth and it turns first few days after birth and it turns first few days after birth and it turns out that was key because if you do out that was key because if you do out that was key because if you do it later the cells don't really it later the cells don't really it later the cells don't really integrate that well they integrate but integrate that well they integrate but integrate that well they integrate but they don't fully integrate and if you they don't fully integrate and if you they don't fully integrate and if you transplant that organoid into the somato transplant that organoid into the somato transplant that organoid into the somato sensory cortex of the rat and then you sensory cortex of the rat and then you sensory cortex of the rat and then you wait for a few months that graph starts wait for a few months that graph starts wait for a few months that graph starts to grow the cells become vascularized by to grow the cells become vascularized by to grow the cells become vascularized by the rat They will even receive the rat They will even receive the rat They will even receive microglea. The immune cells of the microglea. The immune cells of the microglea. The immune cells of the nervous system of the rat start to nervous system of the rat start to nervous system of the rat start to populate. And then when you use look on populate. And then when you use look on populate. And then when you use look on an MRI, you now can see that about a an MRI, you now can see that about a an MRI, you now can see that about a third of one hemisphere of the rat is third of one hemisphere of the rat is third of one hemisphere of the rat is now made up of human cells. So you can now made up of human cells. So you can now made up of human cells. So you can see really from on an MRI from the see really from on an MRI from the see really from on an MRI from the ventricle to the PR. Now you may think ventricle to the PR. Now you may think ventricle to the PR. Now you may think that that's like an inert piece of that that's like an inert piece of that that's like an inert piece of tissue that sits there, but it turns out tissue that sits there, but it turns out tissue that sits there, but it turns out that it is quite well connected to the that it is quite well connected to the that it is quite well connected to the host. And that happens because the brain host. And that happens because the brain host. And that happens because the brain is still eager to connect at that early is still eager to connect at that early is still eager to connect at that early stage of development but later on is stage of development but later on is stage of development but later on is not. And so for instance you can do not. And so for instance you can do not. And so for instance you can do experiments where you can actually experiments where you can actually experiments where you can actually record the activity of human neurons and record the activity of human neurons and record the activity of human neurons and at the same time move the whiskers of at the same time move the whiskers of at the same time move the whiskers of the rat. So if you move the whiskers of the rat. So if you move the whiskers of the rat. So if you move the whiskers of the rat onto the opposite side obviously the rat onto the opposite side obviously the rat onto the opposite side obviously because the pathway is crossed then because the pathway is crossed then because the pathway is crossed then human neurons now start to respond to human neurons now start to respond to human neurons now start to respond to that. And then the I think probably the that. And then the I think probably the that. And then the I think probably the most important consequence of that is most important consequence of that is most important consequence of that is that they receive now input. They're now that they receive now input. They're now that they receive now input. They're now in an environment that is much more in an environment that is much more in an environment that is much more physiological. So when we now looked at physiological. So when we now looked at physiological. So when we now looked at the cells, it turned out that they're the cells, it turned out that they're the cells, it turned out that they're like six to eight folds larger than when like six to eight folds larger than when like six to eight folds larger than when we were making the dish. They're not yet we were making the dish. They're not yet we were making the dish. They're not yet identical replica, but they're very identical replica, but they're very identical replica, but they're very close. And that for us has actually been close. And that for us has actually been close. And that for us has actually been key in started to actually understand key in started to actually understand key in started to actually understand the biology of some of these conditions. the biology of some of these conditions. the biology of some of these conditions. So for instance, for Timothy syndrome, So for instance, for Timothy syndrome, So for instance, for Timothy syndrome, there is a very dramatic effect in the there is a very dramatic effect in the there is a very dramatic effect in the size of the neurons. They're almost size of the neurons. They're almost size of the neurons. They're almost twice as smaller than a control neuron twice as smaller than a control neuron twice as smaller than a control neuron &gt;&gt; in the patient. &gt;&gt; in the patient. &gt;&gt; in the patient. &gt;&gt; Well, in the patient, only when you &gt;&gt; Well, in the patient, only when you &gt;&gt; Well, in the patient, only when you transplant the cells, we can see that transplant the cells, we can see that transplant the cells, we can see that defect. In a dish, you look at them and defect. In a dish, you look at them and defect. In a dish, you look at them and they're identical. And then you they're identical. And then you they're identical. And then you transplant them and some of them grow transplant them and some of them grow transplant them and some of them grow really large to control and the patients really large to control and the patients really large to control and the patients fail. &gt;&gt; And that phenotype can only really be &gt;&gt; And that phenotype can only really be &gt;&gt; And that phenotype can only really be seen properly in vivo. So that has been seen properly in vivo. So that has been seen properly in vivo. So that has been actually essential also as we've been actually essential also as we've been actually essential also as we've been developing a therapeutic for this developing a therapeutic for this developing a therapeutic for this condition. And you start thinking like condition. And you start thinking like condition. And you start thinking like how do you test a therapeutic? how do you test a therapeutic? how do you test a therapeutic? um you know if there's no animal model um you know if there's no animal model um you know if there's no animal model of the disease you test everything in a of the disease you test everything in a of the disease you test everything in a dish you do want to have uh some safety dish you do want to have uh some safety dish you do want to have uh some safety check first of all for making sure that check first of all for making sure that check first of all for making sure that there are no adverse effects but also there are no adverse effects but also there are no adverse effects but also you want to make sure that it works in you want to make sure that it works in you want to make sure that it works in an invivo environment and actually turns an invivo environment and actually turns an invivo environment and actually turns out that this model that we've built was out that this model that we've built was out that this model that we've built was essential because now we could take essential because now we could take essential because now we could take actually the animal actually the animal actually the animal and inject the therapeutic into the and inject the therapeutic into the and inject the therapeutic into the nervous system of the animal but look at nervous system of the animal but look at nervous system of the animal but look at the effect on human neurons in an invivo the effect on human neurons in an invivo the effect on human neurons in an invivo context and uh you know so I think context and uh you know so I think context and uh you know so I think that's one application for this but if that's one application for this but if that's one application for this but if you do the transplantation at an later you do the transplantation at an later you do the transplantation at an later stage like for instance in an adult that stage like for instance in an adult that stage like for instance in an adult that integration will probably not happen integration will probably not happen integration will probably not happen &gt;&gt; I see &gt;&gt; I see &gt;&gt; I see &gt;&gt; so it's quite dependent on the species &gt;&gt; so it's quite dependent on the species &gt;&gt; so it's quite dependent on the species and there's another thing the farther and there's another thing the farther and there's another thing the farther away the species are the less likely it away the species are the less likely it away the species are the less likely it is of course that the cells will is of course that the cells will is of course that the cells will integrate &gt;&gt; so you know think about it takes just a &gt;&gt; so you know think about it takes just a &gt;&gt; so you know think about it takes just a couple of weeks for the rat to make the couple of weeks for the rat to make the couple of weeks for the rat to make the cortex it takes us 20 weeks to make most cortex it takes us 20 weeks to make most cortex it takes us 20 weeks to make most of the cortical cells of the cortical cells of the cortical cells So the human cells are always behind. So the human cells are always behind. So the human cells are always behind. The rat is finishing development very The rat is finishing development very The rat is finishing development very quickly. The humans are trying but quickly. The humans are trying but quickly. The humans are trying but they're keeping their pace. So the they're keeping their pace. So the they're keeping their pace. So the integration between the two species integration between the two species integration between the two species happens at some level but is not happens at some level but is not happens at some level but is not perfect. And that's actually not our perfect. And that's actually not our perfect. And that's actually not our goal. Our goal has never really been to goal. Our goal has never really been to goal. Our goal has never really been to have perfect integration. All we wanted have perfect integration. All we wanted have perfect integration. All we wanted to do is to have a better system where to do is to have a better system where to do is to have a better system where we can capture aspect of disease that we can capture aspect of disease that we can capture aspect of disease that we wouldn't be able to see in another way wouldn't be able to see in another way wouldn't be able to see in another way or test therapeutics that we wouldn't be or test therapeutics that we wouldn't be or test therapeutics that we wouldn't be able to test in any other way. And so able to test in any other way. And so able to test in any other way. And so that's where this actually comes in that's where this actually comes in that's where this actually comes in handy and it's been very useful. handy and it's been very useful. handy and it's been very useful. &gt;&gt; It's so interesting that for most &gt;&gt; It's so interesting that for most &gt;&gt; It's so interesting that for most people, again, I'm making a lot of people, again, I'm making a lot of people, again, I'm making a lot of assumptions here, but for most people, assumptions here, but for most people, assumptions here, but for most people, the idea of a of a chip of a, you know, the idea of a of a chip of a, you know, the idea of a of a chip of a, you know, electrode implanted into the brain of a electrode implanted into the brain of a electrode implanted into the brain of a patient or spinal cord of a patient or spinal cord of a patient or spinal cord of a patient isn't that um disturbing to them. I isn't that um disturbing to them. I isn't that um disturbing to them. I mean, no one would choose to do that in mean, no one would choose to do that in mean, no one would choose to do that in the absence of a clinical issue. But um the absence of a clinical issue. But um the absence of a clinical issue. But um well there are some people who are well there are some people who are well there are some people who are interested in brain augmentation through interested in brain augmentation through interested in brain augmentation through the implantation of chips to create the implantation of chips to create the implantation of chips to create super memory or to be able to um you super memory or to be able to um you super memory or to be able to um you know process more bits of information know process more bits of information know process more bits of information and whatever capacity. But and whatever capacity. But and whatever capacity. But typically it's discussed in the typically it's discussed in the typically it's discussed in the therapeutic context. But as soon as we therapeutic context. But as soon as we therapeutic context. But as soon as we hear about for instance um you know a hear about for instance um you know a hear about for instance um you know a pig heart or baboon heart was pig heart or baboon heart was pig heart or baboon heart was transplanted into a human you know all transplanted into a human you know all transplanted into a human you know all of a sudden it's it gets to some really of a sudden it's it gets to some really of a sudden it's it gets to some really core things about our humanness. core things about our humanness. core things about our humanness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then of course uh I can't help &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then of course uh I can't help &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then of course uh I can't help but uh be reminded of all the anecdotes but uh be reminded of all the anecdotes but uh be reminded of all the anecdotes that you hear where oh you know a that you hear where oh you know a that you hear where oh you know a patient died had donated their heart um patient died had donated their heart um patient died had donated their heart um to medicine the heart was transferred to medicine the heart was transferred to medicine the heart was transferred and then the person who received it and then the person who received it and then the person who received it thought that maybe they had adopted some thought that maybe they had adopted some thought that maybe they had adopted some features of the person's experience and features of the person's experience and features of the person's experience and there's a you know you can't really do there's a you know you can't really do there's a you know you can't really do the control experiment but there's a lot the control experiment but there's a lot the control experiment but there's a lot of interesting questions that of interesting questions that of interesting questions that border on mystical border on mystical border on mystical &gt;&gt; but that um you know given that &gt;&gt; but that um you know given that &gt;&gt; but that um you know given that experience is mapped into the nervous experience is mapped into the nervous experience is mapped into the nervous system it's not inconceivable that you system it's not inconceivable that you system it's not inconceivable that you would have memory traces at least of would have memory traces at least of would have memory traces at least of bodily experiences built into the organ bodily experiences built into the organ bodily experiences built into the organ system. Although typically we think of system. Although typically we think of system. Although typically we think of that stuff as in the brain. So you know that stuff as in the brain. So you know that stuff as in the brain. So you know as I hear and learn more about these as I hear and learn more about these as I hear and learn more about these incredible assemblids um I'm very incredible assemblids um I'm very incredible assemblids um I'm very enthusiastic about where this is headed. enthusiastic about where this is headed. enthusiastic about where this is headed. Um I also of course think that treatment Um I also of course think that treatment Um I also of course think that treatment of disease is the is like the primary of disease is the is like the primary of disease is the is like the primary entry point. this is what you know as entry point. this is what you know as entry point. this is what you know as opposed to building opposed to building opposed to building &gt;&gt; you know superhumans which is I think &gt;&gt; you know superhumans which is I think &gt;&gt; you know superhumans which is I think why that crisper experiment mutating the why that crisper experiment mutating the why that crisper experiment mutating the HIV receptor was also disparaged there HIV receptor was also disparaged there HIV receptor was also disparaged there was this idea that maybe the HIV was this idea that maybe the HIV was this idea that maybe the HIV receptor in the absence of HIV is receptor in the absence of HIV is receptor in the absence of HIV is performing other roles related to performing other roles related to performing other roles related to learning and memory and so there was learning and memory and so there was learning and memory and so there was this there were kind of hints of eugenic this there were kind of hints of eugenic this there were kind of hints of eugenic type approaches um and that raises a type approaches um and that raises a type approaches um and that raises a question for me question for me question for me &gt;&gt; you mentioned that there are many genes &gt;&gt; you mentioned that there are many genes &gt;&gt; you mentioned that there are many genes that are associated with autism that are associated with autism that are associated with autism &gt;&gt; I think most parents or parents to be &gt;&gt; I think most parents or parents to be &gt;&gt; I think most parents or parents to be don't make a test for those genes. Uh don't make a test for those genes. Uh don't make a test for those genes. Uh there are companies like Orchid in the there are companies like Orchid in the there are companies like Orchid in the Bay Area now that will do uh deep Bay Area now that will do uh deep Bay Area now that will do uh deep sequencing of embryos in IVF. You know, sequencing of embryos in IVF. You know, sequencing of embryos in IVF. You know, they'll do depending on how much you they'll do depending on how much you they'll do depending on how much you pay, they'll sequence more. This was in pay, they'll sequence more. This was in pay, they'll sequence more. This was in the news a few weeks or months ago. Um the news a few weeks or months ago. Um the news a few weeks or months ago. Um and people start thinking, oh, and people start thinking, oh, and people start thinking, oh, this is like eugenics, right? Um on the this is like eugenics, right? Um on the this is like eugenics, right? Um on the other hand, partner selection, who one other hand, partner selection, who one other hand, partner selection, who one chooses to have children with, is its chooses to have children with, is its chooses to have children with, is its own form of genetic selection. own form of genetic selection. own form of genetic selection. &gt;&gt; Say, oh, you know, uh he's very kind, &gt;&gt; Say, oh, you know, uh he's very kind, &gt;&gt; Say, oh, you know, uh he's very kind, she's very kind, she's very smart. you she's very kind, she's very smart. you she's very kind, she's very smart. you know that there people are basing their know that there people are basing their know that there people are basing their decisions uh hopefully according to decisions uh hopefully according to decisions uh hopefully according to features that they would like to create features that they would like to create features that they would like to create in the offspring. It's not always the in the offspring. It's not always the in the offspring. It's not always the case but so I think sometimes the case but so I think sometimes the case but so I think sometimes the boundary between you know what we call boundary between you know what we call boundary between you know what we call eugenics &gt;&gt; and uh mate selection and uh creating &gt;&gt; and uh mate selection and uh creating &gt;&gt; and uh mate selection and uh creating offspring in the purely oldfashioned way offspring in the purely oldfashioned way offspring in the purely oldfashioned way it's a it's blurry. It becomes a it's a it's blurry. It becomes a it's a it's blurry. It becomes a continuum. How far off are we from continuum. How far off are we from continuum. How far off are we from genetic testing of parents genetic testing of parents genetic testing of parents &gt;&gt; um as a kind of uh obligatory thing &gt;&gt; um as a kind of uh obligatory thing &gt;&gt; um as a kind of uh obligatory thing &gt;&gt; now that we know some of the genes &gt;&gt; now that we know some of the genes &gt;&gt; now that we know some of the genes associated with autism associated with autism associated with autism &gt;&gt; um we test parents for um things like &gt;&gt; um we test parents for um things like &gt;&gt; um we test parents for um things like Tay-SAC cickle cell anemia um congenal Tay-SAC cickle cell anemia um congenal Tay-SAC cickle cell anemia um congenal adrenal hyperplasia um things that we adrenal hyperplasia um things that we adrenal hyperplasia um things that we that are almost deterministic that are almost deterministic that are almost deterministic &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; down syndrome right tricome um and in &gt;&gt; down syndrome right tricome um and in &gt;&gt; down syndrome right tricome um and in some countries they'll implant embryos some countries they'll implant embryos some countries they'll implant embryos that are uh not as we say uploid um you that are uh not as we say uploid um you that are uh not as we say uploid um you know the proper assortment of know the proper assortment of know the proper assortment of chromosomes but in um in the US chromosomes but in um in the US chromosomes but in um in the US typically that's discouraged. typically that's discouraged. typically that's discouraged. &gt;&gt; Uh so &gt;&gt; Uh so &gt;&gt; Uh so &gt;&gt; how do you think about all this? Like it &gt;&gt; how do you think about all this? Like it &gt;&gt; how do you think about all this? Like it um I mean you're not responsible for um I mean you're not responsible for um I mean you're not responsible for deciding for everyone but you're right deciding for everyone but you're right deciding for everyone but you're right at the kind of leading edge of what's at the kind of leading edge of what's at the kind of leading edge of what's possible and you can kind of sniff possible and you can kind of sniff possible and you can kind of sniff what's going to be possible. I mean how what's going to be possible. I mean how what's going to be possible. I mean how much information should a person much information should a person much information should a person thinking about having a child have in thinking about having a child have in thinking about having a child have in order to make the best informed order to make the best informed order to make the best informed decisions? &gt;&gt; So for some of these conditions you &gt;&gt; So for some of these conditions you &gt;&gt; So for some of these conditions you know it's uh more straightforward than know it's uh more straightforward than know it's uh more straightforward than for others. You know as you were saying for others. You know as you were saying for others. You know as you were saying some of them are very deterministic. So some of them are very deterministic. So some of them are very deterministic. So if you have like three 21 chromosomes, if you have like three 21 chromosomes, if you have like three 21 chromosomes, you're going to have Down syndrome and you're going to have Down syndrome and you're going to have Down syndrome and that's going to be associated with a that's going to be associated with a that's going to be associated with a very classic presentation, you know, but very classic presentation, you know, but very classic presentation, you know, but for others it turns out and I think for others it turns out and I think for others it turns out and I think that's where it's much more complicated that's where it's much more complicated that's where it's much more complicated than just testing and making a decision than just testing and making a decision than just testing and making a decision is that the what we call in genetics the is that the what we call in genetics the is that the what we call in genetics the penetrance of the genetic mutations is penetrance of the genetic mutations is penetrance of the genetic mutations is variable. meaning that you could have a variable. meaning that you could have a variable. meaning that you could have a genetic mutation genetic mutation genetic mutation uh that in one patient could cause a uh that in one patient could cause a uh that in one patient could cause a very severe presentation or a phenotype very severe presentation or a phenotype very severe presentation or a phenotype and in another would be very mild. It's and in another would be very mild. It's and in another would be very mild. It's not the case for tim syndrome where not the case for tim syndrome where not the case for tim syndrome where actually it's quite predictable. Most of actually it's quite predictable. Most of actually it's quite predictable. Most of the patients that we know we've never the patients that we know we've never the patients that we know we've never identified a patient who is nonaffected identified a patient who is nonaffected identified a patient who is nonaffected and they're very severely affected. Uh and they're very severely affected. Uh and they're very severely affected. Uh but there are other conditions that are but there are other conditions that are but there are other conditions that are much more common. I think the classic much more common. I think the classic much more common. I think the classic one is uh a deletion that is happening one is uh a deletion that is happening one is uh a deletion that is happening on chromosome 22 the so-called 22q11.2 on chromosome 22 the so-called 22q11.2 on chromosome 22 the so-called 22q11.2 two deletion syndrome known by many two deletion syndrome known by many two deletion syndrome known by many names. Velocardioacial syndrome, the jaw names. Velocardioacial syndrome, the jaw names. Velocardioacial syndrome, the jaw syndrome known by many names because syndrome known by many names because syndrome known by many names because it's been it's so common. It's actually it's been it's so common. It's actually it's been it's so common. It's actually the most common microdeion in humans the most common microdeion in humans the most common microdeion in humans about one in 3,000 births. about one in 3,000 births. about one in 3,000 births. Now the condition is associated with Now the condition is associated with Now the condition is associated with cardiac issues, immune conditions, you cardiac issues, immune conditions, you cardiac issues, immune conditions, you know, many of which can actually be know, many of which can actually be know, many of which can actually be addressed medically. But it also comes addressed medically. But it also comes addressed medically. But it also comes with a 30% risk for schizophrenia. 30%. with a 30% risk for schizophrenia. 30%. with a 30% risk for schizophrenia. 30%. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So you think the general &gt;&gt; Yeah. So you think the general &gt;&gt; Yeah. So you think the general population is 1%. So this is about 30 population is 1%. So this is about 30 population is 1%. So this is about 30 times higher. It also comes with the 30% times higher. It also comes with the 30% times higher. It also comes with the 30% risk of autism. But you could also not risk of autism. But you could also not risk of autism. But you could also not have any of this. There are uh have any of this. There are uh have any of this. There are uh individuals who are carrying the 22q11.2 individuals who are carrying the 22q11.2 individuals who are carrying the 22q11.2 deletion which is a large deletion by deletion which is a large deletion by deletion which is a large deletion by the way. There's 60 genes that are gone the way. There's 60 genes that are gone the way. There's 60 genes that are gone in the classic deletion and yet still in the classic deletion and yet still in the classic deletion and yet still carry it around and have minimal uh carry it around and have minimal uh carry it around and have minimal uh defects or phenotypes. defects or phenotypes. defects or phenotypes. &gt;&gt; Do we test for this 22 Q? &gt;&gt; Do we test for this 22 Q? &gt;&gt; Do we test for this 22 Q? &gt;&gt; This is tested generally these days. &gt;&gt; This is tested generally these days. &gt;&gt; This is tested generally these days. Yes, because it's so common. Uh but I Yes, because it's so common. Uh but I Yes, because it's so common. Uh but I think that the challenge is this problem think that the challenge is this problem think that the challenge is this problem of penetrance and in some patients and of penetrance and in some patients and of penetrance and in some patients and we don't know what the context is. Each we don't know what the context is. Each we don't know what the context is. Each of us has a very complex genetic of us has a very complex genetic of us has a very complex genetic background. So it could be that you know background. So it could be that you know background. So it could be that you know the same mutation two different the same mutation two different the same mutation two different individuals will have different levels individuals will have different levels individuals will have different levels of severity because one of them perhaps of severity because one of them perhaps of severity because one of them perhaps compensates much better for whatever compensates much better for whatever compensates much better for whatever reason there's a lot of sarcastic forces reason there's a lot of sarcastic forces reason there's a lot of sarcastic forces in development and if a cell it's much in development and if a cell it's much in development and if a cell it's much faster at opening the other gene you faster at opening the other gene you faster at opening the other gene you know like the similar gene that is know like the similar gene that is know like the similar gene that is unmutated and in the other case it unmutated and in the other case it unmutated and in the other case it wasn't and or maybe there are other wasn't and or maybe there are other wasn't and or maybe there are other environmental factors that are uh you environmental factors that are uh you environmental factors that are uh you know interacting but the other know interacting but the other know interacting but the other possibility is that the genetic possibility is that the genetic possibility is that the genetic background that we have is very background that we have is very background that we have is very different and so we're still like in different and so we're still like in different and so we're still like in early days of truly understanding what early days of truly understanding what early days of truly understanding what are the effects of the genetic are the effects of the genetic are the effects of the genetic backgrounds in modulating the severity backgrounds in modulating the severity backgrounds in modulating the severity of these conditions. But in itself it's of these conditions. But in itself it's of these conditions. But in itself it's a very interesting question why some a very interesting question why some a very interesting question why some individuals can have you know a massive individuals can have you know a massive individuals can have you know a massive deletion right of 60 genes and yet still deletion right of 60 genes and yet still deletion right of 60 genes and yet still move around. So I think that that's move around. So I think that that's move around. So I think that that's going to be a lot of interesting biology going to be a lot of interesting biology going to be a lot of interesting biology to discover uh behind this. And then of to discover uh behind this. And then of to discover uh behind this. And then of course we know that there are course we know that there are course we know that there are differences between animals and humans, differences between animals and humans, differences between animals and humans, right? That that we already know that right? That that we already know that right? That that we already know that very often a mutation that would be very often a mutation that would be very often a mutation that would be very severe in a human has almost no you know severe in a human has almost no you know severe in a human has almost no you know defect in an animal model partly because defect in an animal model partly because defect in an animal model partly because that gene maybe plays a different role that gene maybe plays a different role that gene maybe plays a different role or perhaps the genetic background is or perhaps the genetic background is or perhaps the genetic background is very different. very different. very different. Speaking of which, what are some of the Speaking of which, what are some of the Speaking of which, what are some of the other diseases that are being modeled other diseases that are being modeled other diseases that are being modeled and studied with assemblids? So timothy and studied with assemblids? So timothy and studied with assemblids? So timothy syndrome has sort of like been the first syndrome has sort of like been the first syndrome has sort of like been the first example because partly because it was example because partly because it was example because partly because it was some of the first neurons that were some of the first neurons that were some of the first neurons that were derived from IPS cells uh and from derived from IPS cells uh and from derived from IPS cells uh and from patients with neurodedevelopmental patients with neurodedevelopmental patients with neurodedevelopmental disorders in those early days and also disorders in those early days and also disorders in those early days and also partly because it's the disease that we partly because it's the disease that we partly because it's the disease that we studied so much on all possible angles studied so much on all possible angles studied so much on all possible angles first with 2D neurons then with 3D first with 2D neurons then with 3D first with 2D neurons then with 3D organo then with these symbols that at organo then with these symbols that at organo then with these symbols that at one point one point one point and I like to say that it kind like a and I like to say that it kind like a and I like to say that it kind like a therapy became self-evident so to speak. therapy became self-evident so to speak. therapy became self-evident so to speak. I mean we were honestly not I was not I mean we were honestly not I was not I mean we were honestly not I was not thinking that we would develop a therapy thinking that we would develop a therapy thinking that we would develop a therapy for Timothy syndrome like not in the for Timothy syndrome like not in the for Timothy syndrome like not in the near future. Uh but at one point we just near future. Uh but at one point we just near future. Uh but at one point we just accumulated enough biological accumulated enough biological accumulated enough biological information that you just look at it and information that you just look at it and information that you just look at it and you say, "Oh, this is exactly what we you say, "Oh, this is exactly what we you say, "Oh, this is exactly what we need to do." And it turns out that and need to do." And it turns out that and need to do." And it turns out that and this we did about like 5 years ago that this we did about like 5 years ago that this we did about like 5 years ago that we understood so well how this channel we understood so well how this channel we understood so well how this channel is process in the cells and what it is process in the cells and what it is process in the cells and what it causes that at one point we realized causes that at one point we realized causes that at one point we realized that all we need to do is generate this that all we need to do is generate this that all we need to do is generate this tiny piece of nucleic acid that we can tiny piece of nucleic acid that we can tiny piece of nucleic acid that we can get inside the cells. it will go in get inside the cells. it will go in get inside the cells. it will go in switch the way the channel is actually switch the way the channel is actually switch the way the channel is actually processed and rescue or reverse the processed and rescue or reverse the processed and rescue or reverse the phenotypes. And it turns out that every phenotypes. And it turns out that every phenotypes. And it turns out that every single defect that we've described over single defect that we've described over single defect that we've described over the past 15 years in the studies can be the past 15 years in the studies can be the past 15 years in the studies can be rescued by just adding that tiny piece rescued by just adding that tiny piece rescued by just adding that tiny piece of nucleic acid. It's almost like a gene of nucleic acid. It's almost like a gene of nucleic acid. It's almost like a gene therapy in a way. It just doesn't therapy in a way. It just doesn't therapy in a way. It just doesn't involve a virus. involve a virus. involve a virus. &gt;&gt; And so this is the first disease and &gt;&gt; And so this is the first disease and &gt;&gt; And so this is the first disease and we're preparing for a clinical trial. we're preparing for a clinical trial. we're preparing for a clinical trial. The patients are very rare. So I've been The patients are very rare. So I've been The patients are very rare. So I've been traveling around the world trying to traveling around the world trying to traveling around the world trying to find most patients with him syndrome. find most patients with him syndrome. find most patients with him syndrome. and try to understand the complexity of and try to understand the complexity of and try to understand the complexity of the disease, the severity of the disease the disease, the severity of the disease the disease, the severity of the disease and so we now have a large cohort of the and so we now have a large cohort of the and so we now have a large cohort of the patients ready and we're preparing for patients ready and we're preparing for patients ready and we're preparing for the first clinical trial. We already the first clinical trial. We already the first clinical trial. We already started producing the drug. started producing the drug. started producing the drug. &gt;&gt; So it's druggable. &gt;&gt; So it's druggable. &gt;&gt; So it's druggable. &gt;&gt; We think that is druggable but this will &gt;&gt; We think that is druggable but this will &gt;&gt; We think that is druggable but this will be the first therapeutic for psychiatric be the first therapeutic for psychiatric be the first therapeutic for psychiatric disease that has been exclusively disease that has been exclusively disease that has been exclusively developed with human stem cell models developed with human stem cell models developed with human stem cell models without anything else. You know, I like without anything else. You know, I like without anything else. You know, I like to joke about probably you knew very to joke about probably you knew very to joke about probably you knew very well lubber drier. well lubber drier. well lubber drier. &gt;&gt; He developed the so-called gene ship &gt;&gt; He developed the so-called gene ship &gt;&gt; He developed the so-called gene ship early days of evaluating genes in early days of evaluating genes in early days of evaluating genes in different cells. He passed away different cells. He passed away different cells. He passed away recently. &gt;&gt; He passed away sadly. He also um Yeah, &gt;&gt; He passed away sadly. He also um Yeah, &gt;&gt; He passed away sadly. He also um Yeah, he would bring coffee by he would bring coffee by he would bring coffee by &gt;&gt; he would bring coffee by. He had an &gt;&gt; he would bring coffee by. He had an &gt;&gt; he would bring coffee by. He had an office across our D22, right? So he office across our D22, right? So he office across our D22, right? So he would come at 9. would come at 9. would come at 9. &gt;&gt; Anyone who's ever taken biochemistry, &gt;&gt; Anyone who's ever taken biochemistry, &gt;&gt; Anyone who's ever taken biochemistry, the big red biochemistry book, Strier, the big red biochemistry book, Strier, the big red biochemistry book, Strier, that's what it is. I mean, he was an that's what it is. I mean, he was an that's what it is. I mean, he was an amazing communicator. I think above amazing communicator. I think above amazing communicator. I think above anything he was just a larger than life anything he was just a larger than life anything he was just a larger than life figure who like be able to like go with figure who like be able to like go with figure who like be able to like go with you in a conversation from like a deep you in a conversation from like a deep you in a conversation from like a deep molecular mechanism to what does it molecular mechanism to what does it molecular mechanism to what does it actually mean. actually mean. actually mean. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Very kind person too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Very kind person too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Very kind person too. &gt;&gt; So my last conversation with Lubbert &gt;&gt; So my last conversation with Lubbert &gt;&gt; So my last conversation with Lubbert which happened I think a month before he which happened I think a month before he which happened I think a month before he passed away. He came to my office at passed away. He came to my office at passed away. He came to my office at Stanford. We would meet like every few Stanford. We would meet like every few Stanford. We would meet like every few months. He was just like so interested months. He was just like so interested months. He was just like so interested about like how this is evolving. And I about like how this is evolving. And I about like how this is evolving. And I remember he was sitting in my office and remember he was sitting in my office and remember he was sitting in my office and then he wanted to know where are you then he wanted to know where are you then he wanted to know where are you with Timothy syndrome? the paper was with Timothy syndrome? the paper was with Timothy syndrome? the paper was still under revision at Nature was still under revision at Nature was still under revision at Nature was coming in the next few months and uh and coming in the next few months and uh and coming in the next few months and uh and then he said like you know like the then he said like you know like the then he said like you know like the saddest thing is like I'm not going to saddest thing is like I'm not going to saddest thing is like I'm not going to see this paper published like I want to see this paper published like I want to see this paper published like I want to see this paper published and I said like see this paper published and I said like see this paper published and I said like why and he goes do you know what you've why and he goes do you know what you've why and he goes do you know what you've done you know cuz he would usually use done you know cuz he would usually use done you know cuz he would usually use with that intensity and I thought like with that intensity and I thought like with that intensity and I thought like oh my god maybe you know he realized oh my god maybe you know he realized oh my god maybe you know he realized some you know we've made the mistake some you know we've made the mistake some you know we've made the mistake somewhere in the paper or like you know somewhere in the paper or like you know somewhere in the paper or like you know it's going to point out to some flaw and it's going to point out to some flaw and it's going to point out to some flaw and then he says no you've demystified the then he says no you've demystified the then he says no you've demystified the psychiatric disease psychiatric disease psychiatric disease I said, "What do you mean?" Said, "Well, I said, "What do you mean?" Said, "Well, I said, "What do you mean?" Said, "Well, think about psychiatric disorders. think about psychiatric disorders. think about psychiatric disorders. They're so esoteric, so complex, mental They're so esoteric, so complex, mental They're so esoteric, so complex, mental processes in, you know, that are processes in, you know, that are processes in, you know, that are arising, behavioral changes, and yet you arising, behavioral changes, and yet you arising, behavioral changes, and yet you went all the way down to like a went all the way down to like a went all the way down to like a molecular defect, a point mutation, molecular defect, a point mutation, molecular defect, a point mutation, figure out the rest, and now you're on a figure out the rest, and now you're on a figure out the rest, and now you're on a verge of potentially, you know, perhaps verge of potentially, you know, perhaps verge of potentially, you know, perhaps not reversing, but at least improving not reversing, but at least improving not reversing, but at least improving some." So, he was so excited about this. some." So, he was so excited about this. some." So, he was so excited about this. I think I never kind like think enough I think I never kind like think enough I think I never kind like think enough perhaps about it but he was the last one perhaps about it but he was the last one perhaps about it but he was the last one who s like reminded about like how who s like reminded about like how who s like reminded about like how important it is actually to focus on important it is actually to focus on important it is actually to focus on this genetic disorders of which we know this genetic disorders of which we know this genetic disorders of which we know more. Of course this is what just one more. Of course this is what just one more. Of course this is what just one form of disease. There are so many more form of disease. There are so many more form of disease. There are so many more afterwards but our hope is that just by afterwards but our hope is that just by afterwards but our hope is that just by understanding and learning from this understanding and learning from this understanding and learning from this we're going to be able to apply to other we're going to be able to apply to other we're going to be able to apply to other disorders. So another one that we're disorders. So another one that we're disorders. So another one that we're studying now there are forms of epilepsy studying now there are forms of epilepsy studying now there are forms of epilepsy which are very difficult to study. There which are very difficult to study. There which are very difficult to study. There are intractable forms of epilepsies. are intractable forms of epilepsies. are intractable forms of epilepsies. Patients who have some of these genetic Patients who have some of these genetic Patients who have some of these genetic mutations, whether they're in an iron mutations, whether they're in an iron mutations, whether they're in an iron channel or in molecules that are channel or in molecules that are channel or in molecules that are important for cells to stick with each important for cells to stick with each important for cells to stick with each other, they can cause 60 seizures a day, other, they can cause 60 seizures a day, other, they can cause 60 seizures a day, right? So, they're really devastating right? So, they're really devastating right? So, they're really devastating conditions that are actually causing conditions that are actually causing conditions that are actually causing impairment just by having those seizures impairment just by having those seizures impairment just by having those seizures every single day for 10 15 years. And every single day for 10 15 years. And every single day for 10 15 years. And so, those are a really big issue uh so, those are a really big issue uh so, those are a really big issue uh right now. So we've been focusing a lot right now. So we've been focusing a lot right now. So we've been focusing a lot on trying to build our models for this on trying to build our models for this on trying to build our models for this epileptic seizures either through in epileptic seizures either through in epileptic seizures either through in vitro studies or after we transplant and vitro studies or after we transplant and vitro studies or after we transplant and then we study more complex networks in then we study more complex networks in then we study more complex networks in patients and then of course intellectual patients and then of course intellectual patients and then of course intellectual disability so severe intellectual disability so severe intellectual disability so severe intellectual disability uh schizophrenia forms of disability uh schizophrenia forms of disability uh schizophrenia forms of schizophrenia. So we've been studying schizophrenia. So we've been studying schizophrenia. So we've been studying now for almost 12 13 years 22Q11 now for almost 12 13 years 22Q11 now for almost 12 13 years 22Q11 deletion syndrome. We think it's so like deletion syndrome. We think it's so like deletion syndrome. We think it's so like an entry point. It's the highest genetic an entry point. It's the highest genetic an entry point. It's the highest genetic risk factor that we know of for risk factor that we know of for risk factor that we know of for schizophrenia. So we think it may give schizophrenia. So we think it may give schizophrenia. So we think it may give us some windows into how you know us some windows into how you know us some windows into how you know molecular defects arise. So I think all molecular defects arise. So I think all molecular defects arise. So I think all you know you can think of most you know you can think of most you know you can think of most psychiatric and neurological conditions psychiatric and neurological conditions psychiatric and neurological conditions that you can study now as long as they that you can study now as long as they that you can study now as long as they have a strong biological have a strong biological have a strong biological genetic component. Mhm. genetic component. Mhm. genetic component. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So I think those that have a social &gt;&gt; So I think those that have a social &gt;&gt; So I think those that have a social component, those that are triggered by component, those that are triggered by component, those that are triggered by social stress, let's say, right, like social stress, let's say, right, like social stress, let's say, right, like forms of anxiety, forms of anxiety, forms of anxiety, um you know, depression, those are much um you know, depression, those are much um you know, depression, those are much more challenging to study because of more challenging to study because of more challenging to study because of course we can mimic that social course we can mimic that social course we can mimic that social environment. &gt;&gt; Can I make a request please &gt;&gt; Can I make a request please &gt;&gt; Can I make a request please &gt;&gt; that someone in your lab try to tackle &gt;&gt; that someone in your lab try to tackle &gt;&gt; that someone in your lab try to tackle uh donia? uh donia? uh donia? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Uh I had the experience last year of &gt;&gt; Uh I had the experience last year of &gt;&gt; Uh I had the experience last year of somebody contacting me. I get contacted somebody contacting me. I get contacted somebody contacting me. I get contacted a lot, you know, for requests to help a lot, you know, for requests to help a lot, you know, for requests to help with hor horribly um sad situations, with hor horribly um sad situations, with hor horribly um sad situations, right? As one does if you're in the right? As one does if you're in the right? As one does if you're in the neuroscience field. Um typically it's neuroscience field. Um typically it's neuroscience field. Um typically it's people with visual deficits who've gone people with visual deficits who've gone people with visual deficits who've gone blind or losing their vision. This time blind or losing their vision. This time blind or losing their vision. This time it was a mother of a young kid who it was a mother of a young kid who it was a mother of a young kid who had a form of donia where he was had a form of donia where he was had a form of donia where he was essentially just going from a by all essentially just going from a by all essentially just going from a by all accounts normal appearing and acting kid accounts normal appearing and acting kid accounts normal appearing and acting kid to having basically no ability to move to having basically no ability to move to having basically no ability to move or do anything. couldn't go to camp, or do anything. couldn't go to camp, or do anything. couldn't go to camp, couldn't go to school, and just it was couldn't go to school, and just it was couldn't go to school, and just it was just a very tragic situation. Um, just a very tragic situation. Um, just a very tragic situation. Um, he had a neurosurgery. I will know soon he had a neurosurgery. I will know soon he had a neurosurgery. I will know soon how he's doing. But I learned that how he's doing. But I learned that how he's doing. But I learned that these doniaas are not super uncommon. I these doniaas are not super uncommon. I these doniaas are not super uncommon. I mean, fortunately, they're mean, fortunately, they're mean, fortunately, they're uncommon enough, but uncommon enough, but uncommon enough, but &gt;&gt; you just have to witness one of these &gt;&gt; you just have to witness one of these &gt;&gt; you just have to witness one of these stories and it turns out they're stories and it turns out they're stories and it turns out they're there is a genetic basis for these. there is a genetic basis for these. there is a genetic basis for these. &gt;&gt; So, um, I'm putting in a vote for donia &gt;&gt; So, um, I'm putting in a vote for donia &gt;&gt; So, um, I'm putting in a vote for donia for the parent and for the child. It's for the parent and for the child. It's for the parent and for the child. It's it's devastating. Um and we don't hear it's devastating. Um and we don't hear it's devastating. Um and we don't hear from these people very often. Um and from these people very often. Um and from these people very often. Um and there sociological reasons for there sociological reasons for there sociological reasons for that. Um certain diseases are under that. Um certain diseases are under that. Um certain diseases are under represented in the public sphere. Autism represented in the public sphere. Autism represented in the public sphere. Autism we hear a lot about not just because of we hear a lot about not just because of we hear a lot about not just because of the prevalence but because um the prevalence but because um the prevalence but because um &gt;&gt; there's a we have a certain affinity to &gt;&gt; there's a we have a certain affinity to &gt;&gt; there's a we have a certain affinity to uh kids. Um and that explains that a uh kids. Um and that explains that a uh kids. Um and that explains that a discussion for another time. But these discussion for another time. But these discussion for another time. But these doniaas are very hard to witness in a doniaas are very hard to witness in a doniaas are very hard to witness in a way that um has made them kind of um uh way that um has made them kind of um uh way that um has made them kind of um uh veiled. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; To to the public and but they're very &gt;&gt; To to the public and but they're very &gt;&gt; To to the public and but they're very detrimental and it would be very detrimental and it would be very detrimental and it would be amazing. I know you already have a lot amazing. I know you already have a lot amazing. I know you already have a lot on your plate. Um but I'm putting in a on your plate. Um but I'm putting in a on your plate. Um but I'm putting in a strong vote for strong vote for strong vote for &gt;&gt; we are actually working on donia &gt;&gt; we are actually working on donia &gt;&gt; we are actually working on donia because they are devastating conditions because they are devastating conditions because they are devastating conditions and there are now genetic mutations that and there are now genetic mutations that and there are now genetic mutations that cause really severe forms of disynesia cause really severe forms of disynesia cause really severe forms of disynesia and donia. So really uncontrollable and donia. So really uncontrollable and donia. So really uncontrollable movements in these kids that are really movements in these kids that are really movements in these kids that are really devastating for social uh functioning devastating for social uh functioning devastating for social uh functioning and in general for development and in general for development and in general for development &gt;&gt; and so we do know a little bit about the &gt;&gt; and so we do know a little bit about the &gt;&gt; and so we do know a little bit about the biology behind it. We do know that the biology behind it. We do know that the biology behind it. We do know that the basil ganglia this deep structure into basil ganglia this deep structure into basil ganglia this deep structure into the brain is very important for the brain is very important for the brain is very important for movements. You know we very often movements. You know we very often movements. You know we very often stimulate that brain region for stimulate that brain region for stimulate that brain region for Parkinson's disease or parts you know of Parkinson's disease or parts you know of Parkinson's disease or parts you know of those circuitry. So we know it's very those circuitry. So we know it's very those circuitry. So we know it's very important. So we've been trying to important. So we've been trying to important. So we've been trying to rebuild it in a dish. So we now can rebuild it in a dish. So we now can rebuild it in a dish. So we now can build some of the circuits. We call them build some of the circuits. We call them build some of the circuits. We call them loop assemblids where essentially you loop assemblids where essentially you loop assemblids where essentially you can put a cortex and we've made the can put a cortex and we've made the can put a cortex and we've made the &gt;&gt; stridum &gt;&gt; stridum &gt;&gt; stridum &gt;&gt; and then you put parts of the mess &gt;&gt; and then you put parts of the mess &gt;&gt; and then you put parts of the mess inflon and the midbrain and the phalamus inflon and the midbrain and the phalamus inflon and the midbrain and the phalamus &gt;&gt; and the cells connect in a loop and now &gt;&gt; and the cells connect in a loop and now &gt;&gt; and the cells connect in a loop and now they have activity. So you can now they have activity. So you can now they have activity. So you can now induce mutations at various levels of induce mutations at various levels of induce mutations at various levels of the circuit and see where is that the circuit and see where is that the circuit and see where is that mutation most important. So let's say if mutation most important. So let's say if mutation most important. So let's say if you were to develop a gene therapy you were to develop a gene therapy you were to develop a gene therapy &gt;&gt; where would you deliver that gene right &gt;&gt; where would you deliver that gene right &gt;&gt; where would you deliver that gene right if you were to choose if you can deliver if you were to choose if you can deliver if you were to choose if you can deliver it in the entire brain. So these are it in the entire brain. So these are it in the entire brain. So these are really so like early days but I think really so like early days but I think really so like early days but I think the it can be applied and I think in the it can be applied and I think in the it can be applied and I think in general you know you were mentioning this before you know you were mentioning this before you know you were mentioning this before about autism right and this you know about autism right and this you know about autism right and this you know even the ability of so like even the ability of so like even the ability of so like communicating uh this disorders or how much awareness uh this disorders or how much awareness uh this disorders or how much awareness there is right I think when I refer to there is right I think when I refer to there is right I think when I refer to autism I generally refer to the severe autism I generally refer to the severe autism I generally refer to the severe forms and profound autism forms and profound autism forms and profound autism &gt;&gt; and as we discussed earlier there's &gt;&gt; and as we discussed earlier there's &gt;&gt; and as we discussed earlier there's certainly a continuum and there are many certainly a continuum and there are many certainly a continuum and there are many individuals that high functioning, individuals that high functioning, individuals that high functioning, right? There are um uh they have high right? There are um uh they have high right? There are um uh they have high skills. Uh they may lack certain social skills. Uh they may lack certain social skills. Uh they may lack certain social skills, but they have other skills. skills, but they have other skills. skills, but they have other skills. They're different. They're productive in They're different. They're productive in They're different. They're productive in society. I am not talking about society. I am not talking about society. I am not talking about discovering or developing a therapeutic discovering or developing a therapeutic discovering or developing a therapeutic for any of these individuals. We are for any of these individuals. We are for any of these individuals. We are talking about the profound forms of talking about the profound forms of talking about the profound forms of autism. The ones that actually the autism. The ones that actually the autism. The ones that actually the parents are still struggling to even parents are still struggling to even parents are still struggling to even communicate about, right? the kids who communicate about, right? the kids who communicate about, right? the kids who may never go to school may uh never be may never go to school may uh never be may never go to school may uh never be able to actually live on their own. The able to actually live on their own. The able to actually live on their own. The same is the case for many of these same is the case for many of these same is the case for many of these patients with severe donius. So I think patients with severe donius. So I think patients with severe donius. So I think it's very important because uh I think it's very important because uh I think it's very important because uh I think in the case of autism partly because in the case of autism partly because in the case of autism partly because it's been talked about and again because it's been talked about and again because it's been talked about and again because it is a spectrum is uh you know it's it is a spectrum is uh you know it's it is a spectrum is uh you know it's also part of the identity right of a also part of the identity right of a also part of the identity right of a part of the population and that's part of the population and that's part of the population and that's absolutely fine. I think perhaps like at absolutely fine. I think perhaps like at absolutely fine. I think perhaps like at one point having different terms one point having different terms one point having different terms &gt;&gt; yeah that would be useful. It may be &gt;&gt; yeah that would be useful. It may be &gt;&gt; yeah that would be useful. It may be useful because we were talking before useful because we were talking before useful because we were talking before about terminology which is so important. about terminology which is so important. about terminology which is so important. Um so perhaps that would be sort of like Um so perhaps that would be sort of like Um so perhaps that would be sort of like useful at one point to define um you useful at one point to define um you useful at one point to define um you know the border between uh profound know the border between uh profound know the border between uh profound forms of autism and forms of autism that forms of autism and forms of autism that forms of autism and forms of autism that are not really a disease. are not really a disease. are not really a disease. &gt;&gt; Yeah. as well-meaning as the psychiatric &gt;&gt; Yeah. as well-meaning as the psychiatric &gt;&gt; Yeah. as well-meaning as the psychiatric community is, it's bound by this, you community is, it's bound by this, you community is, it's bound by this, you know, DSM, whatever number it happens to know, DSM, whatever number it happens to know, DSM, whatever number it happens to be on for understandable reasons, be on for understandable reasons, be on for understandable reasons, but I think uh better um nomenclature but I think uh better um nomenclature but I think uh better um nomenclature would really help that has societal would really help that has societal would really help that has societal implications. It has to do with how we implications. It has to do with how we implications. It has to do with how we treat people generally. Um treat people generally. Um treat people generally. Um &gt;&gt; actually, just as a quick reflection, &gt;&gt; actually, just as a quick reflection, &gt;&gt; actually, just as a quick reflection, years ago, I sat down with Bob Desimone years ago, I sat down with Bob Desimone years ago, I sat down with Bob Desimone who, you know, world-class who, you know, world-class who, you know, world-class neuroscientist as you know, but he was neuroscientist as you know, but he was neuroscientist as you know, but he was the head of the National Institutes of the head of the National Institutes of the head of the National Institutes of Mental Health at that time. And he said Mental Health at that time. And he said Mental Health at that time. And he said to me directly, it was over lunch. He to me directly, it was over lunch. He to me directly, it was over lunch. He said, "Um, do you know why there's so said, "Um, do you know why there's so said, "Um, do you know why there's so much more money spent trying to much more money spent trying to much more money spent trying to understand autism as opposed to understand autism as opposed to understand autism as opposed to schizophrenia?" At least that was the schizophrenia?" At least that was the schizophrenia?" At least that was the case at the time and I think it is still case at the time and I think it is still case at the time and I think it is still now. I said, "No." And he said, "Because now. I said, "No." And he said, "Because now. I said, "No." And he said, "Because the uh strong genetic link in the uh strong genetic link in the uh strong genetic link in schizophrenia means that um often times schizophrenia means that um often times schizophrenia means that um often times the parents are struggling as well. the parents are struggling as well. the parents are struggling as well. They're not bringing their children in. They're not bringing their children in. They're not bringing their children in. And with severe uh nowadays it's not And with severe uh nowadays it's not And with severe uh nowadays it's not politically correct to call them politically correct to call them politically correct to call them schizophrenics. for people with severe schizophrenics. for people with severe schizophrenics. for people with severe schizophrenia, uh it's scary to be around. uh it's scary to be around. uh it's scary to be around. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; it it's really scary. Whereas with &gt;&gt; it it's really scary. Whereas with &gt;&gt; it it's really scary. Whereas with autism, um even in the profound cases, autism, um even in the profound cases, autism, um even in the profound cases, these are children and as a human these are children and as a human these are children and as a human species, we naturally have this we species, we naturally have this we species, we naturally have this we want to care for our young and it just want to care for our young and it just want to care for our young and it just it just pulls on us. and he said, you it just pulls on us. and he said, you it just pulls on us. and he said, you know, so there's been this incredible know, so there's been this incredible know, so there's been this incredible lobby uh of the government and therefore lobby uh of the government and therefore lobby uh of the government and therefore pressure on NIH to um direct funds pressure on NIH to um direct funds pressure on NIH to um direct funds towards studying autism far less for towards studying autism far less for towards studying autism far less for schizophrenia. It's interesting, you schizophrenia. It's interesting, you schizophrenia. It's interesting, you know, in light of the homeless problem know, in light of the homeless problem know, in light of the homeless problem in California and elsewhere and the huge in California and elsewhere and the huge in California and elsewhere and the huge amount of mental disease and drug amount of mental disease and drug amount of mental disease and drug addiction. I think nowadays there's a addiction. I think nowadays there's a addiction. I think nowadays there's a kind of a broader understanding of brain kind of a broader understanding of brain kind of a broader understanding of brain diseases as diseases that people suffer diseases as diseases that people suffer diseases as diseases that people suffer from as opposed to from as opposed to from as opposed to &gt;&gt; cold mothering or something, you know, &gt;&gt; cold mothering or something, you know, &gt;&gt; cold mothering or something, you know, like ridiculous theories like that. like ridiculous theories like that. like ridiculous theories like that. &gt;&gt; I definitely want to talk a little bit &gt;&gt; I definitely want to talk a little bit &gt;&gt; I definitely want to talk a little bit about um you um not getting too personal about um you um not getting too personal about um you um not getting too personal here, but um I've known you for some here, but um I've known you for some here, but um I've known you for some years and um from the first time I met years and um from the first time I met years and um from the first time I met you, it was clear you were going to work you, it was clear you were going to work you, it was clear you were going to work on something important. you were gonna on something important. you were gonna on something important. you were gonna figure it out and your work ethic figure it out and your work ethic figure it out and your work ethic is like something to behold. Uh without is like something to behold. Uh without is like something to behold. Uh without inflating numbers, um uh how much time inflating numbers, um uh how much time inflating numbers, um uh how much time are you spending these days either are you spending these days either are you spending these days either at the computer working on things at the computer working on things at the computer working on things related to your science or in the lab or related to your science or in the lab or related to your science or in the lab or thinking about your science? I mean, of thinking about your science? I mean, of thinking about your science? I mean, of your waking hours, what percentage? of your waking hours, what percentage? of your waking hours, what percentage? &gt;&gt; Well, I've never seen this at work. So, &gt;&gt; Well, I've never seen this at work. So, &gt;&gt; Well, I've never seen this at work. So, probably all the time. I think about probably all the time. I think about probably all the time. I think about this all the time. I mean luckily now of this all the time. I mean luckily now of this all the time. I mean luckily now of course I have a lab of incredible course I have a lab of incredible course I have a lab of incredible scientists and many of them now have scientists and many of them now have scientists and many of them now have their own labs their own labs their own labs &gt;&gt; and uh we've been teaching so many &gt;&gt; and uh we've been teaching so many &gt;&gt; and uh we've been teaching so many people around the world now like more people around the world now like more people around the world now like more than 350 labs around the world to just than 350 labs around the world to just than 350 labs around the world to just implement this technology very implement this technology very implement this technology very systematically through courses that we systematically through courses that we systematically through courses that we do at Stanford. So I feel we've like do at Stanford. So I feel we've like do at Stanford. So I feel we've like amplified so much so there's always amplified so much so there's always amplified so much so there's always something happening uh but I've never something happening uh but I've never something happening uh but I've never seen it honestly at work. I mean I think seen it honestly at work. I mean I think seen it honestly at work. I mean I think it's so fun to think about you it's so fun to think about you it's so fun to think about you know the human brain. It's certainly know the human brain. It's certainly know the human brain. It's certainly fascinating to think about the biology fascinating to think about the biology fascinating to think about the biology of these conditions and of course for me of these conditions and of course for me of these conditions and of course for me training as a physician. I think seeing training as a physician. I think seeing training as a physician. I think seeing firsthand some of the devastating firsthand some of the devastating firsthand some of the devastating effects of psychiatric disorders was effects of psychiatric disorders was effects of psychiatric disorders was a very strong um you know motivation was a very strong um you know motivation was a very strong um you know motivation to actually go into neuroscience. to actually go into neuroscience. to actually go into neuroscience. &gt;&gt; I'll never forget when the or when your &gt;&gt; I'll never forget when the or when your &gt;&gt; I'll never forget when the or when your first paper was published as a posttock. first paper was published as a posttock. first paper was published as a posttock. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; You brought in um a cake for everyone &gt;&gt; You brought in um a cake for everyone &gt;&gt; You brought in um a cake for everyone else. I don't know if you remember that. else. I don't know if you remember that. else. I don't know if you remember that. &gt;&gt; You brought in cake for everyone else. I &gt;&gt; You brought in cake for everyone else. I &gt;&gt; You brought in cake for everyone else. I don't remember. don't remember. don't remember. &gt;&gt; And I was like, this is the first time &gt;&gt; And I was like, this is the first time &gt;&gt; And I was like, this is the first time I've ever observed this. This is I've ever observed this. This is I've ever observed this. This is awesome. At the time I was eating cake. awesome. At the time I was eating cake. awesome. At the time I was eating cake. I don't eat cake anymore. With each I don't eat cake anymore. With each I don't eat cake anymore. With each successive decade, I get stricter and successive decade, I get stricter and successive decade, I get stricter and stricter with my eating. I still enjoy stricter with my eating. I still enjoy stricter with my eating. I still enjoy food very much, but um it's really food very much, but um it's really food very much, but um it's really speaks to your spirit and your speaks to your spirit and your speaks to your spirit and your generosity. I feel so blessed that generosity. I feel so blessed that generosity. I feel so blessed that someday I'll be able to say I can tell someday I'll be able to say I can tell someday I'll be able to say I can tell you stories from way back when D222 when you stories from way back when D222 when you stories from way back when D222 when we took over that room without we took over that room without we took over that room without permission. I think we just did it. permission. I think we just did it. permission. I think we just did it. &gt;&gt; I think we just took it. &gt;&gt; I think we just took it. &gt;&gt; I think we just took it. &gt;&gt; Which is the way to which is the way to &gt;&gt; Which is the way to which is the way to &gt;&gt; Which is the way to which is the way to do it. do it. do it. &gt;&gt; It's unincorporated. Well, Ben was the &gt;&gt; It's unincorporated. Well, Ben was the &gt;&gt; It's unincorporated. Well, Ben was the one who always said, you know, ask for one who always said, you know, ask for one who always said, you know, ask for forgiveness, not permission within the forgiveness, not permission within the forgiveness, not permission within the proper context uh of doing science. Um proper context uh of doing science. Um proper context uh of doing science. Um he uh was famous for bringing his he uh was famous for bringing his he uh was famous for bringing his experiments to talks as a postto so he experiments to talks as a postto so he experiments to talks as a postto so he wouldn't lose time on his experiments. wouldn't lose time on his experiments. wouldn't lose time on his experiments. He and then I think at one point there's He and then I think at one point there's He and then I think at one point there's a story where someone called it out him a story where someone called it out him a story where someone called it out him out and said, "Hey, you know, like why out and said, "Hey, you know, like why out and said, "Hey, you know, like why are you bringing your experiments to are you bringing your experiments to are you bringing your experiments to seminars? Everyone else is drinking seminars? Everyone else is drinking seminars? Everyone else is drinking coffee and doing stuff." He said, "Cuz I coffee and doing stuff." He said, "Cuz I coffee and doing stuff." He said, "Cuz I don't know if your seminar is going to don't know if your seminar is going to don't know if your seminar is going to be any good and I don't want to waste be any good and I don't want to waste be any good and I don't want to waste the time on my experiments." You know, the time on my experiments." You know, the time on my experiments." You know, he had such a an incredible spirit about he had such a an incredible spirit about he had such a an incredible spirit about just ceaseless pursuit of knowledge. Uh just ceaseless pursuit of knowledge. Uh just ceaseless pursuit of knowledge. Uh which clearly you do as well. Um Sergu, which clearly you do as well. Um Sergu, which clearly you do as well. Um Sergu, I am so grateful for you taking time out I am so grateful for you taking time out I am so grateful for you taking time out of your immensely busy schedule to come of your immensely busy schedule to come of your immensely busy schedule to come here and educate us all on this here and educate us all on this here and educate us all on this incredible technology that you've incredible technology that you've incredible technology that you've developed and that other laboratories developed and that other laboratories developed and that other laboratories are now using. I realize it's a field um are now using. I realize it's a field um are now using. I realize it's a field um but clearly a field that you've been but clearly a field that you've been but clearly a field that you've been seinal in launching and you know I think seinal in launching and you know I think seinal in launching and you know I think for a lot of people if they were to just for a lot of people if they were to just for a lot of people if they were to just hear about organoids in the news or hear about organoids in the news or hear about organoids in the news or hear okay we took these neurons and we were okay we took these neurons and we were okay we took these neurons and we were able to grow them in a dish and they able to grow them in a dish and they able to grow them in a dish and they formed some uh things that resemble formed some uh things that resemble formed some uh things that resemble circuits and we're putting them into circuits and we're putting them into circuits and we're putting them into mice. They'd say you know this sounds a mice. They'd say you know this sounds a mice. They'd say you know this sounds a lot like a parlor trick or something lot like a parlor trick or something lot like a parlor trick or something that scientists do to keep themselves that scientists do to keep themselves that scientists do to keep themselves busy with our tax dollars. But I just busy with our tax dollars. But I just busy with our tax dollars. But I just want to thank you because you've want to thank you because you've want to thank you because you've beautifully illustrated the linear beautifully illustrated the linear beautifully illustrated the linear fashion in which you've gone from human fashion in which you've gone from human fashion in which you've gone from human disease to building up technologies. One disease to building up technologies. One disease to building up technologies. One cell type in a dish, two cell types, cell type in a dish, two cell types, cell type in a dish, two cell types, circuits in a dish, three synapses, circuits in a dish, three synapses, circuits in a dish, three synapses, modeling, using drugs and other modeling, using drugs and other modeling, using drugs and other approaches, genetic therapies to figure approaches, genetic therapies to figure approaches, genetic therapies to figure out what actually needs to be fixed, out what actually needs to be fixed, out what actually needs to be fixed, going back into patients, which is super going back into patients, which is super going back into patients, which is super exciting. I'm absolutely convinced this exciting. I'm absolutely convinced this exciting. I'm absolutely convinced this is the way science is going to be done is the way science is going to be done is the way science is going to be done on the brain to cure neurologic and on the brain to cure neurologic and on the brain to cure neurologic and psychiatric diseases, I'm absolutely psychiatric diseases, I'm absolutely psychiatric diseases, I'm absolutely convinced because animal models, while convinced because animal models, while convinced because animal models, while they have their place, they just can't they have their place, they just can't they have their place, they just can't recapitulate everything we're interested recapitulate everything we're interested recapitulate everything we're interested in. And we know that as you mentioned, in. And we know that as you mentioned, in. And we know that as you mentioned, from other fields. So, uh, whatever we from other fields. So, uh, whatever we from other fields. So, uh, whatever we have to do to keep you going, uh, you have to do to keep you going, uh, you have to do to keep you going, uh, you look younger than the last time I saw look younger than the last time I saw look younger than the last time I saw you, which was a while ago. So, uh, you you, which was a while ago. So, uh, you you, which was a while ago. So, uh, you told me before we started, you walk a told me before we started, you walk a told me before we started, you walk a lot. How many steps a day are you doing? lot. How many steps a day are you doing? lot. How many steps a day are you doing? &gt;&gt; I do more than 12, 15,000 for sure. &gt;&gt; I do more than 12, 15,000 for sure. &gt;&gt; I do more than 12, 15,000 for sure. &gt;&gt; So, you're walking to and from work. &gt;&gt; So, you're walking to and from work. &gt;&gt; So, you're walking to and from work. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I walk all the time. I like to &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I walk all the time. I like to &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I walk all the time. I like to walk especially when I travel. I you walk especially when I travel. I you walk especially when I travel. I you know I visit a lot Europe and parts of know I visit a lot Europe and parts of know I visit a lot Europe and parts of the world and I love to just walk and the world and I love to just walk and the world and I love to just walk and &gt;&gt; art is the only other thing that I do. &gt;&gt; art is the only other thing that I do. &gt;&gt; art is the only other thing that I do. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Other than science I love art. I used to &gt;&gt; Other than science I love art. I used to &gt;&gt; Other than science I love art. I used to paint. Right now it's mostly thinking paint. Right now it's mostly thinking paint. Right now it's mostly thinking about art and like what you know I've about art and like what you know I've about art and like what you know I've seen most museums in Europe at this seen most museums in Europe at this seen most museums in Europe at this point like several times. point like several times. point like several times. &gt;&gt; Whose art is exciting you now? I'm &gt;&gt; Whose art is exciting you now? I'm &gt;&gt; Whose art is exciting you now? I'm fascinated by I love art but whose art fascinated by I love art but whose art fascinated by I love art but whose art are you um intrigued by lately? are you um intrigued by lately? are you um intrigued by lately? &gt;&gt; Well I mean I've my favorites have &gt;&gt; Well I mean I've my favorites have &gt;&gt; Well I mean I've my favorites have always been Impressionist. Uh but then I always been Impressionist. Uh but then I always been Impressionist. Uh but then I go through phases and uh so I love all go through phases and uh so I love all go through phases and uh so I love all art as an expression and I think that's art as an expression and I think that's art as an expression and I think that's sort of like uh you know I walk a lot sort of like uh you know I walk a lot sort of like uh you know I walk a lot museums I think you could you could museums I think you could you could museums I think you could you could probably trace like where I've done most probably trace like where I've done most probably trace like where I've done most of the walking and it's probably done in of the walking and it's probably done in of the walking and it's probably done in museums or in California walking at museums or in California walking at museums or in California walking at night and so like discussing science night and so like discussing science night and so like discussing science with students or others. with students or others. with students or others. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. And none of this biohacking &gt;&gt; Fantastic. And none of this biohacking &gt;&gt; Fantastic. And none of this biohacking nonsense. You eat one meal a day. That's nonsense. You eat one meal a day. That's nonsense. You eat one meal a day. That's how you stay so fit. how you stay so fit. how you stay so fit. &gt;&gt; I generally eat one meal a day. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I generally eat one meal a day. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I generally eat one meal a day. Yeah. &gt;&gt; How long have you been doing that? &gt;&gt; How long have you been doing that? &gt;&gt; How long have you been doing that? &gt;&gt; Uh years I think. Uh years. I mean I &gt;&gt; Uh years I think. Uh years. I mean I &gt;&gt; Uh years I think. Uh years. I mean I think in medical school initially as a think in medical school initially as a think in medical school initially as a necessity because uh I grew up in necessity because uh I grew up in necessity because uh I grew up in Romania and I went to medical school Romania and I went to medical school Romania and I went to medical school there and there wasn't really dedicated there and there wasn't really dedicated there and there wasn't really dedicated time for research. So I had no option time for research. So I had no option time for research. So I had no option but to do my experiments either very but to do my experiments either very but to do my experiments either very early in the morning or very late at early in the morning or very late at early in the morning or very late at night. &gt;&gt; So there would be very little time um to &gt;&gt; So there would be very little time um to &gt;&gt; So there would be very little time um to actually like eat to be honest at that actually like eat to be honest at that actually like eat to be honest at that time. So I felt I was like running all time. So I felt I was like running all time. So I felt I was like running all the time doing experiments or clinical the time doing experiments or clinical the time doing experiments or clinical work. Well, like I said, your vigor work. Well, like I said, your vigor work. Well, like I said, your vigor seems to be just increasing with time. seems to be just increasing with time. seems to be just increasing with time. It's it's really wonderful. Clearly, you It's it's really wonderful. Clearly, you It's it's really wonderful. Clearly, you found the career path for you and found the career path for you and found the career path for you and it's going to benefit us all. It already it's going to benefit us all. It already it's going to benefit us all. It already has. So, please come back and tell us has. So, please come back and tell us has. So, please come back and tell us about your progress um absolutely in about your progress um absolutely in about your progress um absolutely in &gt;&gt; 6 months, a year, whenever the time &gt;&gt; 6 months, a year, whenever the time &gt;&gt; 6 months, a year, whenever the time is right, we'll have you back. And once is right, we'll have you back. And once is right, we'll have you back. And once again, thanks for doing everything you again, thanks for doing everything you again, thanks for doing everything you do. You're uh in this time of hearing so do. You're uh in this time of hearing so do. You're uh in this time of hearing so much negative news and like thinking much negative news and like thinking much negative news and like thinking like science is so, you know, hobbled like science is so, you know, hobbled like science is so, you know, hobbled and all this stuff. Science needs and all this stuff. Science needs and all this stuff. Science needs support obviously, but um you know support obviously, but um you know support obviously, but um you know what's that saying you see on the what's that saying you see on the what's that saying you see on the internet? Uh you know, not all internet? Uh you know, not all internet? Uh you know, not all superheroes wear capes. You're you're superheroes wear capes. You're you're superheroes wear capes. You're you're doing God's work. So, thank you. doing God's work. So, thank you. doing God's work. So, thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. To discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. To discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. To learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. today's discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. today's discussion with Dr. Sergu Pasca. And last but certainly not least, thank And last but certainly not least, thank And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]