Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Chris McCertie. Dr. Chris today is Dr. Chris McCertie. Dr. Chris today is Dr. Chris McCertie. Dr. Chris McCertie is a professor of medicinal McCertie is a professor of medicinal McCertie is a professor of medicinal chemistry at the University of Florida chemistry at the University of Florida chemistry at the University of Florida where he directs research on natural where he directs research on natural where he directs research on natural products and their pharmacologic products and their pharmacologic products and their pharmacologic effects. most recently the plant- effects. most recently the plant- effects. most recently the plant- derived compound which is readily sold derived compound which is readily sold derived compound which is readily sold in the US and around the world and is in the US and around the world and is in the US and around the world and is now used by tens of millions of people now used by tens of millions of people now used by tens of millions of people daily and those numbers are increasing daily and those numbers are increasing daily and those numbers are increasing fast. Dr. McCert's research focuses on fast. Dr. McCert's research focuses on fast. Dr. McCert's research focuses on understanding how interacts with our understanding how interacts with our understanding how interacts with our nervous system and affects our nervous system and affects our nervous system and affects our physiology and behavior. He also studies physiology and behavior. He also studies physiology and behavior. He also studies its potential for addiction. During its potential for addiction. During its potential for addiction. During today's episode, we discuss the complex today's episode, we discuss the complex today's episode, we discuss the complex effects of its relationship to the effects of its relationship to the effects of its relationship to the opioid system. Dr. McCertie explains opioid system. Dr. McCertie explains opioid system. Dr. McCertie explains how's active compounds work in the how's active compounds work in the how's active compounds work in the brain, why it shares certain brain, why it shares certain brain, why it shares certain similarities to opioid drugs, and similarities to opioid drugs, and similarities to opioid drugs, and critically howratom products available critically howratom products available critically howratom products available in the US and elsewhere are largely in the US and elsewhere are largely in the US and elsewhere are largely derivatives and isolates of theratom derivatives and isolates of theratom derivatives and isolates of theratom leaf, which is very different in terms leaf, which is very different in terms leaf, which is very different in terms of the effects it produces when compared of the effects it produces when compared of the effects it produces when compared to the traditional leaf products. And to the traditional leaf products. And to the traditional leaf products. And unfortunately, that has confused and in unfortunately, that has confused and in unfortunately, that has confused and in many cases harmed consumers. So today, many cases harmed consumers. So today, many cases harmed consumers. So today, you'll learn aboutratom's effects at you'll learn aboutratom's effects at you'll learn aboutratom's effects at different doses and when it's sourced in different doses and when it's sourced in different doses and when it's sourced in different ways. You'll learn about how different ways. You'll learn about how different ways. You'll learn about how it can be a stimulant, how it can it can be a stimulant, how it can it can be a stimulant, how it can increase focus, how it can be a increase focus, how it can be a increase focus, how it can be a painkiller, how it can increase painkiller, how it can increase painkiller, how it can increase euphoria, but also its strong potential euphoria, but also its strong potential euphoria, but also its strong potential for addiction. You'll also learn what is for addiction. You'll also learn what is for addiction. You'll also learn what is known about in terms of its ability to known about in terms of its ability to known about in terms of its ability to help people transition off traditional help people transition off traditional help people transition off traditional opioid drugs. It has been shown to be opioid drugs. It has been shown to be opioid drugs. It has been shown to be effective for that. However, we are also effective for that. However, we are also effective for that. However, we are also going to explain the potential harms of going to explain the potential harms of going to explain the potential harms of in particular in young people whose in particular in young people whose in particular in young people whose brains are still developing and in brains are still developing and in brains are still developing and in people that don't have a prior opioid people that don't have a prior opioid people that don't have a prior opioid addiction. Our discussion aboutratom addiction. Our discussion aboutratom addiction. Our discussion aboutratom also opens up a broader discussion about also opens up a broader discussion about also opens up a broader discussion about other plant alkaloids that have other plant alkaloids that have other plant alkaloids that have medicinal properties including those medicinal properties including those medicinal properties including those found in things like cocoa and 100% found in things like cocoa and 100% found in things like cocoa and 100% chocolate. And we discussed the chocolate. And we discussed the chocolate. And we discussed the incredible history of soft drinks like incredible history of soft drinks like incredible history of soft drinks like Coca-Cola, Pepsi, 7Up, and Dr. Pepper, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, 7Up, and Dr. Pepper, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, 7Up, and Dr. Pepper, which believe it or not were originally which believe it or not were originally which believe it or not were originally developed as pharmacologic tools before developed as pharmacologic tools before developed as pharmacologic tools before becoming the ultra popular beverages becoming the ultra popular beverages becoming the ultra popular beverages that we're familiar with today. So I that we're familiar with today. So I that we're familiar with today. So I realize many people have heard realize many people have heard realize many people have heard aboutratom, but also many of you perhaps aboutratom, but also many of you perhaps aboutratom, but also many of you perhaps have not. What everyone should know, have not. What everyone should know, have not. What everyone should know, however, is that products are pretty however, is that products are pretty however, is that products are pretty much everywhere now. You can find them much everywhere now. You can find them much everywhere now. You can find them in supermarkets, convenience stores, in supermarkets, convenience stores, in supermarkets, convenience stores, online, and they're sold under the online, and they're sold under the online, and they're sold under the pretense of having very specific effects pretense of having very specific effects pretense of having very specific effects related to energy, pain management, or related to energy, pain management, or related to energy, pain management, or mood. But by the end of today's episode, mood. But by the end of today's episode, mood. But by the end of today's episode, you'll have a thorough understanding of you'll have a thorough understanding of you'll have a thorough understanding of how this plant compound actually works. how this plant compound actually works. how this plant compound actually works. Yes, its potential effects, but also its Yes, its potential effects, but also its Yes, its potential effects, but also its serious risks. Before we begin, I'd like serious risks. Before we begin, I'd like serious risks. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science to consumer information about science to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Chris And now for my discussion with Dr. Chris And now for my discussion with Dr. Chris McCertie. Dr. Chris Mccertie, welcome. McCertie. Dr. Chris Mccertie, welcome. McCertie. Dr. Chris Mccertie, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's really a pleasure to be &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's really a pleasure to be &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's really a pleasure to be here. I'm excited to have you here here. I'm excited to have you here here. I'm excited to have you here because you work on some incredibly because you work on some incredibly because you work on some incredibly interesting compounds, several of which interesting compounds, several of which interesting compounds, several of which are very controversial and all of which are very controversial and all of which are very controversial and all of which are impacting health and society in a are impacting health and society in a are impacting health and society in a major way right now, especially in the major way right now, especially in the major way right now, especially in the United States. The most notable of those United States. The most notable of those United States. The most notable of those isratom. I'm guessing some people have isratom. I'm guessing some people have isratom. I'm guessing some people have heard ofratom. I'm guessing some people heard ofratom. I'm guessing some people heard ofratom. I'm guessing some people perhaps have not. I'm pretty certain perhaps have not. I'm pretty certain perhaps have not. I'm pretty certain everyone has seen a catratom product everyone has seen a catratom product everyone has seen a catratom product because they are everywhere. because they are everywhere. because they are everywhere. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But it's often in the fine print. So &gt;&gt; But it's often in the fine print. So &gt;&gt; But it's often in the fine print. So could you just tell us whatratom is could you just tell us whatratom is could you just tell us whatratom is where it's found in nature and in the where it's found in nature and in the where it's found in nature and in the United States and some of its properties United States and some of its properties United States and some of its properties that people take it in order to achieve that people take it in order to achieve that people take it in order to achieve certain effects maybe some of its certain effects maybe some of its certain effects maybe some of its lesserk known properties. So that's a lesserk known properties. So that's a lesserk known properties. So that's a lot of questions. So maybe just a lot of questions. So maybe just a lot of questions. So maybe just a general description of them where it's general description of them where it's general description of them where it's found and what it does. found and what it does. found and what it does. &gt;&gt; Let's just start from the beginning and &gt;&gt; Let's just start from the beginning and &gt;&gt; Let's just start from the beginning and make it easy. It's it's a tree that's make it easy. It's it's a tree that's make it easy. It's it's a tree that's called metro speciosa by its botanical called metro speciosa by its botanical called metro speciosa by its botanical name. um is called Cretam in Southeast name. um is called Cretam in Southeast name. um is called Cretam in Southeast Asia, which is where it's native to. Asia, which is where it's native to. Asia, which is where it's native to. It's actually native to uh where It's actually native to uh where It's actually native to uh where Peninsula Malaysia and Thailand connect. Peninsula Malaysia and Thailand connect. Peninsula Malaysia and Thailand connect. So, at the border of those two So, at the border of those two So, at the border of those two countries is thought to be ground zero countries is thought to be ground zero countries is thought to be ground zero for where this tree species came from. for where this tree species came from. for where this tree species came from. And in that region, it's very rural. And in that region, it's very rural. And in that region, it's very rural. It's lots of farmers and lots of outdoor It's lots of farmers and lots of outdoor It's lots of farmers and lots of outdoor laborers. And those outdoor laborers laborers. And those outdoor laborers laborers. And those outdoor laborers chew the leaves um in Thailand or they chew the leaves um in Thailand or they chew the leaves um in Thailand or they make a tea or more technically what we make a tea or more technically what we make a tea or more technically what we call a decoction because they boil the call a decoction because they boil the call a decoction because they boil the leaves for hours. Um but they'll harvest leaves for hours. Um but they'll harvest leaves for hours. Um but they'll harvest fresh leaves and boil those leaves and fresh leaves and boil those leaves and fresh leaves and boil those leaves and then drink that just like we would drink then drink that just like we would drink then drink that just like we would drink a coffee drink in the morning to give a coffee drink in the morning to give a coffee drink in the morning to give them energy to give them sort of them energy to give them sort of them energy to give them sort of sustainability throughout the day to sustainability throughout the day to sustainability throughout the day to tolerate that heat, humidity and very tolerate that heat, humidity and very tolerate that heat, humidity and very harsh tropical environment. and it gives harsh tropical environment. and it gives harsh tropical environment. and it gives them the stamina to make it make it them the stamina to make it make it them the stamina to make it make it through the day. Um, and that's really through the day. Um, and that's really through the day. Um, and that's really what the traditional use has always what the traditional use has always what the traditional use has always been uh more or less for energy and to been uh more or less for energy and to been uh more or less for energy and to get through that day. U but it also has get through that day. U but it also has get through that day. U but it also has been used to treat pain. It's been used been used to treat pain. It's been used been used to treat pain. It's been used to treat um of all things u uh erectile to treat um of all things u uh erectile to treat um of all things u uh erectile dysfunction. It's been said to be dysfunction. It's been said to be dysfunction. It's been said to be nature's sort of Viagra. Um it's used nature's sort of Viagra. Um it's used nature's sort of Viagra. Um it's used for uh mood elevation primarily. Um and for uh mood elevation primarily. Um and for uh mood elevation primarily. Um and so these individuals will so these individuals will so these individuals will utilize it uh like I said throughout the utilize it uh like I said throughout the utilize it uh like I said throughout the day. It's a Muslim population in that day. It's a Muslim population in that day. It's a Muslim population in that area. So there's no uh alcohol really area. So there's no uh alcohol really area. So there's no uh alcohol really and no consumption of alcohol. Um and no consumption of alcohol. Um and no consumption of alcohol. Um and this is sort of a socially lubricating this is sort of a socially lubricating this is sort of a socially lubricating product. Um and so in the evenings on product. Um and so in the evenings on product. Um and so in the evenings on Friday, Saturday evenings, the men would Friday, Saturday evenings, the men would Friday, Saturday evenings, the men would generally gather and then increase their generally gather and then increase their generally gather and then increase their consumption of the tea um just consumption of the tea um just consumption of the tea um just socially uh and it could get them socially uh and it could get them socially uh and it could get them into a more seditive like effect. And so into a more seditive like effect. And so into a more seditive like effect. And so there's this always this sort of um there's this always this sort of um there's this always this sort of um paradoxical description of uh cretam paradoxical description of uh cretam paradoxical description of uh cretam or as we say in the United States. or as we say in the United States. or as we say in the United States. um where you get this stimulant effect um where you get this stimulant effect um where you get this stimulant effect at lower doses or smaller amounts and at lower doses or smaller amounts and at lower doses or smaller amounts and you get this more euphoric or seditive you get this more euphoric or seditive you get this more euphoric or seditive like opioid like effect if you will at like opioid like effect if you will at like opioid like effect if you will at higher doses and so they tend to higher doses and so they tend to higher doses and so they tend to use that traditionally. So they'll use that traditionally. So they'll use that traditionally. So they'll take the benefits of it um they'll take the benefits of it um they'll take the benefits of it um just like we would use coffee I think uh just like we would use coffee I think uh just like we would use coffee I think uh to sort of get us moving in the to sort of get us moving in the to sort of get us moving in the mornings. that's what they sort of use mornings. that's what they sort of use mornings. that's what they sort of use in those regions and they move into um in those regions and they move into um in those regions and they move into um you know on the weekend evenings they'll you know on the weekend evenings they'll you know on the weekend evenings they'll use it as more of a social uh beverage use it as more of a social uh beverage use it as more of a social uh beverage and so that's where that's been. We got and so that's where that's been. We got and so that's where that's been. We got interested in it from the standpoint interested in it from the standpoint interested in it from the standpoint that there were also reports that this could there were also reports that this could there were also reports that this could be utilized when they ran out of heroin be utilized when they ran out of heroin be utilized when they ran out of heroin or raw opium um so that they wouldn't go or raw opium um so that they wouldn't go or raw opium um so that they wouldn't go into withdrawals. And so essentially into withdrawals. And so essentially into withdrawals. And so essentially they're already using it. they would they're already using it. they would they're already using it. they would increase the consumption when they ran increase the consumption when they ran increase the consumption when they ran out of heroin or opium and that would out of heroin or opium and that would out of heroin or opium and that would stave off withdrawals for them. And that stave off withdrawals for them. And that stave off withdrawals for them. And that became really interesting to me uh as an became really interesting to me uh as an became really interesting to me uh as an opioid researcher, a pain researcher, opioid researcher, a pain researcher, opioid researcher, a pain researcher, could this be something that uh has could this be something that uh has could this be something that uh has potential uh and obviously would potential uh and obviously would potential uh and obviously would have potential in helping with the have potential in helping with the have potential in helping with the opioid crisis uh that we're in? And opioid crisis uh that we're in? And opioid crisis uh that we're in? And that's kind of what drove us into that's kind of what drove us into that's kind of what drove us into starting to look at this. starting to look at this. starting to look at this. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 grams of protein, only other. It has 28 grams of protein, only other. It has 28 grams of protein, only 150 calories and 0 g of sugar. That's 150 calories and 0 g of sugar. That's 150 calories and 0 g of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein and 75% of its calories come from protein. This is 50% calories come from protein. This is 50% calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein bar. David protein bars also taste bar. David protein bars also taste bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip favorite bar is the chocolate chip favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough. But then again, I also cookie dough. But then again, I also cookie dough. But then again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter like the new chocolate peanut butter like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavor and the chocolate brownie flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavored. Basically, I like all the flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly flavors a lot. They're all incredibly flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest delicious. In fact, the toughest delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat challenge is knowing which ones to eat challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times per on which days and how many times per on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, but day. I limit myself to two per day, but day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm I absolutely love them. With David, I'm I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the able to get 28 grams of protein in the able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it easy calories of a snack, which makes it easy calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of one gram of to hit my protein goals of one gram of to hit my protein goals of one gram of protein per pound of body weight per protein per pound of body weight per protein per pound of body weight per day. and it allows me to do so without day. and it allows me to do so without day. and it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack and I always keep one with me when snack and I always keep one with me when snack and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. I'm out of the house or traveling. I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by eight. Eightle makes smart mattress eight. Eightle makes smart mattress eight. Eightle makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your unique needs. Eightle has just launched unique needs. Eightle has just launched unique needs. Eightle has just launched their latest model, the Pod 5. And the their latest model, the Pod 5. And the their latest model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has several new important Pod 5 has several new important Pod 5 has several new important features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. The base shifts to optimize your sleep. The base shifts to optimize your sleep. The base on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated speaker that syncs to the EightLe app speaker that syncs to the EightLe app speaker that syncs to the EightLe app and can play audio to support relaxation and can play audio to support relaxation and can play audio to support relaxation and recovery. The audio catalog includes and recovery. The audio catalog includes and recovery. The audio catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest scripts that I worked on with eight scripts that I worked on with eight scripts that I worked on with eight sleep to record. If you're not familiar, sleep to record. If you're not familiar, sleep to record. If you're not familiar, NSDR involves listening to an audio NSDR involves listening to an audio NSDR involves listening to an audio script that walks you through a deep script that walks you through a deep script that walks you through a deep body relaxation combined with some very body relaxation combined with some very body relaxation combined with some very simple breathing exercises. It's an simple breathing exercises. It's an simple breathing exercises. It's an extremely powerful tool that anyone can extremely powerful tool that anyone can extremely powerful tool that anyone can benefit from the first time and every benefit from the first time and every benefit from the first time and every time. If you'd like to try eight, go to time. If you'd like to try eight, go to time. If you'd like to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eightlee ships to many countries Eightlee ships to many countries Eightlee ships to many countries worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman Again, that's eight.com/huberman Again, that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. When we see a catratom product in the When we see a catratom product in the When we see a catratom product in the United States, and I realize there are a United States, and I realize there are a United States, and I realize there are a variety of those, but um let's just take variety of those, but um let's just take variety of those, but um let's just take for example, I'm aware of uh a product for example, I'm aware of uh a product for example, I'm aware of uh a product that's very popular nowadays. It's a that's very popular nowadays. It's a that's very popular nowadays. It's a small blue bottle. Um it includes cava small blue bottle. Um it includes cava small blue bottle. Um it includes cava andratom as its primary ingredients. I andratom as its primary ingredients. I andratom as its primary ingredients. I have zero financial relationship to this have zero financial relationship to this have zero financial relationship to this company. I actually had the opportunity company. I actually had the opportunity company. I actually had the opportunity to be an early investor, uh, turned it to be an early investor, uh, turned it to be an early investor, uh, turned it down. Um, down. Um, down. Um, when somebody takes a bottle of that, when somebody takes a bottle of that, when somebody takes a bottle of that, when they drink a bottle of that, when they drink a bottle of that, when they drink a bottle of that, how concentrated and how muchratom are how concentrated and how muchratom are how concentrated and how muchratom are they getting compared to say the typical they getting compared to say the typical they getting compared to say the typical adult user in Malaysia who drinks I adult user in Malaysia who drinks I adult user in Malaysia who drinks I don't know what a mug of this don't know what a mug of this don't know what a mug of this concoction. Um, concoction. Um, concoction. Um, Are they comparable? Um are they even Are they comparable? Um are they even Are they comparable? Um are they even the same compound? Can we think about the same compound? Can we think about the same compound? Can we think about them the same way? because this is very them the same way? because this is very them the same way? because this is very much in my mind uh like comparing um much in my mind uh like comparing um much in my mind uh like comparing um smoked cannabis smoked cannabis smoked cannabis uh let's just say there is no typical uh let's just say there is no typical uh let's just say there is no typical variety but um compared to a highly variety but um compared to a highly variety but um compared to a highly concentrated uh THC tincture for concentrated uh THC tincture for concentrated uh THC tincture for instance I mean there same chemical instance I mean there same chemical instance I mean there same chemical structure but at some point the structure but at some point the structure but at some point the phocinetics changes and you're basically phocinetics changes and you're basically phocinetics changes and you're basically looking at different brain circuits looking at different brain circuits looking at different brain circuits different bodily organs engaged is like different bodily organs engaged is like different bodily organs engaged is like kind of different experience alto kind of different experience alto kind of different experience alto together &gt;&gt; correct and I and I think it's an &gt;&gt; correct and I and I think it's an &gt;&gt; correct and I and I think it's an important distinction to make at the important distinction to make at the important distinction to make at the outset of this is that, you know, what I outset of this is that, you know, what I outset of this is that, you know, what I described as the traditional use is described as the traditional use is described as the traditional use is freshly picked leaves that day. They're freshly picked leaves that day. They're freshly picked leaves that day. They're either chewing them directly when they either chewing them directly when they either chewing them directly when they pull it off the tree or they're brewing pull it off the tree or they're brewing pull it off the tree or they're brewing this decoction right away. um in the in this decoction right away. um in the in this decoction right away. um in the in the United States and in the Western the United States and in the Western the United States and in the Western world, it's a very different product world, it's a very different product world, it's a very different product from day one because it's a dried leaf from day one because it's a dried leaf from day one because it's a dried leaf material um that's been exposed to the material um that's been exposed to the material um that's been exposed to the air, the sun, whatever environmental air, the sun, whatever environmental air, the sun, whatever environmental factors are there, plus shipping it all factors are there, plus shipping it all factors are there, plus shipping it all the way across the world from Indonesia, the way across the world from Indonesia, the way across the world from Indonesia, which is the primary country where most which is the primary country where most which is the primary country where most of this is grown. Um the last I heard a of this is grown. Um the last I heard a of this is grown. Um the last I heard a year ago was there's about 250,000 year ago was there's about 250,000 year ago was there's about 250,000 um cratom farmers in Indonesia that um cratom farmers in Indonesia that um cratom farmers in Indonesia that are producing and exporting um raw are producing and exporting um raw are producing and exporting um raw materials around the globe but primarily materials around the globe but primarily materials around the globe but primarily to the United States. So that leaf to the United States. So that leaf to the United States. So that leaf material comes in and then leaf material comes in and then leaf material comes in and then leaf material has been ground and put into capsules, has been ground and put into capsules, has been ground and put into capsules, put into um various products, even just put into um various products, even just put into um various products, even just powdered product uh where people will powdered product uh where people will powdered product uh where people will use tablespoons of powder and you know use tablespoons of powder and you know use tablespoons of powder and you know couple grams of powder in their in their couple grams of powder in their in their couple grams of powder in their in their warm water or however they like to do. warm water or however they like to do. warm water or however they like to do. Um, so it's an interesting product Um, so it's an interesting product Um, so it's an interesting product because that's as close to the because that's as close to the because that's as close to the traditional use that you can get in the western use that you can get in the western use that you can get in the western world, right? Because you're world, right? Because you're world, right? Because you're still using leaf, you're ingesting it um still using leaf, you're ingesting it um still using leaf, you're ingesting it um or you're making a tea from it. Water or you're making a tea from it. Water or you're making a tea from it. Water is the worst uh least efficient is the worst uh least efficient is the worst uh least efficient extractor of chemicals out of a plant extractor of chemicals out of a plant extractor of chemicals out of a plant material. And even if we don't make a material. And even if we don't make a material. And even if we don't make a tea out of it, if we just take the leaf tea out of it, if we just take the leaf tea out of it, if we just take the leaf material internally, our body has to material internally, our body has to material internally, our body has to work incredibly hard to pull those work incredibly hard to pull those work incredibly hard to pull those active ingredients out of the plant active ingredients out of the plant active ingredients out of the plant material. So it's a it's an active material. So it's a it's an active material. So it's a it's an active process for us as humans or as animals process for us as humans or as animals process for us as humans or as animals if we want to talk about the animal if we want to talk about the animal if we want to talk about the animal research too and where we've learned research too and where we've learned research too and where we've learned most all of this from that our body most all of this from that our body most all of this from that our body has to work hard to get that into our has to work hard to get that into our has to work hard to get that into our system. Now you take that leaf material system. Now you take that leaf material system. Now you take that leaf material and then you do something like you and then you do something like you and then you do something like you mentioned, put it into a tonic or you mentioned, put it into a tonic or you mentioned, put it into a tonic or you put it into a concentrate form uh or an put it into a concentrate form uh or an put it into a concentrate form uh or an extract. And now the compounds have been extract. And now the compounds have been extract. And now the compounds have been already pulled out of the leaf material already pulled out of the leaf material already pulled out of the leaf material by the solvent or the liquid by the solvent or the liquid by the solvent or the liquid that's being utilized, whether it's that's being utilized, whether it's that's being utilized, whether it's ethanol or it's uh oil or some other ethanol or it's uh oil or some other ethanol or it's uh oil or some other some other type of uh vehicle. I think some other type of uh vehicle. I think some other type of uh vehicle. I think in the product you mentioned is in the product you mentioned is in the product you mentioned is pineapple juice, which again is not as pineapple juice, which again is not as pineapple juice, which again is not as efficient as something like oil or a efficient as something like oil or a efficient as something like oil or a solvent would be, but you start to pull solvent would be, but you start to pull solvent would be, but you start to pull these compounds into that liquid instead these compounds into that liquid instead these compounds into that liquid instead of our body having to pull it out of the of our body having to pull it out of the of our body having to pull it out of the leaf. It's already out of the leaf. Now leaf. It's already out of the leaf. Now leaf. It's already out of the leaf. Now we can ingest that and those compounds we can ingest that and those compounds we can ingest that and those compounds are absorbed much faster into our body, are absorbed much faster into our body, are absorbed much faster into our body, into our system. And it totally changes into our system. And it totally changes into our system. And it totally changes the dynamics of what our body is exposed the dynamics of what our body is exposed the dynamics of what our body is exposed to um from that sort of more to um from that sort of more to um from that sort of more traditionalbased product. And this is also where we feel product. And this is also where we feel product. And this is also where we feel that things have become problematic. And that things have become problematic. And that things have become problematic. And so if we go back to paracelies and you so if we go back to paracelies and you so if we go back to paracelies and you know hundreds of years ago talking about know hundreds of years ago talking about know hundreds of years ago talking about the poison is in the dose um where we the poison is in the dose um where we the poison is in the dose um where we where we've seen somewhat um where we've seen somewhat um where we've seen somewhat um nonproatic use I would say the majority nonproatic use I would say the majority nonproatic use I would say the majority of nonproatic use is with that leaf of nonproatic use is with that leaf of nonproatic use is with that leaf material more of that closer to material more of that closer to material more of that closer to traditional use but as you start to make traditional use but as you start to make traditional use but as you start to make these concentrates and extracts and these concentrates and extracts and these concentrates and extracts and now isolates which are even a whole and now isolates which are even a whole and now isolates which are even a whole another discussion because they're no another discussion because they're no another discussion because they're no longer even creating products. Um, you longer even creating products. Um, you longer even creating products. Um, you start to move ever so far across you start to move ever so far across you start to move ever so far across that spectrum. And I like to equate it that spectrum. And I like to equate it that spectrum. And I like to equate it to the alcohol world where we talk to the alcohol world where we talk to the alcohol world where we talk about seltzers or light beers being um about seltzers or light beers being um about seltzers or light beers being um more comparable in an alcohol beverage more comparable in an alcohol beverage more comparable in an alcohol beverage to that traditional use of whereas we to that traditional use of whereas we to that traditional use of whereas we get to things like almost pure alcohol get to things like almost pure alcohol get to things like almost pure alcohol ever clear 190 proof 95% alcohol. Now ever clear 190 proof 95% alcohol. Now ever clear 190 proof 95% alcohol. Now you're talking about these isolate you're talking about these isolate you're talking about these isolate products and we have products in the in products and we have products in the in products and we have products in the in the alcohol industry through that whole the alcohol industry through that whole the alcohol industry through that whole span. But we've classified all of them. span. But we've classified all of them. span. But we've classified all of them. We don't call them alcohol in general. We don't call them alcohol in general. We don't call them alcohol in general. We we'll define them We we'll define them We we'll define them &gt;&gt; beer, wine, beer, wine, craft beer. &gt;&gt; beer, wine, beer, wine, craft beer. &gt;&gt; beer, wine, beer, wine, craft beer. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And ind and to spirits and then into &gt;&gt; And ind and to spirits and then into &gt;&gt; And ind and to spirits and then into very fortified um beverages. And so we very fortified um beverages. And so we very fortified um beverages. And so we don't have that delineation in the in don't have that delineation in the in don't have that delineation in the in theratom space. And so allratom products theratom space. And so allratom products theratom space. And so allratom products get dumped into a single bucket. And so get dumped into a single bucket. And so get dumped into a single bucket. And so whether or not it's a benign product or whether or not it's a benign product or whether or not it's a benign product or something that's highly something that's highly something that's highly concentrated, um, and I shouldn't say benign, but you um, and I shouldn't say benign, but you um, and I shouldn't say benign, but you know, something that is much more close know, something that is much more close know, something that is much more close to that traditional use that you're not to that traditional use that you're not to that traditional use that you're not going to have a risk of getting a great going to have a risk of getting a great going to have a risk of getting a great exposure when you take some of it versus exposure when you take some of it versus exposure when you take some of it versus a shot that might be 15 milliliters and a shot that might be 15 milliliters and a shot that might be 15 milliliters and it tells you on the bottle it's nine it tells you on the bottle it's nine it tells you on the bottle it's nine servings, but nobody reads that part and servings, but nobody reads that part and servings, but nobody reads that part and just downs the entire bottle. Is that just downs the entire bottle. Is that just downs the entire bottle. Is that what we're talking about when we talk what we're talking about when we talk what we're talking about when we talk about this little blue little blue about this little blue little blue about this little blue little blue bottle? &gt;&gt; No, the little blue bottle is more &gt;&gt; No, the little blue bottle is more &gt;&gt; No, the little blue bottle is more actually is more similar in terms of actually is more similar in terms of actually is more similar in terms of what is dosed in there to a traditional what is dosed in there to a traditional what is dosed in there to a traditional exposure of a beverage. exposure of a beverage. exposure of a beverage. &gt;&gt; One bottle. &gt;&gt; One bottle. &gt;&gt; One bottle. &gt;&gt; One bottle. &gt;&gt; One bottle. &gt;&gt; One bottle. &gt;&gt; One bottle. And forgive me for &gt;&gt; One bottle. And forgive me for &gt;&gt; One bottle. And forgive me for interrupting because about a year and a interrupting because about a year and a interrupting because about a year and a half ago, I ran into a friend and um his half ago, I ran into a friend and um his half ago, I ran into a friend and um his assistant, she came running out and assistant, she came running out and assistant, she came running out and knowing what I do, she said, "Hey, do knowing what I do, she said, "Hey, do knowing what I do, she said, "Hey, do you know about this like little blue you know about this like little blue you know about this like little blue bottle product?" And I said, "Yeah, bottle product?" And I said, "Yeah, bottle product?" And I said, "Yeah, I've seen it. Not tried it." And um why I've seen it. Not tried it." And um why I've seen it. Not tried it." And um why what do you think? And she said, "Well, what do you think? And she said, "Well, what do you think? And she said, "Well, I liked it because I drank one, but I liked it because I drank one, but I liked it because I drank one, but now I'm drinking six a day and I can't now I'm drinking six a day and I can't now I'm drinking six a day and I can't seem to whittle it back." Like when I seem to whittle it back." Like when I seem to whittle it back." Like when I went to three, I did not feel well. went to three, I did not feel well. went to three, I did not feel well. Headaches, feel anxiety, not well. It Headaches, feel anxiety, not well. It Headaches, feel anxiety, not well. It was how basically how she described it. was how basically how she described it. was how basically how she described it. And &gt;&gt; um I said, "Well, sounds like either &gt;&gt; um I said, "Well, sounds like either &gt;&gt; um I said, "Well, sounds like either addictive or a habit forming." And I addictive or a habit forming." And I addictive or a habit forming." And I don't know where she's at with that, but don't know where she's at with that, but don't know where she's at with that, but this seems very common. People start this seems very common. People start this seems very common. People start with one, not unlike nicotine patch with one, not unlike nicotine patch with one, not unlike nicotine patch pouches, start with three milligrams and pouches, start with three milligrams and pouches, start with three milligrams and they're up to six milligrams and then they're up to six milligrams and then they're up to six milligrams and then pretty soon it's a tin pretty soon it's a tin pretty soon it's a tin &gt;&gt; a day or a canister a day. So um one &gt;&gt; a day or a canister a day. So um one &gt;&gt; a day or a canister a day. So um one bottle of that ofratom cava is bottle of that ofratom cava is bottle of that ofratom cava is comparable to the to the plant use. comparable to the to the plant use. comparable to the to the plant use. &gt;&gt; I think if I remember right a bottle is &gt;&gt; I think if I remember right a bottle is &gt;&gt; I think if I remember right a bottle is two servings. So we've tested we've two servings. So we've tested we've two servings. So we've tested we've tested almost every single product in tested almost every single product in tested almost every single product in the marketplace and we've analyzed it the marketplace and we've analyzed it the marketplace and we've analyzed it for the content of alkaloids to see for the content of alkaloids to see for the content of alkaloids to see what's there in what they what's there in what they what's there in what they consider a serving. Um but if we only consider a serving. Um but if we only consider a serving. Um but if we only look at a serving they're pretty much look at a serving they're pretty much look at a serving they're pretty much all equivalent. Again, it's what's in all equivalent. Again, it's what's in all equivalent. Again, it's what's in that bottle, right? Is it one serving, that bottle, right? Is it one serving, that bottle, right? Is it one serving, two servings, nine servings, 15 servings two servings, nine servings, 15 servings two servings, nine servings, 15 servings &gt;&gt; in a single bottle? So, most people &gt;&gt; in a single bottle? So, most people &gt;&gt; in a single bottle? So, most people aren't going to look at it from the aren't going to look at it from the aren't going to look at it from the standpoint of, hey, I've got I've got standpoint of, hey, I've got I've got standpoint of, hey, I've got I've got this bottle here, which is actually this bottle here, which is actually this bottle here, which is actually smaller than the blue bottle, smaller than the blue bottle, smaller than the blue bottle, &gt;&gt; but it's 10 times more servings, &gt;&gt; but it's 10 times more servings, &gt;&gt; but it's 10 times more servings, right? And so if you're used to right? And so if you're used to right? And so if you're used to consuming that blue bottle all at once, consuming that blue bottle all at once, consuming that blue bottle all at once, which is two servings, I think, then if which is two servings, I think, then if which is two servings, I think, then if you pick up one of those bottles that's you pick up one of those bottles that's you pick up one of those bottles that's 15 servings, and you consume the whole 15 servings, and you consume the whole 15 servings, and you consume the whole thing at once, you're getting a thing at once, you're getting a thing at once, you're getting a much greater exposure immediately and much greater exposure immediately and much greater exposure immediately and it's in a much easier vehicle for our it's in a much easier vehicle for our it's in a much easier vehicle for our body to um welcome those compounds in, body to um welcome those compounds in, body to um welcome those compounds in, if you will. So it becomes a very if you will. So it becomes a very if you will. So it becomes a very slippery slope in my opinion um very slippery slope in my opinion um very slippery slope in my opinion um with these different products that are with these different products that are with these different products that are out there in the marketplace. And so if out there in the marketplace. And so if out there in the marketplace. And so if someone is not paying attention to if someone is not paying attention to if someone is not paying attention to what the actual serving is supposed to what the actual serving is supposed to what the actual serving is supposed to be, then this is where problems become. be, then this is where problems become. be, then this is where problems become. And the other thing I would add to that And the other thing I would add to that And the other thing I would add to that is that a lot of times, and I've seen is that a lot of times, and I've seen is that a lot of times, and I've seen this, I've stopped in um of all this, I've stopped in um of all this, I've stopped in um of all places, I stopped at a Murphy USA gas places, I stopped at a Murphy USA gas places, I stopped at a Murphy USA gas station, Walmart's gas station, and they station, Walmart's gas station, and they station, Walmart's gas station, and they had uh energy shots right next to the had uh energy shots right next to the had uh energy shots right next to the 5-hour energy shots. And so if you 5-hour energy shots. And so if you 5-hour energy shots. And so if you were in a hurry and you weren't even were in a hurry and you weren't even were in a hurry and you weren't even paying attention, you might accidentally paying attention, you might accidentally paying attention, you might accidentally grab something that you thought was a grab something that you thought was a grab something that you thought was a five-hour energy shot, right? And five-hour energy shot, right? And five-hour energy shot, right? And suddenly you and I took I you normally suddenly you and I took I you normally suddenly you and I took I you normally take two of those and I do it right back take two of those and I do it right back take two of those and I do it right back and throw them right back. And um back and throw them right back. And um back and throw them right back. And um so if you if you get these and generally so if you if you get these and generally so if you if you get these and generally what we worry about is kids getting what we worry about is kids getting what we worry about is kids getting these right and getting these and then these right and getting these and then these right and getting these and then taking a shot a whole bottle uh which taking a shot a whole bottle uh which taking a shot a whole bottle uh which may be multiple servings and they don't may be multiple servings and they don't may be multiple servings and they don't feel anything right away and somebody feel anything right away and somebody feel anything right away and somebody told them you're going to get high from told them you're going to get high from told them you're going to get high from this. You can't believe it, but you'll this. You can't believe it, but you'll this. You can't believe it, but you'll get high from this thing you can buy in get high from this thing you can buy in get high from this thing you can buy in the gas station and then they don't feel the gas station and then they don't feel the gas station and then they don't feel anything and then suddenly they have anything and then suddenly they have anything and then suddenly they have another one, right? And then all of it another one, right? And then all of it another one, right? And then all of it gets absorbed and hits them gets absorbed and hits them gets absorbed and hits them harder almost all at once. You can think harder almost all at once. You can think harder almost all at once. You can think of it like if you sat down and you drank of it like if you sat down and you drank of it like if you sat down and you drank a light beer and you drank that 12 ounce a light beer and you drank that 12 ounce a light beer and you drank that 12 ounce beer um in a short period of time, beer um in a short period of time, beer um in a short period of time, just you could really drink it fast. just you could really drink it fast. just you could really drink it fast. you're not going to get very much you're not going to get very much you're not going to get very much alcohol exposure because there's only alcohol exposure because there's only alcohol exposure because there's only 3.5% in that 12 ounces. But if you sit 3.5% in that 12 ounces. But if you sit 3.5% in that 12 ounces. But if you sit down and you do three shots of tequila down and you do three shots of tequila down and you do three shots of tequila in a row in that same time frame, your in a row in that same time frame, your in a row in that same time frame, your body is getting exposed to significantly body is getting exposed to significantly body is getting exposed to significantly more alcohol in that time frame. And more alcohol in that time frame. And more alcohol in that time frame. And that's what that's what our concerns are that's what that's what our concerns are that's what that's what our concerns are around some of these products. And so around some of these products. And so around some of these products. And so when you look at the specific serving, when you look at the specific serving, when you look at the specific serving, yeah, they dial it in to say, "Yep, yeah, they dial it in to say, "Yep, yeah, they dial it in to say, "Yep, this is what uh is comparable to a this is what uh is comparable to a this is what uh is comparable to a traditional full glass of tea." Um but they're full glass of tea." Um but they're full glass of tea." Um but they're very concentrated. And now, they're very concentrated. And now, they're very concentrated. And now, as I mentioned, you know, moving as I mentioned, you know, moving as I mentioned, you know, moving outside of this space into semiynthetics outside of this space into semiynthetics outside of this space into semiynthetics and products that are no longer and products that are no longer and products that are no longer products are no longer traceable back to products are no longer traceable back to products are no longer traceable back to the plant material. They're actually the plant material. They're actually the plant material. They're actually semiynthetically produced. That means semiynthetically produced. That means semiynthetically produced. That means they're chemically modified um into they're chemically modified um into they're chemically modified um into other things that they're calling in other things that they're calling in other things that they're calling in some cases product. Again, this is that some cases product. Again, this is that some cases product. Again, this is that trash can or they're actually calling trash can or they're actually calling trash can or they're actually calling themratom derived products. themratom derived products. themratom derived products. &gt;&gt; Two things that I'm taking from what &gt;&gt; Two things that I'm taking from what &gt;&gt; Two things that I'm taking from what you've said thus far is that anyone you've said thus far is that anyone you've said thus far is that anyone considering products of any kind needs to carefully products of any kind needs to carefully products of any kind needs to carefully consider serving size. And it's uh consider serving size. And it's uh consider serving size. And it's uh interesting that those small bottles and interesting that those small bottles and interesting that those small bottles and frankly the packaging of most uh things frankly the packaging of most uh things frankly the packaging of most uh things is pretty small. And uh I don't think is pretty small. And uh I don't think is pretty small. And uh I don't think it's just my age. uh you need a compound it's just my age. uh you need a compound it's just my age. uh you need a compound microscope to read some of the microscope to read some of the microscope to read some of the print like literally fine print has print like literally fine print has print like literally fine print has become so fine that I think become so fine that I think become so fine that I think it's below the threshold of a of a it's below the threshold of a of a it's below the threshold of a of a you know a you know a you know a &gt;&gt; air force um fighter pilots's uh high &gt;&gt; air force um fighter pilots's uh high &gt;&gt; air force um fighter pilots's uh high acuity vision 2015 acuity vision 2015 acuity vision 2015 &gt;&gt; in all seriousness you need to look at &gt;&gt; in all seriousness you need to look at &gt;&gt; in all seriousness you need to look at the serving size and know how many the serving size and know how many the serving size and know how many servings are in there absolutely servings are in there absolutely servings are in there absolutely &gt;&gt; so check serving size &gt;&gt; so check serving size &gt;&gt; so check serving size &gt;&gt; and the other thing is uh to look &gt;&gt; and the other thing is uh to look &gt;&gt; and the other thing is uh to look forratom derived orratom extracted forratom derived orratom extracted forratom derived orratom extracted versus actual catratom plant product versus actual catratom plant product versus actual catratom plant product &gt;&gt; because &gt;&gt; because &gt;&gt; because &gt;&gt; while we're not recommending usage here &gt;&gt; while we're not recommending usage here &gt;&gt; while we're not recommending usage here there are a number of people using these there are a number of people using these there are a number of people using these products there are a number of people products there are a number of people products there are a number of people that are going to use these products we that are going to use these products we that are going to use these products we just have to be honest about that and I just have to be honest about that and I just have to be honest about that and I think it's very important to understand think it's very important to understand think it's very important to understand how to navigate this space because as how to navigate this space because as how to navigate this space because as you've pointed out it's not one thing you've pointed out it's not one thing you've pointed out it's not one thing it's just not and um maybe just for the it's just not and um maybe just for the it's just not and um maybe just for the moment let's step back in light of that moment let's step back in light of that moment let's step back in light of that and let me just ask you said earlier and let me just ask you said earlier and let me just ask you said earlier that when people use the plant at lower that when people use the plant at lower that when people use the plant at lower dosages it's a bit of a stimulant dosages it's a bit of a stimulant dosages it's a bit of a stimulant right? &gt;&gt; Might even have some aphrodisiac um &gt;&gt; Might even have some aphrodisiac um &gt;&gt; Might even have some aphrodisiac um qualities to it which suggests to me I'm qualities to it which suggests to me I'm qualities to it which suggests to me I'm not a medicinal chemist as you are but not a medicinal chemist as you are but not a medicinal chemist as you are but suggests that there might be some suggests that there might be some suggests that there might be some dopamineergic &gt;&gt; um maybe some chonergic maybe some &gt;&gt; um maybe some chonergic maybe some &gt;&gt; um maybe some chonergic maybe some vasoddil dilation activity given the vasoddil dilation activity given the vasoddil dilation activity given the aphrodisiac part etc. Okay. Um but then aphrodisiac part etc. Okay. Um but then aphrodisiac part etc. Okay. Um but then at higher doses it starts to become more at higher doses it starts to become more at higher doses it starts to become more of a sedative. of a sedative. of a sedative. &gt;&gt; Yeah. When people take &gt;&gt; Yeah. When people take &gt;&gt; Yeah. When people take derivatives or these more manufactured derivatives or these more manufactured derivatives or these more manufactured or processed products in the United or processed products in the United or processed products in the United States, the small blue bottle, let's say States, the small blue bottle, let's say States, the small blue bottle, let's say one or two servings, or um the ones one or two servings, or um the ones one or two servings, or um the ones that are in the energy shot, let's say that are in the energy shot, let's say that are in the energy shot, let's say they take one or two servings, which they take one or two servings, which they take one or two servings, which would be basically a quarter of a sip of would be basically a quarter of a sip of would be basically a quarter of a sip of one of those little thimbleized one of those little thimbleized one of those little thimbleized things. Are they seeking the stimulant things. Are they seeking the stimulant things. Are they seeking the stimulant aphrodesiac effect or do you think that aphrodesiac effect or do you think that aphrodesiac effect or do you think that most do we have any data rather as to most do we have any data rather as to most do we have any data rather as to whether or not users in the US are whether or not users in the US are whether or not users in the US are really going for that kind of set really going for that kind of set really going for that kind of set sedative numbing out effect because sedative numbing out effect because sedative numbing out effect because those are two very different things those are two very different things those are two very different things &gt;&gt; very different and I don't &gt;&gt; very different and I don't &gt;&gt; very different and I don't think we have good strong definitive think we have good strong definitive think we have good strong definitive data. So I will say that um with my data. So I will say that um with my data. So I will say that um with my colleague uh Dr. Kirsten Smith at Johns colleague uh Dr. Kirsten Smith at Johns colleague uh Dr. Kirsten Smith at Johns Hopkins um and others on our team. Hopkins um and others on our team. Hopkins um and others on our team. We've done pretty extensive surveying of We've done pretty extensive surveying of We've done pretty extensive surveying of users. Um these users, you know, of users. Um these users, you know, of users. Um these users, you know, volunteer themselves into the studies. volunteer themselves into the studies. volunteer themselves into the studies. So, I think we have to we have to look So, I think we have to we have to look So, I think we have to we have to look at that from a standpoint of, you know, at that from a standpoint of, you know, at that from a standpoint of, you know, we're not we're not just putting out we're not we're not just putting out we're not we're not just putting out random people on the street and asking random people on the street and asking random people on the street and asking them questions. These are people that them questions. These are people that them questions. These are people that choose to answer. Uh, but what we found choose to answer. Uh, but what we found choose to answer. Uh, but what we found in the largest study that we've done to in the largest study that we've done to in the largest study that we've done to date is most users are using it in a date is most users are using it in a date is most users are using it in a very responsible um and directed way very responsible um and directed way very responsible um and directed way where they're not using it to get this where they're not using it to get this where they're not using it to get this high or euphoria or seditive feel. high or euphoria or seditive feel. high or euphoria or seditive feel. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Okay. I want Could you repeat that? You &gt;&gt; Okay. I want Could you repeat that? You &gt;&gt; Okay. I want Could you repeat that? You said it very clearly, but I think the said it very clearly, but I think the said it very clearly, but I think the world needs to hear this. the estimated world needs to hear this. the estimated world needs to hear this. the estimated number of users right now we don't number of users right now we don't number of users right now we don't really have a good thumb on this right really have a good thumb on this right really have a good thumb on this right so the most recent literature report was so the most recent literature report was so the most recent literature report was around 2 million 2 and a.5 million users around 2 million 2 and a.5 million users around 2 million 2 and a.5 million users but if you look at sales of products and but if you look at sales of products and but if you look at sales of products and you talk to the manufacturers you talk to the manufacturers you talk to the manufacturers the estimates are well over 20 million the estimates are well over 20 million the estimates are well over 20 million users in the United States and if you users in the United States and if you users in the United States and if you look at the availability of product it's look at the availability of product it's look at the availability of product it's got to be closer to those numbers so got to be closer to those numbers so got to be closer to those numbers so &gt;&gt; on a daily basis &gt;&gt; on a daily basis &gt;&gt; on a daily basis &gt;&gt; on a daily basis daily basis. So this &gt;&gt; on a daily basis daily basis. So this &gt;&gt; on a daily basis daily basis. So this isn't you know 2 to 20 million people isn't you know 2 to 20 million people isn't you know 2 to 20 million people per year ingest a cratom product. per year ingest a cratom product. per year ingest a cratom product. &gt;&gt; This is 20 million people a day. &gt;&gt; This is 20 million people a day. &gt;&gt; This is 20 million people a day. &gt;&gt; This is what is the estimate right now. &gt;&gt; This is what is the estimate right now. &gt;&gt; This is what is the estimate right now. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Based on the amount of material that's &gt;&gt; Based on the amount of material that's &gt;&gt; Based on the amount of material that's been imported or if you will exported been imported or if you will exported been imported or if you will exported um to the US and then manufactured. And um to the US and then manufactured. And um to the US and then manufactured. And so in 2019 when we actually had solid so in 2019 when we actually had solid so in 2019 when we actually had solid data is 1950 metric tons per month data is 1950 metric tons per month data is 1950 metric tons per month coming in. coming in. coming in. &gt;&gt; Do you think and there are many people &gt;&gt; Do you think and there are many people &gt;&gt; Do you think and there are many people in the US that are ingesting products in the US that are ingesting products in the US that are ingesting products like them for the effect it produces and like them for the effect it produces and like them for the effect it produces and are not aware that they're actually are not aware that they're actually are not aware that they're actually taking. &gt;&gt; It's a very interesting question. So I &gt;&gt; It's a very interesting question. So I &gt;&gt; It's a very interesting question. So I work with a whole plethora of work with a whole plethora of work with a whole plethora of different people, right? So from different people, right? So from different people, right? So from emergency room physicians to medical emergency room physicians to medical emergency room physicians to medical toxicologists to basic scientists like toxicologists to basic scientists like toxicologists to basic scientists like myself and everything in between. And if myself and everything in between. And if myself and everything in between. And if people have heard ofratom, they know if people have heard ofratom, they know if people have heard ofratom, they know what it is and they they've if what it is and they they've if what it is and they they've if they've heard of it and they've heard of it and they've heard of it and they are um experienced in trying they are um experienced in trying they are um experienced in trying things, they've probably tried it. Um things, they've probably tried it. Um things, they've probably tried it. Um and then there's a whole group of people and then there's a whole group of people and then there's a whole group of people that have no idea what it is, never that have no idea what it is, never that have no idea what it is, never heard of it, just heard of it, just heard of it, just completely something that they drive by, completely something that they drive by, completely something that they drive by, they see it. Like you said, you see it they see it. Like you said, you see it they see it. Like you said, you see it everywhere, but you don't you don't have everywhere, but you don't you don't have everywhere, but you don't you don't have any idea what it is. So, I think I think any idea what it is. So, I think I think any idea what it is. So, I think I think most people that are ingesting it or most people that are ingesting it or most people that are ingesting it or utilizing it know that they're utilizing it know that they're utilizing it know that they're utilizing it. I think they know they're it. I think they know they're it. I think they know they're specifically going after it. But again, specifically going after it. But again, specifically going after it. But again, what I'll say is what we did, what I'll say is what we did, what I'll say is what we did, &gt;&gt; it was a ecological momentary &gt;&gt; it was a ecological momentary &gt;&gt; it was a ecological momentary assessment. And so this is a EMA study assessment. And so this is a EMA study assessment. And so this is a EMA study where you're actually monitoring people where you're actually monitoring people where you're actually monitoring people with smartphone apps in every single with smartphone apps in every single with smartphone apps in every single dose they're taking. They're reporting dose they're taking. They're reporting dose they're taking. They're reporting what they're feeling. They're reporting what they're feeling. They're reporting what they're feeling. They're reporting why they're taking it, when they're why they're taking it, when they're why they're taking it, when they're taking it, right? And the majority of taking it, right? And the majority of taking it, right? And the majority of those people that were involved in those people that were involved in those people that were involved in those studies were using it in a appropriate studies were using it in a appropriate studies were using it in a appropriate sort of not to get high weight. sort of not to get high weight. sort of not to get high weight. &gt;&gt; What are they using it for? &gt;&gt; What are they using it for? &gt;&gt; What are they using it for? &gt;&gt; Mostly for energy, mood elevation, um, &gt;&gt; Mostly for energy, mood elevation, um, &gt;&gt; Mostly for energy, mood elevation, um, and pain treatment. So, uh, people like and pain treatment. So, uh, people like and pain treatment. So, uh, people like to use it, uh, as an alternative, um, to use it, uh, as an alternative, um, to use it, uh, as an alternative, um, particularly to opioids. So, what we particularly to opioids. So, what we particularly to opioids. So, what we were surprised at, we thought we would were surprised at, we thought we would were surprised at, we thought we would see a lot of people using it to get off see a lot of people using it to get off see a lot of people using it to get off of opioids, right? Because that's sort of opioids, right? Because that's sort of opioids, right? Because that's sort of the general um, theme that it's had. of the general um, theme that it's had. of the general um, theme that it's had. Indeed, people are doing that. And I Indeed, people are doing that. And I Indeed, people are doing that. And I get emails almost weekly of people get emails almost weekly of people get emails almost weekly of people writing to me saying that this got them writing to me saying that this got them writing to me saying that this got them off the couch. You know, they off the couch. You know, they off the couch. You know, they getting their families back. They're getting their families back. They're getting their families back. They're getting their lives back because this getting their lives back because this getting their lives back because this really helped give them that energy that really helped give them that energy that really helped give them that energy that they didn't have when they had opioids. they didn't have when they had opioids. they didn't have when they had opioids. &gt;&gt; Really? Okay. We'll definitely double &gt;&gt; Really? Okay. We'll definitely double &gt;&gt; Really? Okay. We'll definitely double click on that in a few minutes. click on that in a few minutes. click on that in a few minutes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so that's an interesting &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so that's an interesting &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so that's an interesting group of people, but I'm not sure that group of people, but I'm not sure that group of people, but I'm not sure that that's the largest group that are out that's the largest group that are out that's the largest group that are out there. It's really these mood there. It's really these mood there. It's really these mood elevations. You touched on a little bit elevations. You touched on a little bit elevations. You touched on a little bit too with the exercise um uh that the too with the exercise um uh that the too with the exercise um uh that the people are using this as a preworkout people are using this as a preworkout people are using this as a preworkout stimulant to give you more endurance. stimulant to give you more endurance. stimulant to give you more endurance. very similar to that traditional use, very similar to that traditional use, very similar to that traditional use, right? These people in the outdoor hot right? These people in the outdoor hot right? These people in the outdoor hot environment being able to work better, environment being able to work better, environment being able to work better, harder, faster. Um, and people are harder, faster. Um, and people are harder, faster. Um, and people are using as a post-workout uh pain using as a post-workout uh pain using as a post-workout uh pain treatment, right, to help kind of soothe treatment, right, to help kind of soothe treatment, right, to help kind of soothe them through that all that lactic acid them through that all that lactic acid them through that all that lactic acid buildup and that pain feeling. So buildup and that pain feeling. So buildup and that pain feeling. So there's a variety of groups or there's a variety of groups or there's a variety of groups or reported groups of users, but the reported groups of users, but the reported groups of users, but the biggest one is really that mood biggest one is really that mood biggest one is really that mood elevation, that sort of kind of energy elevation, that sort of kind of energy elevation, that sort of kind of energy boost, um just overall general good boost, um just overall general good boost, um just overall general good feeling, not a high feeling. And we feeling, not a high feeling. And we feeling, not a high feeling. And we specifically ask for those specifically ask for those specifically ask for those questions, you know, are you using this questions, you know, are you using this questions, you know, are you using this to get high? And yeah, there is a to get high? And yeah, there is a to get high? And yeah, there is a population of people that are purely out population of people that are purely out population of people that are purely out there to say, "This is my thing. This is there to say, "This is my thing. This is there to say, "This is my thing. This is what I use it for. I get high. I know what I use it for. I get high. I know what I use it for. I get high. I know people that on Friday nights, they're people that on Friday nights, they're people that on Friday nights, they're like, "This is this is my Friday night like, "This is this is my Friday night like, "This is this is my Friday night jam and this is what I do." And it makes jam and this is what I do." And it makes jam and this is what I do." And it makes me feel, you know, euphoric and relaxed me feel, you know, euphoric and relaxed me feel, you know, euphoric and relaxed and that's it. And so and that's it. And so and that's it. And so &gt;&gt; I think there's just various user &gt;&gt; I think there's just various user &gt;&gt; I think there's just various user populations and we can't even get to populations and we can't even get to populations and we can't even get to a granular point in that to say, you a granular point in that to say, you a granular point in that to say, you know, are these populations know, are these populations know, are these populations um that are trying to get high, are they um that are trying to get high, are they um that are trying to get high, are they using those really concentrated using those really concentrated using those really concentrated products? More than likely, that would be the More than likely, that would be the More than likely, that would be the assumption. and are the people that are assumption. and are the people that are assumption. and are the people that are using it more on a daily basis, are they using it more on a daily basis, are they using it more on a daily basis, are they doing it with more of the powdered leaf doing it with more of the powdered leaf doing it with more of the powdered leaf material and those types of products? material and those types of products? material and those types of products? And that's generally what we've seen. And that's generally what we've seen. And that's generally what we've seen. Um, and interestingly enough, I mean, we Um, and interestingly enough, I mean, we Um, and interestingly enough, I mean, we looked at the time of day. When are we looked at the time of day. When are we looked at the time of day. When are people using these products, right? They people using these products, right? They people using these products, right? They they wake up and within the first half they wake up and within the first half they wake up and within the first half hour they have it. hour they have it. hour they have it. &gt;&gt; Would you say they have it or they need &gt;&gt; Would you say they have it or they need &gt;&gt; Would you say they have it or they need it? &gt;&gt; It could be they need it there. It does. &gt;&gt; It could be they need it there. It does. &gt;&gt; It could be they need it there. It does. It absolutely causes a physical It absolutely causes a physical It absolutely causes a physical dependence. You said it absolutely dependence. You said it absolutely dependence. You said it absolutely causes a physical dependence. Do you causes a physical dependence. Do you causes a physical dependence. Do you mean it absolutely causes a physical mean it absolutely causes a physical mean it absolutely causes a physical dependence at every dose and every dependence at every dose and every dependence at every dose and every desired effect? desired effect? desired effect? &gt;&gt; I would I would say not. So if you take &gt;&gt; I would I would say not. So if you take &gt;&gt; I would I would say not. So if you take it one time, you're not going to be it one time, you're not going to be it one time, you're not going to be physically dependent on it. But if physically dependent on it. But if physically dependent on it. But if you're utilizing it over a course of you're utilizing it over a course of you're utilizing it over a course of time, and I can't tell you what that time, and I can't tell you what that time, and I can't tell you what that time frame is because we don't have any time frame is because we don't have any time frame is because we don't have any chronic studies in humans. We don't have chronic studies in humans. We don't have chronic studies in humans. We don't have and sadly we don't even have chronic and sadly we don't even have chronic and sadly we don't even have chronic studies in animals. Although animals studies in animals. Although animals studies in animals. Although animals aren't going to be able to tell us I aren't going to be able to tell us I aren't going to be able to tell us I need this, right? So the physical need this, right? So the physical need this, right? So the physical dependence feeling um that most people dependence feeling um that most people dependence feeling um that most people will report is very similar to that. And will report is very similar to that. And will report is very similar to that. And and I and I and I get caught making this comparison many get caught making this comparison many get caught making this comparison many times because people that are using leaf times because people that are using leaf times because people that are using leaf material, excuse me, if they get up in the morning excuse me, if they get up in the morning excuse me, if they get up in the morning and they want to go get their leaf and they want to go get their leaf and they want to go get their leaf material, they're not drinking coffee, material, they're not drinking coffee, material, they're not drinking coffee, they're drinking credum orratom and they they're drinking credum orratom and they they're drinking credum orratom and they have a headache or they feel they have a headache or they feel they have a headache or they feel miserable if they don't get that into miserable if they don't get that into miserable if they don't get that into them. very similar to what we would get them. very similar to what we would get them. very similar to what we would get with a caffeine withdrawal um or with a caffeine withdrawal um or with a caffeine withdrawal um or physical dependence on caffeine. Now, I physical dependence on caffeine. Now, I physical dependence on caffeine. Now, I can't speak to how much intense that can't speak to how much intense that can't speak to how much intense that gets as you start to ramp up into those gets as you start to ramp up into those gets as you start to ramp up into those various products because we don't have various products because we don't have various products because we don't have good reports around those. But I can good reports around those. But I can good reports around those. But I can tell you that anecdotally people have tell you that anecdotally people have tell you that anecdotally people have said they get more restless leg said they get more restless leg said they get more restless leg syndrome. they get more severe type syndrome. they get more severe type syndrome. they get more severe type physical dependence signs physical dependence signs physical dependence signs which restless leg is much more related which restless leg is much more related which restless leg is much more related to a opioid withdrawal type issue than to a opioid withdrawal type issue than to a opioid withdrawal type issue than it is to a coffee withdrawal issue. So it is to a coffee withdrawal issue. So it is to a coffee withdrawal issue. So there there's not only is there a there there's not only is there a there there's not only is there a spectrum of physical dependence spectrum of physical dependence spectrum of physical dependence symptoms um you know you have symptoms um you know you have symptoms um you know you have this spectrum of products and which ones this spectrum of products and which ones this spectrum of products and which ones are causing which we don't we don't have are causing which we don't we don't have are causing which we don't we don't have a handle on yet. I'm gathering at this a handle on yet. I'm gathering at this a handle on yet. I'm gathering at this point that there are basically three point that there are basically three point that there are basically three paths ofratom usage in the United paths ofratom usage in the United paths ofratom usage in the United States. One group of people is using States. One group of people is using States. One group of people is using products to achieve an energetic lift, products to achieve an energetic lift, products to achieve an energetic lift, not dissimilar from the lift they're not dissimilar from the lift they're not dissimilar from the lift they're seeking with caffeine or an energy seeking with caffeine or an energy seeking with caffeine or an energy drink, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Sounds like they're using products &gt;&gt; Sounds like they're using products &gt;&gt; Sounds like they're using products pretty regularly to achieve that. pretty regularly to achieve that. pretty regularly to achieve that. And if they don't use theirrratom And if they don't use theirrratom And if they don't use theirrratom product, they feel a little bit more product, they feel a little bit more product, they feel a little bit more lethargic, maybe a little bit of minor lethargic, maybe a little bit of minor lethargic, maybe a little bit of minor headache, not as energized and clear as headache, not as energized and clear as headache, not as energized and clear as they would otherwise. Sounds a lot like they would otherwise. Sounds a lot like they would otherwise. Sounds a lot like caffeine to me, caffeine to me, caffeine to me, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; With one caveat, I should add. &gt;&gt; With one caveat, I should add. &gt;&gt; With one caveat, I should add. When somebody consumes a lot of When somebody consumes a lot of When somebody consumes a lot of caffeine, at some point the effect starts to at some point the effect starts to at some point the effect starts to drop off because they gain a drop off because they gain a drop off because they gain a tolerance. that the effect of caffeine tolerance. that the effect of caffeine tolerance. that the effect of caffeine doesn't shift from a stimulant to an to doesn't shift from a stimulant to an to doesn't shift from a stimulant to an to a more opioid-like effect the more you a more opioid-like effect the more you a more opioid-like effect the more you take. It tends to just make you less uh take. It tends to just make you less uh take. It tends to just make you less uh sensitive to caffeine over time. It's sensitive to caffeine over time. It's sensitive to caffeine over time. It's more of a inverted U-shaped function as more of a inverted U-shaped function as more of a inverted U-shaped function as opposed to two different curves. Right. opposed to two different curves. Right. opposed to two different curves. Right. &gt;&gt; Right. But you will you will become, you &gt;&gt; Right. But you will you will become, you &gt;&gt; Right. But you will you will become, you know, you'll get jittery with caffeine know, you'll get jittery with caffeine know, you'll get jittery with caffeine and you get it actually causes anxiety and you get it actually causes anxiety and you get it actually causes anxiety when you get into higher amounts of it. when you get into higher amounts of it. when you get into higher amounts of it. And so, yeah, I mean, point well taken. And so, yeah, I mean, point well taken. And so, yeah, I mean, point well taken. It's just a matter of where you are in It's just a matter of where you are in It's just a matter of where you are in that sort of U-shaped curve, right? You that sort of U-shaped curve, right? You that sort of U-shaped curve, right? You got to get over that sort of jittery got to get over that sort of jittery got to get over that sort of jittery anxiety point before it really starts to anxiety point before it really starts to anxiety point before it really starts to you. It doesn't bother you, right? I you. It doesn't bother you, right? I you. It doesn't bother you, right? I mean, when I was a young assistant mean, when I was a young assistant mean, when I was a young assistant professor, they would see me come in the professor, they would see me come in the professor, they would see me come in the restaurant with our guests and they restaurant with our guests and they restaurant with our guests and they would immediately put a pot of coffee on would immediately put a pot of coffee on would immediately put a pot of coffee on because they knew I was going to sit because they knew I was going to sit because they knew I was going to sit there until 9 10:00 at night and drink there until 9 10:00 at night and drink there until 9 10:00 at night and drink coffee the whole time. Right. And I go coffee the whole time. Right. And I go coffee the whole time. Right. And I go to bed, no problem. to bed, no problem. to bed, no problem. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I was saying that today recently &gt;&gt; Yeah. I was saying that today recently &gt;&gt; Yeah. I was saying that today recently on a podcast I was a guest on, I shared on a podcast I was a guest on, I shared on a podcast I was a guest on, I shared that I drink, and I do not suggest that I drink, and I do not suggest that I drink, and I do not suggest people do this, but I legitimately drink people do this, but I legitimately drink people do this, but I legitimately drink somewhere between 600 and probably 900 somewhere between 600 and probably 900 somewhere between 600 and probably 900 milligrams of caffeine per day. Wow. And milligrams of caffeine per day. Wow. And milligrams of caffeine per day. Wow. And people say, "Well, that's impossible." people say, "Well, that's impossible." people say, "Well, that's impossible." But I'll drink five But I'll drink five But I'll drink five &gt;&gt; zero sugar cold brew yerba mates. Each &gt;&gt; zero sugar cold brew yerba mates. Each &gt;&gt; zero sugar cold brew yerba mates. Each one of those 120 milligrams, plus a one of those 120 milligrams, plus a one of those 120 milligrams, plus a strong coffee, probably another half strong coffee, probably another half strong coffee, probably another half cup. I limit it to the early part of the cup. I limit it to the early part of the cup. I limit it to the early part of the day or up to about 2 p.m., but no day or up to about 2 p.m., but no day or up to about 2 p.m., but no problem. But most people who get their problem. But most people who get their problem. But most people who get their commercial vendor coffee, let's say uh commercial vendor coffee, let's say uh commercial vendor coffee, let's say uh venti coffee, venti coffee, venti coffee, &gt;&gt; take that away from them from two for &gt;&gt; take that away from them from two for &gt;&gt; take that away from them from two for two days and they will be complaining of two days and they will be complaining of two days and they will be complaining of headache and maybe even nausea because headache and maybe even nausea because headache and maybe even nausea because it there's so much caffeine in those. it there's so much caffeine in those. it there's so much caffeine in those. &gt;&gt; Okay, so we got this first case uh &gt;&gt; Okay, so we got this first case uh &gt;&gt; Okay, so we got this first case uh caffeine- like usage. Let's just bin caffeine- like usage. Let's just bin caffeine- like usage. Let's just bin that. Um, second path of cratom usage that. Um, second path of cratom usage that. Um, second path of cratom usage seems to be people who use fairly high seems to be people who use fairly high seems to be people who use fairly high doses or concentrates to achieve an doses or concentrates to achieve an doses or concentrates to achieve an opioid-like effect, a mild seditive opioid-like effect, a mild seditive opioid-like effect, a mild seditive effect, um, euphoric effect. Um, this effect, um, euphoric effect. Um, this effect, um, euphoric effect. Um, this sounds a lot like opioid use or higher sounds a lot like opioid use or higher sounds a lot like opioid use or higher dosage alcohol use for instance. dosage alcohol use for instance. dosage alcohol use for instance. &gt;&gt; Right. And then we've got this third &gt;&gt; Right. And then we've got this third &gt;&gt; Right. And then we've got this third category that you mentioned that are category that you mentioned that are category that you mentioned that are using to get off opiates or to stay away using to get off opiates or to stay away using to get off opiates or to stay away from opiates from opiates from opiates &gt;&gt; and for whom you told us &gt;&gt; and for whom you told us &gt;&gt; and for whom you told us is a is a real benefit for them because is a is a real benefit for them because is a is a real benefit for them because otherwise they would be strongly otherwise they would be strongly otherwise they would be strongly addicted to opiates. And I should just addicted to opiates. And I should just addicted to opiates. And I should just mention that this third category of mention that this third category of mention that this third category of people are the ones that I heard from people are the ones that I heard from people are the ones that I heard from when I mentioned on X formerly known as when I mentioned on X formerly known as when I mentioned on X formerly known as Twitter. I said something kind of Twitter. I said something kind of Twitter. I said something kind of negative about I just put out a then negative about I just put out a then negative about I just put out a then tweet now post um which alluded to the tweet now post um which alluded to the tweet now post um which alluded to the darker sides of darker sides of darker sides of &gt;&gt; and I got attacked actually by this &gt;&gt; and I got attacked actually by this &gt;&gt; and I got attacked actually by this community that said hey were it not community that said hey were it not community that said hey were it not forratom uh we'd see a lot more uh forratom uh we'd see a lot more uh forratom uh we'd see a lot more uh opioid dependence we'd see a lot more opioid dependence we'd see a lot more opioid dependence we'd see a lot more fatalities and actually I learned about fatalities and actually I learned about fatalities and actually I learned about you in large part through the dialogue you in large part through the dialogue you in large part through the dialogue that emerged from that response and so that emerged from that response and so that emerged from that response and so hopefully what listeners of the of this hopefully what listeners of the of this hopefully what listeners of the of this podcast are starting to hear is that podcast are starting to hear is that podcast are starting to hear is that this molecule is uh complicated, this molecule is uh complicated, this molecule is uh complicated, super interesting and that the usage super interesting and that the usage super interesting and that the usage patterns are complicated and varied and patterns are complicated and varied and patterns are complicated and varied and very interesting. So we can't just very interesting. So we can't just very interesting. So we can't just sayratom badratom good sayratom badratom good sayratom badratom good &gt;&gt; we really have to explore how it's &gt;&gt; we really have to explore how it's &gt;&gt; we really have to explore how it's delivered and what people are using it delivered and what people are using it delivered and what people are using it for. &gt;&gt; And again we can't just sayratom because &gt;&gt; And again we can't just sayratom because &gt;&gt; And again we can't just sayratom because it's that's just like just saying it's that's just like just saying it's that's just like just saying alcohol, right? So there's a alcohol, right? So there's a alcohol, right? So there's a variety of different forms of product variety of different forms of product variety of different forms of product &gt;&gt; that are that are out there and that are &gt;&gt; that are that are out there and that are &gt;&gt; that are that are out there and that are being utilized and it could be that being utilized and it could be that being utilized and it could be that those are being utilized in those are being utilized in those are being utilized in very different ways. Um as I mentioned very different ways. Um as I mentioned very different ways. Um as I mentioned we don't have good strong data to we don't have good strong data to we don't have good strong data to suggest one way or the other but you can suggest one way or the other but you can suggest one way or the other but you can assume and anecdotally say that it would assume and anecdotally say that it would assume and anecdotally say that it would make sense. Right? So I think two things make sense. Right? So I think two things make sense. Right? So I think two things that will really kind of probably blow that will really kind of probably blow that will really kind of probably blow this open a little bit more. Um one is this open a little bit more. Um one is this open a little bit more. Um one is that uhratom itself contains multiple is that uhratom itself contains multiple is that uhratom itself contains multiple compounds multiple chemical compounds. compounds multiple chemical compounds. compounds multiple chemical compounds. So it's not just one thing. So it's not just one thing. So it's not just one thing. &gt;&gt; It's an alkyoid. &gt;&gt; It's an alkyoid. &gt;&gt; It's an alkyoid. &gt;&gt; It has at least 20 to 40 alkyoids in it. &gt;&gt; It has at least 20 to 40 alkyoids in it. &gt;&gt; It has at least 20 to 40 alkyoids in it. &gt;&gt; Can you um explain to people what an &gt;&gt; Can you um explain to people what an &gt;&gt; Can you um explain to people what an alkaloid is and some other examples of alkaloid is and some other examples of alkaloid is and some other examples of alkyoids they might be familiar with? alkyoids they might be familiar with? alkyoids they might be familiar with? &gt;&gt; Sure. So alkyoid is a organic molecule &gt;&gt; Sure. So alkyoid is a organic molecule &gt;&gt; Sure. So alkyoid is a organic molecule that has at least a nitrogen in its that has at least a nitrogen in its that has at least a nitrogen in its structure. So it has to be nitrogen, structure. So it has to be nitrogen, structure. So it has to be nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen. It can or cannot have carbon, hydrogen. It can or cannot have carbon, hydrogen. It can or cannot have oxygen. Um but those are essentially the oxygen. Um but those are essentially the oxygen. Um but those are essentially the template for what we would define as the template for what we would define as the template for what we would define as an alkyoid. And then there's various an alkyoid. And then there's various an alkyoid. And then there's various classes of alkyoids. Um many things that classes of alkyoids. Um many things that classes of alkyoids. Um many things that people are familiar with. Dopamine, people are familiar with. Dopamine, people are familiar with. Dopamine, serotonin, these are alkyoids. Um but we serotonin, these are alkyoids. Um but we serotonin, these are alkyoids. Um but we could go further. We just talked about could go further. We just talked about could go further. We just talked about caffeine. Caffeine's an alkyoid. Uh caffeine. Caffeine's an alkyoid. Uh caffeine. Caffeine's an alkyoid. Uh cocaine's an alkaloid. Morphine's an cocaine's an alkaloid. Morphine's an cocaine's an alkaloid. Morphine's an alkyoid. Um, so all of these molecules alkyoid. Um, so all of these molecules alkyoid. Um, so all of these molecules contain a nitrogen um that is core contain a nitrogen um that is core contain a nitrogen um that is core to part of their activity. What we to part of their activity. What we to part of their activity. What we believe is essential for them to believe is essential for them to believe is essential for them to interact with the proteins in the body. interact with the proteins in the body. interact with the proteins in the body. &gt;&gt; Can I ask a question about nitrogen and &gt;&gt; Can I ask a question about nitrogen and &gt;&gt; Can I ask a question about nitrogen and protein interactions given this is a protein interactions given this is a protein interactions given this is a science/halth podcast without getting science/halth podcast without getting science/halth podcast without getting too far down in the weeds. too far down in the weeds. too far down in the weeds. &gt;&gt; Uh, a number of people will hear, okay, &gt;&gt; Uh, a number of people will hear, okay, &gt;&gt; Uh, a number of people will hear, okay, it's got a nitrogen. Okay, they probably it's got a nitrogen. Okay, they probably it's got a nitrogen. Okay, they probably have uh vague or clear memories of have uh vague or clear memories of have uh vague or clear memories of chemistry class, but the fact that you chemistry class, but the fact that you chemistry class, but the fact that you have this N this nitrogen have this N this nitrogen have this N this nitrogen &gt;&gt; and you have cells that have proteins, &gt;&gt; and you have cells that have proteins, &gt;&gt; and you have cells that have proteins, it for the non-chemist, could you it for the non-chemist, could you it for the non-chemist, could you explain how the nitrogen allows the that explain how the nitrogen allows the that explain how the nitrogen allows the that molecule to do something? Does it bind molecule to do something? Does it bind molecule to do something? Does it bind with more affinity? Does it change the with more affinity? Does it change the with more affinity? Does it change the gene expression? What is it about having gene expression? What is it about having gene expression? What is it about having a nitrogen that really changes the a nitrogen that really changes the a nitrogen that really changes the properties of a molecule? Yeah. So properties of a molecule? Yeah. So properties of a molecule? Yeah. So there's a couple of important there's a couple of important there's a couple of important pieces here. Nitrogen is a element that pieces here. Nitrogen is a element that pieces here. Nitrogen is a element that can act as a base. So it can in a can act as a base. So it can in a can act as a base. So it can in a technical term can accept a proton. So technical term can accept a proton. So technical term can accept a proton. So it can also develop a charge. Charges it can also develop a charge. Charges it can also develop a charge. Charges are important because if you think about are important because if you think about are important because if you think about magnets, right, we have a positive magnets, right, we have a positive magnets, right, we have a positive charge magnet face and a negative charge magnet face and a negative charge magnet face and a negative charge magnet face. And those two things will magnet face. And those two things will magnet face. And those two things will attract each other. You can set them on attract each other. You can set them on attract each other. You can set them on a table and they'll find each other, a table and they'll find each other, a table and they'll find each other, right? Depending on how strong or close right? Depending on how strong or close right? Depending on how strong or close they are to each other. That's a very they are to each other. That's a very they are to each other. That's a very similar thing that happens between a similar thing that happens between a similar thing that happens between a nitrogen that can gain a positive charge nitrogen that can gain a positive charge nitrogen that can gain a positive charge in our body and say a caroxyic acid or a in our body and say a caroxyic acid or a in our body and say a caroxyic acid or a negative charge that would be present a negative charge that would be present a negative charge that would be present on a protein. And so that nitrogen being on a protein. And so that nitrogen being on a protein. And so that nitrogen being charged, I always call it when I teach charged, I always call it when I teach charged, I always call it when I teach my pharmacy students, it's almost like a my pharmacy students, it's almost like a my pharmacy students, it's almost like a tractor beam. That molecules floating tractor beam. That molecules floating tractor beam. That molecules floating around and it it's trying to find that around and it it's trying to find that around and it it's trying to find that negative charge to interact with. And negative charge to interact with. And negative charge to interact with. And when it finds the right one in the right when it finds the right one in the right when it finds the right one in the right space, and the right fit, boom, it's space, and the right fit, boom, it's space, and the right fit, boom, it's into that protein and it causes whatever into that protein and it causes whatever into that protein and it causes whatever it's going to cause, whether it it's going to cause, whether it it's going to cause, whether it activates that protein or whether it activates that protein or whether it activates that protein or whether it blocks that protein from doing its blocks that protein from doing its blocks that protein from doing its function. It is a key element of life. function. It is a key element of life. function. It is a key element of life. All our amino acids, amino is nitrogen. All our amino acids, amino is nitrogen. All our amino acids, amino is nitrogen. All of our amino acids are building All of our amino acids are building All of our amino acids are building blocks of life have that nitrogen and blocks of life have that nitrogen and blocks of life have that nitrogen and they have the acid part to it. So they have the acid part to it. So they have the acid part to it. So they have a positive and a negative charge by have a positive and a negative charge by have a positive and a negative charge by nature. Um and that's what makes up all nature. Um and that's what makes up all nature. Um and that's what makes up all of our proteins. And so the proteins can of our proteins. And so the proteins can of our proteins. And so the proteins can have positive charges from the nitrogens have positive charges from the nitrogens have positive charges from the nitrogens and they can have negative charges from and they can have negative charges from and they can have negative charges from the acids. And what we generally see the acids. And what we generally see the acids. And what we generally see with plant materials is they have with plant materials is they have with plant materials is they have alkaloids within those plants and those alkaloids within those plants and those alkaloids within those plants and those alkyoids um have helped define really alkyoids um have helped define really alkyoids um have helped define really our chemical neurotransmitter systems. our chemical neurotransmitter systems. our chemical neurotransmitter systems. Nicotine perfect example. It's an Nicotine perfect example. It's an Nicotine perfect example. It's an alkyoid. We have an entire alkyoid. We have an entire alkyoid. We have an entire acetylolineric nervous system and which acetylolineric nervous system and which acetylolineric nervous system and which is the exclusive nervous system in is the exclusive nervous system in is the exclusive nervous system in insects. But nicotine binds to nicotinic insects. But nicotine binds to nicotinic insects. But nicotine binds to nicotinic acetylolinergic receptors. That whole acetylolinergic receptors. That whole acetylolinergic receptors. That whole system was defined by nicotine. system was defined by nicotine. system was defined by nicotine. &gt;&gt; Right? And people just to take a step &gt;&gt; Right? And people just to take a step &gt;&gt; Right? And people just to take a step back um what uh Dr. McCertie is back um what uh Dr. McCertie is back um what uh Dr. McCertie is explaining is that there are receptors explaining is that there are receptors explaining is that there are receptors throughout the brain and body that are throughout the brain and body that are throughout the brain and body that are responsible for everything from muscle responsible for everything from muscle responsible for everything from muscle movement and contraction to uh your movement and contraction to uh your movement and contraction to uh your ability to focus um to your memory um ability to focus um to your memory um ability to focus um to your memory um neuroplasticity that are so-called neuroplasticity that are so-called neuroplasticity that are so-called nicotinic acetyloline receptors. They nicotinic acetyloline receptors. They nicotinic acetyloline receptors. They didn't evolve didn't evolve didn't evolve because we thought that people would because we thought that people would because we thought that people would take nicotine. It just so happens that take nicotine. It just so happens that take nicotine. It just so happens that this plant that a tobacco plant that this plant that a tobacco plant that this plant that a tobacco plant that contains nicotine was used as a contains nicotine was used as a contains nicotine was used as a experimental probe to understand where experimental probe to understand where experimental probe to understand where these nicotinic receptors are in the these nicotinic receptors are in the these nicotinic receptors are in the body. So this reflects the fact that body. So this reflects the fact that body. So this reflects the fact that humans have been uh nibbling on plants humans have been uh nibbling on plants humans have been uh nibbling on plants and seeing what happens for a long time. and seeing what happens for a long time. and seeing what happens for a long time. There's a um explicative version of this There's a um explicative version of this There's a um explicative version of this which is f around and find out kind of which is f around and find out kind of which is f around and find out kind of uh experimentation, but this is really uh experimentation, but this is really uh experimentation, but this is really what uh old world primates including what uh old world primates including what uh old world primates including humans have been doing for a long time. humans have been doing for a long time. humans have been doing for a long time. And then just seeing whether or not uh And then just seeing whether or not uh And then just seeing whether or not uh your buddy that ate the plant died. your buddy that ate the plant died. your buddy that ate the plant died. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Got energized, &gt;&gt; Got energized, &gt;&gt; Got energized, mated, um fought, slept, um fought, slept, um fought, slept, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And I mean, this is kind of still what &gt;&gt; And I mean, this is kind of still what &gt;&gt; And I mean, this is kind of still what we're doing. It's just that we do this we're doing. It's just that we do this we're doing. It's just that we do this now with lab coats on, now with lab coats on, now with lab coats on, &gt;&gt; right? In in many ways. And and you're &gt;&gt; right? In in many ways. And and you're &gt;&gt; right? In in many ways. And and you're 100% right. Right. There's the old joke, 100% right. Right. There's the old joke, 100% right. Right. There's the old joke, there's two types of mushroom hunters, there's two types of mushroom hunters, there's two types of mushroom hunters, good ones and dead ones. Right. good ones and dead ones. Right. good ones and dead ones. Right. &gt;&gt; Good joke because it's going to keep a &gt;&gt; Good joke because it's going to keep a &gt;&gt; Good joke because it's going to keep a lot of people safe. lot of people safe. lot of people safe. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and I mean it's that's the &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and I mean it's that's the &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and I mean it's that's the point and in fact I' I've done a lot point and in fact I' I've done a lot point and in fact I' I've done a lot of work with ethnobbotnist and of work with ethnobbotnist and of work with ethnobbotnist and ethnopharmacologists and somewhat am ethnopharmacologists and somewhat am ethnopharmacologists and somewhat am uh being in that work we've been doing uh being in that work we've been doing uh being in that work we've been doing and actually going into the you know and actually going into the you know and actually going into the you know native places to learn more about it. um native places to learn more about it. um native places to learn more about it. um which is what ethnobbotnist or which is what ethnobbotnist or which is what ethnobbotnist or ethnopharmarmacologist would be doing. ethnopharmarmacologist would be doing. ethnopharmarmacologist would be doing. Um and you know we have um a lot Um and you know we have um a lot Um and you know we have um a lot to learn from the things that have to learn from the things that have to learn from the things that have existed on this earth for a long time. existed on this earth for a long time. existed on this earth for a long time. Many of those are animals. Animals were Many of those are animals. Animals were Many of those are animals. Animals were probably the first pharmacists and the probably the first pharmacists and the probably the first pharmacists and the first physicians because they learned first physicians because they learned first physicians because they learned which plants to utilize when they were which plants to utilize when they were which plants to utilize when they were ill or sick and they use which plants to ill or sick and they use which plants to ill or sick and they use which plants to avoid to stay alive. So they avoid to stay alive. So they avoid to stay alive. So they learned these things long before humans learned these things long before humans learned these things long before humans were capable of looking at and were capable of looking at and were capable of looking at and understanding what the animals were understanding what the animals were understanding what the animals were doing and then mimicking the animals, doing and then mimicking the animals, doing and then mimicking the animals, right? And then this is sort of how right? And then this is sort of how right? And then this is sort of how modern medicine started to develop was modern medicine started to develop was modern medicine started to develop was all by observational, all by anecdotal. all by observational, all by anecdotal. all by observational, all by anecdotal. Hey, that looks interesting, right? Hey, that looks interesting, right? Hey, that looks interesting, right? This this is happening. This this is happening. This this is happening. &gt;&gt; And you still do this now in your &gt;&gt; And you still do this now in your &gt;&gt; And you still do this now in your laboratory. We study animals and we laboratory. We study animals and we laboratory. We study animals and we advance to human clinical trials. Right. advance to human clinical trials. Right. advance to human clinical trials. Right. &gt;&gt; Animals have a certain advantage in this &gt;&gt; Animals have a certain advantage in this &gt;&gt; Animals have a certain advantage in this regard because they don't um subject regard because they don't um subject regard because they don't um subject themselves to the placebo effect as far themselves to the placebo effect as far themselves to the placebo effect as far as we know. as we know. as we know. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; And in addition to that, animals, most &gt;&gt; And in addition to that, animals, most &gt;&gt; And in addition to that, animals, most animals, including insects, but many animals, including insects, but many animals, including insects, but many non-human mammals have a much more non-human mammals have a much more non-human mammals have a much more powerful sense of smell than we do. powerful sense of smell than we do. powerful sense of smell than we do. And many of the compounds in plants if And many of the compounds in plants if And many of the compounds in plants if they have uh like some people will um be they have uh like some people will um be they have uh like some people will um be familiar with the discussions about familiar with the discussions about familiar with the discussions about testosterone and estrogen as you know testosterone and estrogen as you know testosterone and estrogen as you know steroid hormones having um and then the steroid hormones having um and then the steroid hormones having um and then the aromatase properties. Aroma they aromatase properties. Aroma they aromatase properties. Aroma they literally make literally make literally make &gt;&gt; have an aroma that chemists in the lab &gt;&gt; have an aroma that chemists in the lab &gt;&gt; have an aroma that chemists in the lab know. Oh, you could smell if something know. Oh, you could smell if something know. Oh, you could smell if something has a has a steroid like chemical has a has a steroid like chemical has a has a steroid like chemical structure by virtue of the way it structure by virtue of the way it structure by virtue of the way it smells. But animals are very good at smells. But animals are very good at smells. But animals are very good at seeking out plants that have estrogen or seeking out plants that have estrogen or seeking out plants that have estrogen or testosterone in them just by virtue of testosterone in them just by virtue of testosterone in them just by virtue of their ability to smell those compounds their ability to smell those compounds their ability to smell those compounds uh very um sensitive. uh very um sensitive. uh very um sensitive. &gt;&gt; And you take it a little step further, &gt;&gt; And you take it a little step further, &gt;&gt; And you take it a little step further, it's also the taste part that's it's also the taste part that's it's also the taste part that's involved. I had my original mentor, he's involved. I had my original mentor, he's involved. I had my original mentor, he's gone now. Um one of my original he's gone now. Um one of my original he's gone now. Um one of my original mentors, he actually would come into the mentors, he actually would come into the mentors, he actually would come into the lab was so old school that he would dip lab was so old school that he would dip lab was so old school that he would dip his finger into whatever I made and his finger into whatever I made and his finger into whatever I made and taste it and say, "Yep, you got your taste it and say, "Yep, you got your taste it and say, "Yep, you got your product." I knew that was coming because product." I knew that was coming because product." I knew that was coming because I knew one of these old older uh he I knew one of these old older uh he I knew one of these old older uh he was a neuroanatomist and was a neuroanatomist and was a neuroanatomist and &gt;&gt; I never I can't believe that these guys &gt;&gt; I never I can't believe that these guys &gt;&gt; I never I can't believe that these guys did this. did this. did this. &gt;&gt; These guys did it. &gt;&gt; These guys did it. &gt;&gt; These guys did it. &gt;&gt; Uh he's dead now by way of age, but he &gt;&gt; Uh he's dead now by way of age, but he &gt;&gt; Uh he's dead now by way of age, but he was a member of the national academy and was a member of the national academy and was a member of the national academy and everything that we had a shipment of everything that we had a shipment of everything that we had a shipment of &gt;&gt; please do not do this of non-human &gt;&gt; please do not do this of non-human &gt;&gt; please do not do this of non-human primate and human brain tissue being primate and human brain tissue being primate and human brain tissue being shipped in for his brain bank. Friends shipped in for his brain bank. Friends shipped in for his brain bank. Friends of mine will know who this is. And he of mine will know who this is. And he of mine will know who this is. And he &gt;&gt; opened up the jar that it was shipped &gt;&gt; opened up the jar that it was shipped &gt;&gt; opened up the jar that it was shipped in. It was in liquid and he took off his in. It was in liquid and he took off his in. It was in liquid and he took off his glove which itself is crazy. Dipped two glove which itself is crazy. Dipped two glove which itself is crazy. Dipped two fingers in fingers in fingers in &gt;&gt; and he goes 30% sucrossse but this could &gt;&gt; and he goes 30% sucrossse but this could &gt;&gt; and he goes 30% sucrossse but this could have prons in it. Now it was fixed also have prons in it. Now it was fixed also have prons in it. Now it was fixed also being parapaldahhide. being parapaldahhide. being parapaldahhide. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; No no regard whatsoever. Rescrewed &gt;&gt; No no regard whatsoever. Rescrewed &gt;&gt; No no regard whatsoever. Rescrewed it put it on the shelf and then you know it put it on the shelf and then you know it put it on the shelf and then you know people got to work and it was obviously people got to work and it was obviously people got to work and it was obviously a demonstrate. This was kind of bravado a demonstrate. This was kind of bravado a demonstrate. This was kind of bravado in laboratories too. in laboratories too. in laboratories too. Self-experimentation terrible habits. Um Self-experimentation terrible habits. Um Self-experimentation terrible habits. Um but uh it was not uncommon. I mean this but uh it was not uncommon. I mean this but uh it was not uncommon. I mean this is the way chemistry was done. is the way chemistry was done. is the way chemistry was done. &gt;&gt; One of my great meners and I'll &gt;&gt; One of my great meners and I'll &gt;&gt; One of my great meners and I'll spare him sharing his name but his spare him sharing his name but his spare him sharing his name but his um his master's thesis was making um his master's thesis was making um his master's thesis was making analoges of methylenidate which is rolin analoges of methylenidate which is rolin analoges of methylenidate which is rolin &gt;&gt; and so he rolin is a um methylester. So &gt;&gt; and so he rolin is a um methylester. So &gt;&gt; and so he rolin is a um methylester. So it's a caroxyic acid that has one carbon it's a caroxyic acid that has one carbon it's a caroxyic acid that has one carbon attached to where the acid part is. So attached to where the acid part is. So attached to where the acid part is. So this makes a what we call an esther. Um, this makes a what we call an esther. Um, this makes a what we call an esther. Um, and if you extend the carbon chain of an and if you extend the carbon chain of an and if you extend the carbon chain of an esther, you can one, increase how it is esther, you can one, increase how it is esther, you can one, increase how it is absorbed in the body, and two, you can absorbed in the body, and two, you can absorbed in the body, and two, you can potentially increase how long it lasts potentially increase how long it lasts potentially increase how long it lasts in the body. And so his whole project in the body. And so his whole project in the body. And so his whole project was making from the methyl, now we take was making from the methyl, now we take was making from the methyl, now we take two carbons, which is ethyl, we take two carbons, which is ethyl, we take two carbons, which is ethyl, we take three carbons, which is propel, we three carbons, which is propel, we three carbons, which is propel, we branch those carbons to make isopropyl branch those carbons to make isopropyl branch those carbons to make isopropyl or whatnot. And he would try each one of or whatnot. And he would try each one of or whatnot. And he would try each one of the compounds that he made himself to the compounds that he made himself to the compounds that he made himself to see if pharmacocinetically and see if pharmacocinetically and see if pharmacocinetically and pharmacodnamically it's improved on methylenity. Well, it's improved on methylenity. Well, it's improved on methylenity. Well, guess what's still on the market today? guess what's still on the market today? guess what's still on the market today? Methylenadate. So that ought to tell you Methylenadate. So that ought to tell you Methylenadate. So that ought to tell you the result of his work. But but when the result of his work. But but when the result of his work. But but when he told me those stories, um it just he told me those stories, um it just he told me those stories, um it just blew my mind because I I'm so averse to blew my mind because I I'm so averse to blew my mind because I I'm so averse to even smelling the chemicals we work even smelling the chemicals we work even smelling the chemicals we work with. Good. with. Good. with. Good. &gt;&gt; You can blow out your factory &gt;&gt; You can blow out your factory &gt;&gt; You can blow out your factory epithelium. Absolutely. epithelium. Absolutely. epithelium. Absolutely. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in research science for almost three research science for almost three research science for almost three decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. and I've been taking it every day since. and I've been taking it every day since. I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune system health as well as to improve system health as well as to improve system health as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just one supplement what that supplement one supplement what that supplement one supplement what that supplement would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of Omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of Omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of Omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this podcast, Omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, Omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, Omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status and much more. Again, that's and much more. Again, that's and much more. Again, that's drinkagg.com/huberman to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROA. episode is also brought to us by ROA. episode is also brought to us by ROA. I'm excited to share that ROA and I I'm excited to share that ROA and I I'm excited to share that ROA and I recently teamed up to create a new pair recently teamed up to create a new pair recently teamed up to create a new pair of red lens glasses. These Red Lens of red lens glasses. These Red Lens of red lens glasses. These Red Lens glasses are meant to be worn in the glasses are meant to be worn in the glasses are meant to be worn in the evening after the sun goes down. They evening after the sun goes down. They evening after the sun goes down. They filter out shortwavelength light that filter out shortwavelength light that filter out shortwavelength light that comes from screens and from LED lights, comes from screens and from LED lights, comes from screens and from LED lights, which are the most common indoor which are the most common indoor which are the most common indoor lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize Roa Red Lens glasses are not traditional Roa Red Lens glasses are not traditional Roa Red Lens glasses are not traditional blue blockers. They do filter out blue blockers. They do filter out blue blockers. They do filter out blue light, but they filter out a lot more light, but they filter out a lot more light, but they filter out a lot more than just blue light. In fact, they than just blue light. In fact, they than just blue light. In fact, they filter out the full range of filter out the full range of filter out the full range of shortwavelength light that suppresses shortwavelength light that suppresses shortwavelength light that suppresses the hormone melatonin. By the way, you the hormone melatonin. By the way, you the hormone melatonin. By the way, you want melatonin high in the evening and want melatonin high in the evening and want melatonin high in the evening and at night. Makes it easy to fall and stay at night. Makes it easy to fall and stay at night. Makes it easy to fall and stay asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and at night. These Rocoa Red Lens glasses at night. These Rocoa Red Lens glasses at night. These Rocoa Red Lens glasses ensure normal, healthy increases in ensure normal, healthy increases in ensure normal, healthy increases in melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing so, these Roka Red Lens glasses really so, these Roka Red Lens glasses really so, these Roka Red Lens glasses really help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your transition to sleep. Roka Red Lens transition to sleep. Roka Red Lens transition to sleep. Roka Red Lens glasses also look great. They have a ton glasses also look great. They have a ton glasses also look great. They have a ton of different frames to select from, and of different frames to select from, and of different frames to select from, and you can wear them out to dinner or you can wear them out to dinner or you can wear them out to dinner or concerts, and you can still see things. concerts, and you can still see things. concerts, and you can still see things. I don't recommend you wear them while I don't recommend you wear them while I don't recommend you wear them while driving just for safety purposes. But if driving just for safety purposes. But if driving just for safety purposes. But if you're out to dinner, you're at a you're out to dinner, you're at a you're out to dinner, you're at a concert, you're at a friend's house, or concert, you're at a friend's house, or concert, you're at a friend's house, or you're just at home, pop those Roka Red you're just at home, pop those Roka Red you're just at home, pop those Roka Red Lens glasses on, and you'll really Lens glasses on, and you'll really Lens glasses on, and you'll really notice the difference in terms of your notice the difference in terms of your notice the difference in terms of your levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I mentioned earlier. So, it really is mentioned earlier. So, it really is mentioned earlier. So, it really is possible to support your biology. be possible to support your biology. be possible to support your biology. be scientific about it and remain social at scientific about it and remain social at scientific about it and remain social at the same time if you like. If you'd like the same time if you like. If you'd like the same time if you like. If you'd like to try ROA, go to roka.com. That's to try ROA, go to roka.com. That's to try ROA, go to roka.com. That's roa.com and enter the code hubman to roa.com and enter the code hubman to roa.com and enter the code hubman to save 20% off your first order. Again, save 20% off your first order. Again, save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roa.com and enter the code hubman that's roa.com and enter the code hubman that's roa.com and enter the code hubman at checkout. What's clear to me now is at checkout. What's clear to me now is at checkout. What's clear to me now is that uh what we're talking about that uh what we're talking about that uh what we're talking about scientists and um everyday uh apes uh scientists and um everyday uh apes uh scientists and um everyday uh apes uh that we call humans um smelling stuff that we call humans um smelling stuff that we call humans um smelling stuff and tasting stuff and experimenting and tasting stuff and experimenting and tasting stuff and experimenting on one end of the spectrum and that on one end of the spectrum and that on one end of the spectrum and that on the other end of the spectrum somebody the other end of the spectrum somebody the other end of the spectrum somebody going into a convenience store we're going into a convenience store we're going into a convenience store we're looking online and buying a little looking online and buying a little looking online and buying a little bottle and slugging it down. bottle and slugging it down. bottle and slugging it down. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And getting some effect. And I actually &gt;&gt; And getting some effect. And I actually &gt;&gt; And getting some effect. And I actually think that in between those is some think that in between those is some think that in between those is some important experiential stuff that's important experiential stuff that's important experiential stuff that's missing that perhaps is explains a bit missing that perhaps is explains a bit missing that perhaps is explains a bit of where we are withratom at this point of where we are withratom at this point of where we are withratom at this point in time which is in time which is in time which is historically or what you call the historically or what you call the historically or what you call the traditional use. People would harvest traditional use. People would harvest traditional use. People would harvest the plant. They have knowledge of kind the plant. They have knowledge of kind the plant. They have knowledge of kind of the coloration of the plant, the of the coloration of the plant, the of the coloration of the plant, the texture of the field. A lot of texture of the field. A lot of texture of the field. A lot of unconscious knowledge too. Um maybe it's unconscious knowledge too. Um maybe it's unconscious knowledge too. Um maybe it's passed down through generations. Maybe passed down through generations. Maybe passed down through generations. Maybe they just learn it, you know, in a they just learn it, you know, in a they just learn it, you know, in a couple of years and next thing you know couple of years and next thing you know couple of years and next thing you know they're brewing it, they're drinking it. they're brewing it, they're drinking it. they're brewing it, they're drinking it. As they're brewing it, they're smelling As they're brewing it, they're smelling As they're brewing it, they're smelling it. There are many more um avenues of it. There are many more um avenues of it. There are many more um avenues of information coming in about the information coming in about the information coming in about the concentration. You're not just going concentration. You're not just going concentration. You're not just going from product purchase, ingestion effect, from product purchase, ingestion effect, from product purchase, ingestion effect, &gt;&gt; right? And I think that perhaps this &gt;&gt; right? And I think that perhaps this &gt;&gt; right? And I think that perhaps this explains a lot of how we end up with um explains a lot of how we end up with um explains a lot of how we end up with um the highly processed food industry where the highly processed food industry where the highly processed food industry where you know much of what we're talking you know much of what we're talking you know much of what we're talking about today is paralleled. You know about today is paralleled. You know about today is paralleled. You know sugar is we have an innate desire for sugar is we have an innate desire for sugar is we have an innate desire for sugar. Uh who doesn't like sugar? We sugar. Uh who doesn't like sugar? We sugar. Uh who doesn't like sugar? We have an innate desire for protein and have an innate desire for protein and have an innate desire for protein and amino acids. But the highly processed amino acids. But the highly processed amino acids. But the highly processed food industry has figured out how to put food industry has figured out how to put food industry has figured out how to put all this into a package where there's all this into a package where there's all this into a package where there's two servings worth. Right? you're two servings worth. Right? you're two servings worth. Right? you're ingesting far more calories, far more ingesting far more calories, far more ingesting far more calories, far more preservatives, etc. in trying to get preservatives, etc. in trying to get preservatives, etc. in trying to get some effect, but what happens is your some effect, but what happens is your some effect, but what happens is your threshold changes and the next thing you threshold changes and the next thing you threshold changes and the next thing you know, you're going to the highly know, you're going to the highly know, you're going to the highly concentrated version. In other words, we concentrated version. In other words, we concentrated version. In other words, we don't go through this process of don't go through this process of don't go through this process of stepping through and getting stepping through and getting stepping through and getting familiar with a molecule and I think familiar with a molecule and I think familiar with a molecule and I think that could explain why people, you know, that could explain why people, you know, that could explain why people, you know, you're prescribed an opioid, next thing you're prescribed an opioid, next thing you're prescribed an opioid, next thing you know, you need that opioid, right? I you know, you need that opioid, right? I you know, you need that opioid, right? I mean, good people have been very mean, good people have been very mean, good people have been very willing, it's clear, to do bad things to willing, it's clear, to do bad things to willing, it's clear, to do bad things to other people other people other people &gt;&gt; in effort to try and avoid the &gt;&gt; in effort to try and avoid the &gt;&gt; in effort to try and avoid the withdrawal symptoms of opioids, right? withdrawal symptoms of opioids, right? withdrawal symptoms of opioids, right? &gt;&gt; And often the person they're harming the &gt;&gt; And often the person they're harming the &gt;&gt; And often the person they're harming the most is themselves. most is themselves. most is themselves. &gt;&gt; I think what you hit on is a really &gt;&gt; I think what you hit on is a really &gt;&gt; I think what you hit on is a really deep philosophical conversation on a deep philosophical conversation on a deep philosophical conversation on a whole another level because I just had whole another level because I just had whole another level because I just had this conversation with a colleague. this conversation with a colleague. this conversation with a colleague. We've lost totally in our culture where We've lost totally in our culture where We've lost totally in our culture where it is that medicines have come from. If it is that medicines have come from. If it is that medicines have come from. If you look at prescription medications, you look at prescription medications, you look at prescription medications, FDA approved medications, FDA approved medications, FDA approved medications, in the neighborhood of 75% of those that in the neighborhood of 75% of those that in the neighborhood of 75% of those that are available today were either are available today were either are available today were either discovered because of a natural product discovered because of a natural product discovered because of a natural product or modified or modified or modified natural products that made it into natural products that made it into natural products that made it into our drugstores and our hospitals. our drugstores and our hospitals. our drugstores and our hospitals. Aspirin. &gt;&gt; Aspirin is one perfect example. &gt;&gt; Aspirin is one perfect example. &gt;&gt; Aspirin is one perfect example. &gt;&gt; Salicy acid. &gt;&gt; Salicy acid. &gt;&gt; Salicy acid. &gt;&gt; Salicylic acid. It comes from salicin &gt;&gt; Salicylic acid. It comes from salicin &gt;&gt; Salicylic acid. It comes from salicin which is in the bark of the willow tree which is in the bark of the willow tree which is in the bark of the willow tree and people used to chew on the bark of and people used to chew on the bark of and people used to chew on the bark of willow tree and that salicin is the willow tree and that salicin is the willow tree and that salicin is the active form. You know you get salicylic active form. You know you get salicylic active form. You know you get salicylic acid makes it more stable. And there's a acid makes it more stable. And there's a acid makes it more stable. And there's a long story there, but um uh it's long story there, but um uh it's long story there, but um uh it's important because um important because um important because um we've lost that sort of connection to we've lost that sort of connection to we've lost that sort of connection to nature, that connection we just talked nature, that connection we just talked nature, that connection we just talked about with the animal world, right? That about with the animal world, right? That about with the animal world, right? That watching the animals do things and watching the animals do things and watching the animals do things and learning from the animals. learning from the animals. learning from the animals. &gt;&gt; Metformin, bourberine, a tree bark. &gt;&gt; Metformin, bourberine, a tree bark. &gt;&gt; Metformin, bourberine, a tree bark. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That lowers blood glucose &gt;&gt; That lowers blood glucose &gt;&gt; That lowers blood glucose &gt;&gt; and works for all the world as well as &gt;&gt; and works for all the world as well as &gt;&gt; and works for all the world as well as metformin. Well, look at look at the metformin. Well, look at look at the metformin. Well, look at look at the biggest selling weight loss drugs right biggest selling weight loss drugs right biggest selling weight loss drugs right now, the GLP1s. You know, you know that now, the GLP1s. You know, you know that now, the GLP1s. You know, you know that story. They actually came from the story. They actually came from the story. They actually came from the saliva of the helila monster. So, saliva of the helila monster. So, saliva of the helila monster. So, this is a lizard that eats only a few this is a lizard that eats only a few this is a lizard that eats only a few times a year. times a year. times a year. Um, but in its saliva, it has uh GLP-1 Um, but in its saliva, it has uh GLP-1 Um, but in its saliva, it has uh GLP-1 peptides. And um this was this was peptides. And um this was this was peptides. And um this was this was learned to help control glucose and help learned to help control glucose and help learned to help control glucose and help do all these things. And that was do all these things. And that was do all these things. And that was modified. And now we have Wiggoi and modified. And now we have Wiggoi and modified. And now we have Wiggoi and whatever zones uh out there as whatever zones uh out there as whatever zones uh out there as blockbuster drugs that are really blockbuster drugs that are really blockbuster drugs that are really changing um you know the shape of our changing um you know the shape of our changing um you know the shape of our society for hopefully for a good society for hopefully for a good society for hopefully for a good benefit and getting people away from benefit and getting people away from benefit and getting people away from some of these sugary things you some of these sugary things you some of these sugary things you mentioned earlier too. But yeah, there's mentioned earlier too. But yeah, there's mentioned earlier too. But yeah, there's just this history, rich history there's just this history, rich history there's just this history, rich history of how drugs have gotten to where they of how drugs have gotten to where they of how drugs have gotten to where they are. And most of us, including myself, are. And most of us, including myself, are. And most of us, including myself, uh you know, we run in and we pick up a uh you know, we run in and we pick up a uh you know, we run in and we pick up a prescription or we pick up something prescription or we pick up something prescription or we pick up something over the counter and don't even think over the counter and don't even think over the counter and don't even think twice about it. We know it's going to twice about it. We know it's going to twice about it. We know it's going to give us this effect and boom. And so, give us this effect and boom. And so, give us this effect and boom. And so, you're 100% right. And like I you're 100% right. And like I you're 100% right. And like I say, it's a very long deep philosophical say, it's a very long deep philosophical say, it's a very long deep philosophical discussion to get this whole thing discussion to get this whole thing discussion to get this whole thing circular, but we've lost that circular, but we've lost that circular, but we've lost that whole understanding of where things are whole understanding of where things are whole understanding of where things are coming from. And that's one of coming from. And that's one of coming from. And that's one of the things that I've always loved in my the things that I've always loved in my the things that I've always loved in my training originally as a pharmacist. training originally as a pharmacist. training originally as a pharmacist. I've always felt like for every disease I've always felt like for every disease I've always felt like for every disease that presents itself in this planet, that presents itself in this planet, that presents itself in this planet, there's got to be a solution. There's there's got to be a solution. There's there's got to be a solution. There's got to be this balance in nature. and got to be this balance in nature. and got to be this balance in nature. and natural products has always attracted me natural products has always attracted me natural products has always attracted me because of that. because of that. because of that. &gt;&gt; I'm just struck by the um &gt;&gt; I'm just struck by the um &gt;&gt; I'm just struck by the um by the number of examples that are just by the number of examples that are just by the number of examples that are just like popping to mind about how we've like popping to mind about how we've like popping to mind about how we've gone from plants and food and compounds gone from plants and food and compounds gone from plants and food and compounds out in nature to through experimentation out in nature to through experimentation out in nature to through experimentation and observation to medicine. and then and observation to medicine. and then and observation to medicine. and then how that those same medicines are how that those same medicines are how that those same medicines are extracted and concentrated and in some extracted and concentrated and in some extracted and concentrated and in some cases diabolically hidden in other cases diabolically hidden in other cases diabolically hidden in other things like food. Um because I don't things like food. Um because I don't things like food. Um because I don't think sugar is poison in the same way think sugar is poison in the same way think sugar is poison in the same way that um heroin is poison but sugar that um heroin is poison but sugar that um heroin is poison but sugar clearly can be destructive in a way that clearly can be destructive in a way that clearly can be destructive in a way that makes it poisonous and the way it's used makes it poisonous and the way it's used makes it poisonous and the way it's used and packaged and marketed etc and kids and packaged and marketed etc and kids and packaged and marketed etc and kids cereals and things like that I think is cereals and things like that I think is cereals and things like that I think is absolutely clear. And so the arguments absolutely clear. And so the arguments absolutely clear. And so the arguments about whether or not sugar is addictive about whether or not sugar is addictive about whether or not sugar is addictive in the same way that heroin or cocaine in the same way that heroin or cocaine in the same way that heroin or cocaine is addictive are um they're kind of um is addictive are um they're kind of um is addictive are um they're kind of um empty arguments until we really define empty arguments until we really define empty arguments until we really define what we're talking about. And it is that what we're talking about. And it is that what we're talking about. And it is that the dose makes the poison. It's also the dose makes the poison. It's also the dose makes the poison. It's also whether or not people are aware of what whether or not people are aware of what whether or not people are aware of what they're doing. I think this lack of they're doing. I think this lack of they're doing. I think this lack of awareness that we're using medicines awareness that we're using medicines awareness that we're using medicines when we consume products and that we're when we consume products and that we're when we consume products and that we're using medicines at high concentrations using medicines at high concentrations using medicines at high concentrations that are not typically found in nature that are not typically found in nature that are not typically found in nature is a big part of this. I also heard you is a big part of this. I also heard you is a big part of this. I also heard you say that you believe that for every say that you believe that for every say that you believe that for every human ailment and disease, there's human ailment and disease, there's human ailment and disease, there's probably a treatment and/or cure out probably a treatment and/or cure out probably a treatment and/or cure out there in nature. there in nature. there in nature. &gt;&gt; That that's an exciting thing to hear &gt;&gt; That that's an exciting thing to hear &gt;&gt; That that's an exciting thing to hear from a medicinal chemist who runs a from a medicinal chemist who runs a from a medicinal chemist who runs a laboratory. Um, which by the way, folks, laboratory. Um, which by the way, folks, laboratory. Um, which by the way, folks, um, looking over, uh, Chris McCert's CV, looking over, uh, Chris McCert's CV, looking over, uh, Chris McCert's CV, they publish at an absolutely staggering they publish at an absolutely staggering they publish at an absolutely staggering rate and all high quality papers. I rate and all high quality papers. I rate and all high quality papers. I mean, there's never been a single mean, there's never been a single mean, there's never been a single retracted paper. They're just be retracted paper. They're just be retracted paper. They're just be beautifully done studies that just the beautifully done studies that just the beautifully done studies that just the amount of work coming out of your lab in amount of work coming out of your lab in amount of work coming out of your lab in terms of trying to parse what these terms of trying to parse what these terms of trying to parse what these molecules are doing is just like molecules are doing is just like molecules are doing is just like mindblowing. So, I just want to point that out. It's So, I just want to point that out. It's So, I just want to point that out. It's clearly clear that you're very clearly clear that you're very clearly clear that you're very passionate about this. I passionate about this. I passionate about this. I have heard the concept of slow food. have heard the concept of slow food. have heard the concept of slow food. You know, this idea that instead of just You know, this idea that instead of just You know, this idea that instead of just consuming prepackaged food and, you consuming prepackaged food and, you consuming prepackaged food and, you know, we're going to slow down, we're know, we're going to slow down, we're know, we're going to slow down, we're going to cook our food, we're going to going to cook our food, we're going to going to cook our food, we're going to get in touch with the food and that will get in touch with the food and that will get in touch with the food and that will give us a better understanding and give us a better understanding and give us a better understanding and health relationship with the food. I health relationship with the food. I health relationship with the food. I almost feel like we need a slow medicine almost feel like we need a slow medicine almost feel like we need a slow medicine movement. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost. &gt;&gt; Might as well. &gt;&gt; Might as well. &gt;&gt; Might as well. &gt;&gt; I like that idea. you know, as somebody &gt;&gt; I like that idea. you know, as somebody &gt;&gt; I like that idea. you know, as somebody who has been using supplements since I who has been using supplements since I who has been using supplements since I was in my teens, um, and I know it's a was in my teens, um, and I know it's a was in my teens, um, and I know it's a less well-regulated um, industry, I've less well-regulated um, industry, I've less well-regulated um, industry, I've long been interested in herbs I've long been interested in herbs I've long been interested in herbs like I use and I'm open about the fact like I use and I'm open about the fact like I use and I'm open about the fact that I've used Tonga Ali um, as a like that I've used Tonga Ali um, as a like that I've used Tonga Ali um, as a like for vitality for a long time. Things for vitality for a long time. Things for vitality for a long time. Things like Fedogia. Um, I continue to use like Fedogia. Um, I continue to use like Fedogia. Um, I continue to use these and my blood works as a it's fine these and my blood works as a it's fine these and my blood works as a it's fine and I enjoy them and it works and I enjoy them and it works and I enjoy them and it works well for me. But if those were put into well for me. But if those were put into well for me. But if those were put into a um pharmacologic agent at very high a um pharmacologic agent at very high a um pharmacologic agent at very high concentration, I can bet that it's an entirely I can bet that it's an entirely I can bet that it's an entirely different molecule and experience and different molecule and experience and different molecule and experience and might cause shutdown of the of uh might cause shutdown of the of uh might cause shutdown of the of uh certain hormone pathways and things like certain hormone pathways and things like certain hormone pathways and things like that. There seems to be something kind that. There seems to be something kind that. There seems to be something kind of um unregulated of um unregulated of um unregulated and yet uh more nuanced and yet uh more nuanced and yet uh more nuanced and um stayed about the use of and um stayed about the use of and um stayed about the use of medicinals in their more natural form. medicinals in their more natural form. medicinals in their more natural form. And this is kind of the yin-yang And this is kind of the yin-yang And this is kind of the yin-yang of it. It's like yeah, you can't get an of it. It's like yeah, you can't get an of it. It's like yeah, you can't get an exact milligram dosage and exact milligram dosage and exact milligram dosage and concentration, but you're also not concentration, but you're also not concentration, but you're also not playing at very high concentrations. playing at very high concentrations. playing at very high concentrations. &gt;&gt; Right. I look at it like a &gt;&gt; Right. I look at it like a &gt;&gt; Right. I look at it like a natural products. natural products. natural products. It they have evolved in mother nature's It they have evolved in mother nature's It they have evolved in mother nature's kitchen for, kitchen for, kitchen for, you know, millennials. I mean, they've you know, millennials. I mean, they've you know, millennials. I mean, they've been there for thousands of they've been there for thousands of they've been there for thousands of years. Um it only took humans coming years. Um it only took humans coming years. Um it only took humans coming along to figure out how to manipulate along to figure out how to manipulate along to figure out how to manipulate all that, right, and mess it up. So, all that, right, and mess it up. So, all that, right, and mess it up. So, mother nature's kind of got it right in mother nature's kind of got it right in mother nature's kind of got it right in many cases. Um couple examples just many cases. Um couple examples just many cases. Um couple examples just to bring this back to more of a to bring this back to more of a to bring this back to more of a discussion around alkaloids. discussion around alkaloids. discussion around alkaloids. um opium poppy long been used and um opium poppy long been used and um opium poppy long been used and yes it's problematic addictive and all yes it's problematic addictive and all yes it's problematic addictive and all these things but it's nowhere as bad as these things but it's nowhere as bad as these things but it's nowhere as bad as once morphine which by the way was the once morphine which by the way was the once morphine which by the way was the very first alkyoid ever isolated very first alkyoid ever isolated very first alkyoid ever isolated characterized identified characterized identified characterized identified &gt;&gt; morphine when that happened the poppy &gt;&gt; morphine when that happened the poppy &gt;&gt; morphine when that happened the poppy became sort of not that important became sort of not that important became sort of not that important anymore because we found the magic piece anymore because we found the magic piece anymore because we found the magic piece the Same thing happened with the second the Same thing happened with the second the Same thing happened with the second alkyoid ever isolated, cocaine. alkyoid ever isolated, cocaine. alkyoid ever isolated, cocaine. Cocaine comes from coca leaf, which has Cocaine comes from coca leaf, which has Cocaine comes from coca leaf, which has been used for thousands of years in been used for thousands of years in been used for thousands of years in South America and in indigenous tribes South America and in indigenous tribes South America and in indigenous tribes and cultures there. It's still used and cultures there. It's still used and cultures there. It's still used today. It's one of the only places on today. It's one of the only places on today. It's one of the only places on the face of the earth that it's legal. the face of the earth that it's legal. the face of the earth that it's legal. Um, when cocaine was isolated and Um, when cocaine was isolated and Um, when cocaine was isolated and discovered, the rest of the leaf was discovered, the rest of the leaf was discovered, the rest of the leaf was criminalized and thrown out like the criminalized and thrown out like the criminalized and thrown out like the baby's bath water. Um yet there seems to baby's bath water. Um yet there seems to baby's bath water. Um yet there seems to be great medical potential with coca be great medical potential with coca be great medical potential with coca leaf. Uh and this is something that leaf. Uh and this is something that leaf. Uh and this is something that my lab is getting ready to embark on my lab is getting ready to embark on my lab is getting ready to embark on next as kind of like our new our new next as kind of like our new our new next as kind of like our new our new challenge. We still we still have a lot challenge. We still we still have a lot challenge. We still we still have a lot of work to do um withratom and of work to do um withratom and of work to do um withratom and understanding that. But um you get you understanding that. But um you get you understanding that. But um you get you get to a point where a lot of the get to a point where a lot of the get to a point where a lot of the initial excitement starts to wear off initial excitement starts to wear off initial excitement starts to wear off and yeah we know we need to do these and yeah we know we need to do these and yeah we know we need to do these other things but we want to come back to other things but we want to come back to other things but we want to come back to some of that initial excitement project some of that initial excitement project some of that initial excitement project type work again and that's why we're type work again and that's why we're type work again and that's why we're embarking on that. Um we world health embarking on that. Um we world health embarking on that. Um we world health organization is actually doing a organization is actually doing a organization is actually doing a critical review of cocoa leaf again to critical review of cocoa leaf again to critical review of cocoa leaf again to consider removing it as a globally consider removing it as a globally consider removing it as a globally banned substance and returning it back banned substance and returning it back banned substance and returning it back into potentially the food supply um into potentially the food supply um into potentially the food supply um which is a very nutritious plant. It's which is a very nutritious plant. It's which is a very nutritious plant. It's utilized by um tribes in the in the high utilized by um tribes in the in the high utilized by um tribes in the in the high mountains high elevations in South mountains high elevations in South mountains high elevations in South America where they don't have much dairy America where they don't have much dairy America where they don't have much dairy in their diet. There's tons of calcium in their diet. There's tons of calcium in their diet. There's tons of calcium in this um in the cocoa leaf. There's in this um in the cocoa leaf. There's in this um in the cocoa leaf. There's tons of vitamins. It's so nutrientrich. tons of vitamins. It's so nutrientrich. tons of vitamins. It's so nutrientrich. Um and just a remarkable plant in Um and just a remarkable plant in Um and just a remarkable plant in and of itself. But again, we've and of itself. But again, we've and of itself. But again, we've forgotten about this because we found forgotten about this because we found forgotten about this because we found this, you know, smoking bullet uh this, you know, smoking bullet uh this, you know, smoking bullet uh cocaine. And we don't want people to cocaine. And we don't want people to cocaine. And we don't want people to mess with that plant because there's a mess with that plant because there's a mess with that plant because there's a chance they're going to get that out of chance they're going to get that out of chance they're going to get that out of it. And this has been a somewhat of a it. And this has been a somewhat of a it. And this has been a somewhat of a cautionary tale bringing this back cautionary tale bringing this back cautionary tale bringing this back toratom because what we're seeing now is toratom because what we're seeing now is toratom because what we're seeing now is theseratom derived products where theseratom derived products where theseratom derived products where they're actually taking compounds that they're actually taking compounds that they're actually taking compounds that are rich in the naturally occurring leaf are rich in the naturally occurring leaf are rich in the naturally occurring leaf and they're manipulating these into very and they're manipulating these into very and they're manipulating these into very potent opioids. potent opioids. potent opioids. They're chemically changing these They're chemically changing these They're chemically changing these molecules. Um, and these are now molecules. Um, and these are now molecules. Um, and these are now products that are out in the market that products that are out in the market that products that are out in the market that are available, easily purchasable. Um, are available, easily purchasable. Um, are available, easily purchasable. Um, and unfortunately in the same places you and unfortunately in the same places you and unfortunately in the same places you can buy the more, you know, benign leaf, can buy the more, you know, benign leaf, can buy the more, you know, benign leaf, if you will, and it's not benign. And if you will, and it's not benign. And if you will, and it's not benign. And please don't think that I'm saying is please don't think that I'm saying is please don't think that I'm saying is benign at all because the leaf material benign at all because the leaf material benign at all because the leaf material can be dangerous. And we know that can be dangerous. And we know that can be dangerous. And we know that people have problems with even just the people have problems with even just the people have problems with even just the leaf material over time. And so we don't leaf material over time. And so we don't leaf material over time. And so we don't understand where those things come from. understand where those things come from. understand where those things come from. Uh we don't have a good scientific Uh we don't have a good scientific Uh we don't have a good scientific history of how that evolves. But what history of how that evolves. But what history of how that evolves. But what we do know is that if we go down the we do know is that if we go down the we do know is that if we go down the same pathway that we have for things same pathway that we have for things same pathway that we have for things like identification of morphine, like identification of morphine, like identification of morphine, identification of co of cocaine identification of co of cocaine identification of co of cocaine to a product that we started from nature to a product that we started from nature to a product that we started from nature againratom uh and now we're whittling down and uh and now we're whittling down and uh and now we're whittling down and figuring out actually it's a metabolite figuring out actually it's a metabolite figuring out actually it's a metabolite in our bodies. it's a metabolite. in our bodies. it's a metabolite. in our bodies. it's a metabolite. Controversially, that may or may not Controversially, that may or may not Controversially, that may or may not exist in the plant. We've never found exist in the plant. We've never found exist in the plant. We've never found with all the work that we've done um with all the work that we've done um with all the work that we've done um with expert biosynthetic with expert biosynthetic with expert biosynthetic um biosynthetic um biosynthetic um biosynthetic uh plant folks, we've never found uh plant folks, we've never found uh plant folks, we've never found enzymes that will produce this compound enzymes that will produce this compound enzymes that will produce this compound 7 hydroxy metroin and that's a 7 hydroxy metroin and that's a 7 hydroxy metroin and that's a metabolite of metroin which metroin is metabolite of metroin which metroin is metabolite of metroin which metroin is the major alkyoid within the plant uh the major alkyoid within the plant uh the major alkyoid within the plant uh and as I mentioned there's more than 20 and as I mentioned there's more than 20 and as I mentioned there's more than 20 alkaloids within this plant and I alkaloids within this plant and I alkaloids within this plant and I really want to come back to this really want to come back to this really want to come back to this discussion about the differences in some discussion about the differences in some discussion about the differences in some of these alkaloids because they're of these alkaloids because they're of these alkaloids because they're very different. I look they're very different. I look they're very different. I look at this plant as almost a pharmaceutical at this plant as almost a pharmaceutical at this plant as almost a pharmaceutical shotgun. It's got shotgun. It's got shotgun. It's got different alkaloids that are targeting different alkaloids that are targeting different alkaloids that are targeting different systems in our body. And this different systems in our body. And this different systems in our body. And this is what makes different. You referred to is what makes different. You referred to is what makes different. You referred to it in the past as it's opioid, but it's it in the past as it's opioid, but it's it in the past as it's opioid, but it's different opioid, right? It's a different opioid, right? It's a different opioid, right? It's a different because it's interacting with different because it's interacting with different because it's interacting with multiple other systems in our brains. multiple other systems in our brains. multiple other systems in our brains. And so we need to come back and And so we need to come back and And so we need to come back and revisit that. But before we do that, revisit that. But before we do that, revisit that. But before we do that, what we know is that this seven hydroxy what we know is that this seven hydroxy what we know is that this seven hydroxy metric and this metabolite that our metric and this metabolite that our metric and this metabolite that our bodies produce naturally from the major bodies produce naturally from the major bodies produce naturally from the major alkyoid is being chemically produced now alkyoid is being chemically produced now alkyoid is being chemically produced now and sold in commerce. And the these are and sold in commerce. And the these are and sold in commerce. And the these are now catam derived products or isolates now catam derived products or isolates now catam derived products or isolates or synthetically derived products. Um we or synthetically derived products. Um we or synthetically derived products. Um we know that molecule is pure opioid know that molecule is pure opioid know that molecule is pure opioid in its activity. in its activity. in its activity. &gt;&gt; It only interacts with opioid receptors. &gt;&gt; It only interacts with opioid receptors. &gt;&gt; It only interacts with opioid receptors. &gt;&gt; You said these are catratom derived &gt;&gt; You said these are catratom derived &gt;&gt; You said these are catratom derived orratom isolates. If they're going to orratom isolates. If they're going to orratom isolates. If they're going to experiment with or use products, they experiment with or use products, they experiment with or use products, they need to pay attention to serving size. need to pay attention to serving size. need to pay attention to serving size. Yeah. And also pay attention to whether Yeah. And also pay attention to whether Yeah. And also pay attention to whether or not the product is contains derived or not the product is contains derived or not the product is contains derived products within it orratom isolates products within it orratom isolates products within it orratom isolates because those more closely mimic because those more closely mimic because those more closely mimic powerful opioids powerful opioids powerful opioids &gt;&gt; pure drug &gt;&gt; pure drug &gt;&gt; pure drug &gt;&gt; a pure drug &gt;&gt; a pure drug &gt;&gt; a pure drug &gt;&gt; and I actually am of the belief that &gt;&gt; and I actually am of the belief that &gt;&gt; and I actually am of the belief that many people taking products are not many people taking products are not many people taking products are not aware that they're not taking the leaf aware that they're not taking the leaf aware that they're not taking the leaf type product. type product. type product. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Even if they're drinking it they &gt;&gt; Even if they're drinking it they &gt;&gt; Even if they're drinking it they it's because we just call it one thing. it's because we just call it one thing. it's because we just call it one thing. I agree and that's where you know we've I agree and that's where you know we've I agree and that's where you know we've published commentaries we've published commentaries we've published commentaries um on this because we feel it's just um on this because we feel it's just um on this because we feel it's just really important to get this message out really important to get this message out really important to get this message out and it's important to get this message and it's important to get this message and it's important to get this message out to the medical community because the out to the medical community because the out to the medical community because the medical community um that are dealing medical community um that are dealing medical community um that are dealing with patients humans firsthand they show with patients humans firsthand they show with patients humans firsthand they show up in an emergency department um you up in an emergency department um you up in an emergency department um you know they don't know to ask did you know they don't know to ask did you know they don't know to ask did you take leaf did you take leaf did you take leaf did you take uh extract Did you take a uh extract Did you take a uh extract Did you take a concentrate? What what product is it concentrate? What what product is it concentrate? What what product is it that you actually take? Because most that you actually take? Because most that you actually take? Because most people, if they know if someone was with people, if they know if someone was with people, if they know if someone was with them and they them and they them and they got intoxicated by a product, they're got intoxicated by a product, they're got intoxicated by a product, they're probably just going to they're probably just going to they're probably just going to generically say it's not going to generically say it's not going to generically say it's not going to specify what it was. And so this is specify what it was. And so this is specify what it was. And so this is a big thing that we're trying to as many a big thing that we're trying to as many a big thing that we're trying to as many of the researchers in the community are of the researchers in the community are of the researchers in the community are really trying to get out is this really trying to get out is this really trying to get out is this differentiation of not allratom is the differentiation of not allratom is the differentiation of not allratom is the same. Right. same. Right. same. Right. &gt;&gt; Well fortunately uh we have the ear um &gt;&gt; Well fortunately uh we have the ear um &gt;&gt; Well fortunately uh we have the ear um on this podcast from some of the folks on this podcast from some of the folks on this podcast from some of the folks like Jay Badacharia NIH and others like Jay Badacharia NIH and others like Jay Badacharia NIH and others who are um thinking seriously about who are um thinking seriously about who are um thinking seriously about revising uh laws around packaging of uh revising uh laws around packaging of uh revising uh laws around packaging of uh food and drugs. Um I don't have any food and drugs. Um I don't have any food and drugs. Um I don't have any direct relationship to them but we have direct relationship to them but we have direct relationship to them but we have their ear. So, um, uh, I think one thing their ear. So, um, uh, I think one thing their ear. So, um, uh, I think one thing that I can't imagine anyone would oppose that I can't imagine anyone would oppose that I can't imagine anyone would oppose would be the careful wording of warnings would be the careful wording of warnings would be the careful wording of warnings about this contains derived products or about this contains derived products or about this contains derived products or isolates in the same way that um, you'd isolates in the same way that um, you'd isolates in the same way that um, you'd like, you know, cannabis is legal in like, you know, cannabis is legal in like, you know, cannabis is legal in many places now or at least many places now or at least many places now or at least decriminalized. As I learned from a decriminalized. As I learned from a decriminalized. As I learned from a guest on this podcast who's expert in uh guest on this podcast who's expert in uh guest on this podcast who's expert in uh cannabis science, um people who smoke cannabis science, um people who smoke cannabis science, um people who smoke cannabis are pretty good at regulating cannabis are pretty good at regulating cannabis are pretty good at regulating the dose the dose the dose um based on number and duration of um based on number and duration of um based on number and duration of inhales, but people that take edibles inhales, but people that take edibles inhales, but people that take edibles are often the ones that end up in are often the ones that end up in are often the ones that end up in psychotic episodes um or anxiety attacks psychotic episodes um or anxiety attacks psychotic episodes um or anxiety attacks due to overconumption because you can due to overconumption because you can due to overconumption because you can eat something very fast before it hits eat something very fast before it hits eat something very fast before it hits you. There's like there's this delay. I you. There's like there's this delay. I you. There's like there's this delay. I want to parse each of the things that want to parse each of the things that want to parse each of the things that you raised, but I think there's likely you raised, but I think there's likely you raised, but I think there's likely to be a couple of basic questions that to be a couple of basic questions that to be a couple of basic questions that are on people's minds that maybe we can are on people's minds that maybe we can are on people's minds that maybe we can tick off really quick as we as we head tick off really quick as we as we head tick off really quick as we as we head into that. into that. into that. &gt;&gt; And I know it might be hard to answer &gt;&gt; And I know it might be hard to answer &gt;&gt; And I know it might be hard to answer these with a yes, no. So feel free to these with a yes, no. So feel free to these with a yes, no. So feel free to say maybe or it depends. Kids 18 or say maybe or it depends. Kids 18 or say maybe or it depends. Kids 18 or younger, avoid, don't avoid, or it younger, avoid, don't avoid, or it younger, avoid, don't avoid, or it depends when it comes to and here depends when it comes to and here depends when it comes to and here we're talking about leafratom or we're talking about leafratom or we're talking about leafratom or products. And we're talking about kids products. And we're talking about kids products. And we're talking about kids in the US. So, we're not and in the US. So, we're not and in the US. So, we're not and in Europe, we're talking about outside in Europe, we're talking about outside in Europe, we're talking about outside of Malaysia where they have a have a of Malaysia where they have a have a of Malaysia where they have a have a more innate um historical understanding more innate um historical understanding more innate um historical understanding of the of the plant. of the of the plant. of the of the plant. &gt;&gt; I'll preface it by saying I am not &gt;&gt; I'll preface it by saying I am not &gt;&gt; I'll preface it by saying I am not familiar with anybody familiar with anybody familiar with anybody young using this in Southeast Asia in a young using this in Southeast Asia in a young using this in Southeast Asia in a traditional sense. traditional sense. traditional sense. &gt;&gt; Well, that's good to know. &gt;&gt; Well, that's good to know. &gt;&gt; Well, that's good to know. &gt;&gt; So, it's mostly used by people that &gt;&gt; So, it's mostly used by people that &gt;&gt; So, it's mostly used by people that are laborers that are out doing this, are laborers that are out doing this, are laborers that are out doing this, you know, more adult, if you will. you know, more adult, if you will. you know, more adult, if you will. Most of the regulations that have been Most of the regulations that have been Most of the regulations that have been drafted and put into place in some drafted and put into place in some drafted and put into place in some states are either limiting age of 18 and older are either limiting age of 18 and older are either limiting age of 18 and older or 21 and older. or 21 and older. or 21 and older. &gt;&gt; Do you agree with that? &gt;&gt; Do you agree with that? &gt;&gt; Do you agree with that? &gt;&gt; I agree with that from the standpoint &gt;&gt; I agree with that from the standpoint &gt;&gt; I agree with that from the standpoint that the brain is still developing until that the brain is still developing until that the brain is still developing until we're 24 25. We know from studies with we're 24 25. We know from studies with we're 24 25. We know from studies with cannabis that, you know, that can slow cannabis that, you know, that can slow cannabis that, you know, that can slow brain development and people can have brain development and people can have brain development and people can have lower IQs if they start at a younger age lower IQs if they start at a younger age lower IQs if they start at a younger age versus people that never smoked and versus people that never smoked and versus people that never smoked and developed their brain fully. So we have developed their brain fully. So we have developed their brain fully. So we have no idea what the impact is ofratum no idea what the impact is ofratum no idea what the impact is ofratum developing brain. A lot of people will developing brain. A lot of people will developing brain. A lot of people will hate me for saying this, but my feeling hate me for saying this, but my feeling hate me for saying this, but my feeling is, you know, the drinking age should be is, you know, the drinking age should be is, you know, the drinking age should be 24, 25, just like when your insurance 24, 25, just like when your insurance 24, 25, just like when your insurance rates go down for your car, it's 25. rates go down for your car, it's 25. rates go down for your car, it's 25. It's because you have a prefrontal It's because you have a prefrontal It's because you have a prefrontal cortex, right? And I think when you cortex, right? And I think when you cortex, right? And I think when you hijack that system with any substance hijack that system with any substance hijack that system with any substance that can be psychoactive, you run into that can be psychoactive, you run into that can be psychoactive, you run into problems. And so the best problems. And so the best problems. And so the best recommendations are, in my opinion, recommendations are, in my opinion, recommendations are, in my opinion, getting all the way up to that 24 25. getting all the way up to that 24 25. getting all the way up to that 24 25. But I would be okay with people saying But I would be okay with people saying But I would be okay with people saying 18 or 21 um because that seems to be 18 or 21 um because that seems to be 18 or 21 um because that seems to be more acceptable in society as to where more acceptable in society as to where more acceptable in society as to where we've set barriers in you know we've set barriers in you know we've set barriers in you know historical precedent. So yeah, I don't I historical precedent. So yeah, I don't I historical precedent. So yeah, I don't I have great fear have great fear have great fear um as a parent that my own child would um as a parent that my own child would um as a parent that my own child would go into one of these gas stations not go into one of these gas stations not go into one of these gas stations not knowing what they're getting knowing what they're getting knowing what they're getting because one of their buddies told them, because one of their buddies told them, because one of their buddies told them, "Hey, this is cool. try it. Um, you "Hey, this is cool. try it. Um, you "Hey, this is cool. try it. Um, you know, and consume it and something know, and consume it and something know, and consume it and something happens. Um, and as you're something happens. Um, and as you're something happens. Um, and as you're well aware, there's a there's a big well aware, there's a there's a big well aware, there's a there's a big difference between someone who's naive difference between someone who's naive difference between someone who's naive to any substance and takes it for the to any substance and takes it for the to any substance and takes it for the first time um versus someone who's first time um versus someone who's first time um versus someone who's gained some experience um with those gained some experience um with those gained some experience um with those substances. And so, substances. And so, substances. And so, uh, young people are, uh, young people are, uh, young people are, again, because there's not that again, because there's not that again, because there's not that executive control of the prefrontal executive control of the prefrontal executive control of the prefrontal cortex are much more likely to take cortex are much more likely to take cortex are much more likely to take those risks, but not because they're those risks, but not because they're those risks, but not because they're being dumb. They just don't they don't being dumb. They just don't they don't being dumb. They just don't they don't understand. &gt;&gt; Well, they're not getting the &gt;&gt; Well, they're not getting the &gt;&gt; Well, they're not getting the information and thanks to you, information and thanks to you, information and thanks to you, they're getting the information. Now, they're getting the information. Now, they're getting the information. Now, the second cohort that I'll ask about the second cohort that I'll ask about the second cohort that I'll ask about would be, you know, people, let's just would be, you know, people, let's just would be, you know, people, let's just say, you know, 18 to uh 25 and older who say, you know, 18 to uh 25 and older who say, you know, 18 to uh 25 and older who are seeking a caffeine um stimulant-like are seeking a caffeine um stimulant-like are seeking a caffeine um stimulant-like effect. Um assuming they can get a hold effect. Um assuming they can get a hold effect. Um assuming they can get a hold of the more plant-like product, so the of the more plant-like product, so the of the more plant-like product, so the uh you know, where it it's not a uh you know, where it it's not a uh you know, where it it's not a catratom derived product or isolate. Are catratom derived product or isolate. Are catratom derived product or isolate. Are most people able to use product in the most people able to use product in the most people able to use product in the same way that they use caffeine? So on a same way that they use caffeine? So on a same way that they use caffeine? So on a daily basis, but were they to not be daily basis, but were they to not be daily basis, but were they to not be able to get it, they would have a able to get it, they would have a able to get it, they would have a couple days of mild discomfort, but couple days of mild discomfort, but couple days of mild discomfort, but they'd be okay. They could drink they'd be okay. They could drink they'd be okay. They could drink caffeine instead and get over the caffeine instead and get over the caffeine instead and get over the hump, so to speak. hump, so to speak. hump, so to speak. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's a that's a definite maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's a that's a definite maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's a that's a definite maybe question. &gt;&gt; So, it depends on the person. &gt;&gt; So, it depends on the person. &gt;&gt; So, it depends on the person. &gt;&gt; It depends on the person, as you know, &gt;&gt; It depends on the person, as you know, &gt;&gt; It depends on the person, as you know, that we're all so different and we all that we're all so different and we all that we're all so different and we all respond differently to different or the respond differently to different or the respond differently to different or the same thing. Um, but I think that same thing. Um, but I think that same thing. Um, but I think that let's just say um the most frequent let's just say um the most frequent let's just say um the most frequent thing I hear from people that are using thing I hear from people that are using thing I hear from people that are using and particularly leaf products on a and particularly leaf products on a and particularly leaf products on a regular basis, they always say less is regular basis, they always say less is regular basis, they always say less is more. They always say that the lower more. They always say that the lower more. They always say that the lower amounts they take, they seem to derive amounts they take, they seem to derive amounts they take, they seem to derive more benefit from it. more benefit from it. more benefit from it. And I've struggled with that from And I've struggled with that from And I've struggled with that from the standpoint of just understanding the standpoint of just understanding the standpoint of just understanding pharmarmacology and understanding pharmarmacology and understanding pharmarmacology and understanding tolerance and understanding, you know, tolerance and understanding, you know, tolerance and understanding, you know, after you've been taking something for after you've been taking something for after you've been taking something for so long, you naturally think you got to so long, you naturally think you got to so long, you naturally think you got to take more to benefit from it. And I take more to benefit from it. And I take more to benefit from it. And I think it comes again back to the group think it comes again back to the group think it comes again back to the group of users that we talked about. What is of users that we talked about. What is of users that we talked about. What is their goal at the end of the day? But if their goal at the end of the day? But if their goal at the end of the day? But if they're just taking it as this sort of they're just taking it as this sort of they're just taking it as this sort of mood lifting elevating um energyderived mood lifting elevating um energyderived mood lifting elevating um energyderived uh thing then the recommendation to uh thing then the recommendation to uh thing then the recommendation to and I would say this for anything is and I would say this for anything is and I would say this for anything is stay low and stay slow and you know stay low and stay slow and you know stay low and stay slow and you know never increase things. what I've been never increase things. what I've been never increase things. what I've been told because again this is not something told because again this is not something told because again this is not something that I use is that I use is that I use is that um people benefit from this on a um people benefit from this on a um people benefit from this on a consistent basis just like most people consistent basis just like most people consistent basis just like most people benefit from a cup of coffee or two a benefit from a cup of coffee or two a benefit from a cup of coffee or two a day. Um and yeah, if you go a couple day. Um and yeah, if you go a couple day. Um and yeah, if you go a couple days without it, you're going to have a days without it, you're going to have a days without it, you're going to have a headache. where people start to develop headache. where people start to develop headache. where people start to develop problems is problems is problems is if they are using this for um pain if they are using this for um pain if they are using this for um pain treatment or something else like that treatment or something else like that treatment or something else like that and they initially start out and this is and they initially start out and this is and they initially start out and this is great everything's good. It does seem great everything's good. It does seem great everything's good. It does seem that a tolerance develops to the pain that a tolerance develops to the pain that a tolerance develops to the pain relieving properties of this. We don't relieving properties of this. We don't relieving properties of this. We don't know what that time scale looks like so know what that time scale looks like so know what that time scale looks like so we have no idea and it it'll differ for we have no idea and it it'll differ for we have no idea and it it'll differ for everyone. Um we've not done these everyone. Um we've not done these everyone. Um we've not done these studies in animals to tell you that uh studies in animals to tell you that uh studies in animals to tell you that uh you know a mouse or a rat is going to you know a mouse or a rat is going to you know a mouse or a rat is going to take this much time and therefore we can take this much time and therefore we can take this much time and therefore we can you know scale this to what it would be you know scale this to what it would be you know scale this to what it would be on a human. We've not even done those on a human. We've not even done those on a human. We've not even done those types of studies to understand. But I types of studies to understand. But I types of studies to understand. But I can tell you anecdotally from talking to can tell you anecdotally from talking to can tell you anecdotally from talking to people that's what happens. They'll people that's what happens. They'll people that's what happens. They'll they'll develop these tolerance they'll develop these tolerance they'll develop these tolerance and they'll suddenly have to take more and they'll suddenly have to take more and they'll suddenly have to take more to get that relief. And as we take more to get that relief. And as we take more to get that relief. And as we take more of anything, we get closer and closer to of anything, we get closer and closer to of anything, we get closer and closer to a problem because it's not the benefit a problem because it's not the benefit a problem because it's not the benefit that we're getting that generally gives that we're getting that generally gives that we're getting that generally gives us the problem. It's something offtarget us the problem. It's something offtarget us the problem. It's something offtarget or off or off or off of that original frame that we're off of that original frame that we're off of that original frame that we're focused on that gives us into the focused on that gives us into the focused on that gives us into the problems. Um, you know, opioids for just problems. Um, you know, opioids for just problems. Um, you know, opioids for just a clear example, opioids are fantastic a clear example, opioids are fantastic a clear example, opioids are fantastic pain relievers, pain relievers, pain relievers, but humans develop tolerance to the pain but humans develop tolerance to the pain but humans develop tolerance to the pain relief properties of opioids quickly. relief properties of opioids quickly. relief properties of opioids quickly. Unfortunately, we don't develop Unfortunately, we don't develop Unfortunately, we don't develop tolerance to the constipating effects tolerance to the constipating effects tolerance to the constipating effects and the respiratory depressive effects and the respiratory depressive effects and the respiratory depressive effects of these as well. And those are the two of these as well. And those are the two of these as well. And those are the two things that limit um clinical things that limit um clinical things that limit um clinical utilization of opioids. If you're utilization of opioids. If you're utilization of opioids. If you're getting constipated, then we have to getting constipated, then we have to getting constipated, then we have to stop using opioids from a clinical stop using opioids from a clinical stop using opioids from a clinical standpoint to treat your pain because standpoint to treat your pain because standpoint to treat your pain because it's you can get too stopped up and it's you can get too stopped up and it's you can get too stopped up and this could be worse. Same thing with this could be worse. Same thing with this could be worse. Same thing with respirations. Of course, the mo main respirations. Of course, the mo main respirations. Of course, the mo main reason that individuals die from opioid reason that individuals die from opioid reason that individuals die from opioid overdose is because they stop breathing. overdose is because they stop breathing. overdose is because they stop breathing. Um, and that respiratory depression is Um, and that respiratory depression is Um, and that respiratory depression is nothing to do with the analesia. Has nothing to do with the analesia. Has nothing to do with the analesia. Has nothing to do with the pain relief. It's nothing to do with the pain relief. It's nothing to do with the pain relief. It's just this off offside target. just this off offside target. just this off offside target. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's these receptors in the brain &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's these receptors in the brain &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's these receptors in the brain stem. I mean, I think stem. I mean, I think stem. I mean, I think &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; it raises the question whether or &gt;&gt; it raises the question whether or &gt;&gt; it raises the question whether or notratom can cause respiratory notratom can cause respiratory notratom can cause respiratory suppression. &gt;&gt; It's a good it's a good segue to our &gt;&gt; It's a good it's a good segue to our &gt;&gt; It's a good it's a good segue to our paper that should be coming out in the paper that should be coming out in the paper that should be coming out in the next week or two. next week or two. next week or two. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. Well, since it's already &gt;&gt; Oh, great. Well, since it's already &gt;&gt; Oh, great. Well, since it's already accepted, uh yes or no, accepted, uh yes or no, accepted, uh yes or no, &gt;&gt; it's complicated. &gt;&gt; it's complicated. &gt;&gt; it's complicated. &gt;&gt; Is it dose dependent? So I will say this &gt;&gt; Is it dose dependent? So I will say this &gt;&gt; Is it dose dependent? So I will say this inratum as a whole we've not studied in as a whole we've not studied in as a whole we've not studied in respiratory depression. So the products respiratory depression. So the products respiratory depression. So the products that are in the marketplace we don't that are in the marketplace we don't that are in the marketplace we don't know. I don't know an answer to this. know. I don't know an answer to this. know. I don't know an answer to this. It's long been said that there's much It's long been said that there's much It's long been said that there's much less respiratory depression fromratom less respiratory depression fromratom less respiratory depression fromratom than there is from clinically or illicit than there is from clinically or illicit than there is from clinically or illicit opioids. I think that's pretty well opioids. I think that's pretty well opioids. I think that's pretty well accepted in an anecdotal way. accepted in an anecdotal way. accepted in an anecdotal way. Scientifically, we can't say Scientifically, we can't say Scientifically, we can't say definitively what that is. The paper definitively what that is. The paper definitively what that is. The paper that we have that's coming out that we have that's coming out that we have that's coming out um it should be in the journal of um it should be in the journal of um it should be in the journal of pharmarmacology and experimental pharmarmacology and experimental pharmarmacology and experimental therapeutics. Um it's already on therapeutics. Um it's already on therapeutics. Um it's already on bioarchchive right now, but bioarchchive right now, but bioarchchive right now, but bioarchchive is not a peer-reviewed site. Uh we just is not a peer-reviewed site. Uh we just is not a peer-reviewed site. Uh we just wanted to get this information out as wanted to get this information out as wanted to get this information out as soon as possible because we think it is soon as possible because we think it is soon as possible because we think it is vitally important for public safety. um vitally important for public safety. um vitally important for public safety. um these seven hydroxy metroin these seven hydroxy metroin these seven hydroxy metroin um products that are now being sold as I um products that are now being sold as I um products that are now being sold as I mentioned as semiynthetics or isolates mentioned as semiynthetics or isolates mentioned as semiynthetics or isolates um are actually causing respiratory um are actually causing respiratory um are actually causing respiratory depression equivalent to opioids. depression equivalent to opioids. depression equivalent to opioids. &gt;&gt; Wow. Okay. So these are the um the &gt;&gt; Wow. Okay. So these are the um the &gt;&gt; Wow. Okay. So these are the um the specific alkyoid metabolites. So to back specific alkyoid metabolites. So to back specific alkyoid metabolites. So to back up again folks the alrratom contains up again folks the alrratom contains up again folks the alrratom contains somewhere between 20 and 40 alkyoids. somewhere between 20 and 40 alkyoids. somewhere between 20 and 40 alkyoids. Um, one of them is most abundant. The Um, one of them is most abundant. The Um, one of them is most abundant. The metabolite of that um is what's active metabolite of that um is what's active metabolite of that um is what's active in the body. Chem chemists have figured in the body. Chem chemists have figured in the body. Chem chemists have figured out how to manufacture that metabolite. out how to manufacture that metabolite. out how to manufacture that metabolite. People are taking products of the pure People are taking products of the pure People are taking products of the pure metabolite mixed in with some other metabolite mixed in with some other metabolite mixed in with some other things and that can cause respiratory things and that can cause respiratory things and that can cause respiratory depression um on par with uh opioids depression um on par with uh opioids depression um on par with uh opioids &gt;&gt; in a rat. So, I will I will caveat &gt;&gt; in a rat. So, I will I will caveat &gt;&gt; in a rat. So, I will I will caveat that. But, you know, it's one of these that. But, you know, it's one of these that. But, you know, it's one of these things that we talk about all the things that we talk about all the things that we talk about all the time. If it walks like a duck, if it time. If it walks like a duck, if it time. If it walks like a duck, if it quacks like a duck, if it looks like a quacks like a duck, if it looks like a quacks like a duck, if it looks like a duck, it's a duck. duck, it's a duck. duck, it's a duck. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think when it comes to &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think when it comes to &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think when it comes to translating animal studies to humans, it translating animal studies to humans, it translating animal studies to humans, it um it's hard often to take a dosage by um it's hard often to take a dosage by um it's hard often to take a dosage by kilogram of body weight and translate kilogram of body weight and translate kilogram of body weight and translate because metabolism is different, etc. because metabolism is different, etc. because metabolism is different, etc. However, I think when it comes to neural However, I think when it comes to neural However, I think when it comes to neural circuitry, which is what we're talking circuitry, which is what we're talking circuitry, which is what we're talking about when we talk about respiration, about when we talk about respiration, about when we talk about respiration, these two nuclei in the brain, pre-bot these two nuclei in the brain, pre-bot these two nuclei in the brain, pre-bot singinger and paraphial nucleus, which singinger and paraphial nucleus, which singinger and paraphial nucleus, which have abundant receptors for these things have abundant receptors for these things have abundant receptors for these things that control breathing, um the that control breathing, um the that control breathing, um the that machinery is so highly conserved from machinery is so highly conserved from machinery is so highly conserved from mice to rats to non-human primates as we mice to rats to non-human primates as we mice to rats to non-human primates as we always say rat, cat, monkey, bat, um and always say rat, cat, monkey, bat, um and always say rat, cat, monkey, bat, um and human um that it would be human um that it would be human um that it would be it would be remarkable and extraord it would be remarkable and extraord it would be remarkable and extraord extraordinary to for the system to work extraordinary to for the system to work extraordinary to for the system to work much differently much differently much differently and I think in humans it's going to have and I think in humans it's going to have and I think in humans it's going to have exactly the same effect you know but I exactly the same effect you know but I exactly the same effect you know but I can't say that definitively and it's can't say that definitively and it's can't say that definitively and it's not an ethical thing to really do right not an ethical thing to really do right not an ethical thing to really do right but we know that effect even in the but we know that effect even in the but we know that effect even in the animals is completely reversible with animals is completely reversible with animals is completely reversible with narcan or nlloxxone so it's also narcan or nlloxxone so it's also narcan or nlloxxone so it's also highly opioid highly opioid highly opioid um receptor involved um receptor involved um receptor involved I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. So, let to get early access to Function. So, let to get early access to Function. So, let me ask you this. If I were in charge of me ask you this. If I were in charge of me ask you this. If I were in charge of the FDA, and I'm not, um, the FDA, and I'm not, um, the FDA, and I'm not, um, &gt;&gt; that makes two of us, &gt;&gt; that makes two of us, &gt;&gt; that makes two of us, &gt;&gt; but if I were, I would say, okay, based &gt;&gt; but if I were, I would say, okay, based &gt;&gt; but if I were, I would say, okay, based on everything I've learned thus far, um, on everything I've learned thus far, um, on everything I've learned thus far, um, the plant basedratom products that were the plant basedratom products that were the plant basedratom products that were still close to the plant seem like it's still close to the plant seem like it's still close to the plant seem like it's a maybe scenario. Kids and people up to a maybe scenario. Kids and people up to a maybe scenario. Kids and people up to 18, maybe 21 or even 25, 18, maybe 21 or even 25, 18, maybe 21 or even 25, it's a hard no. Stay away from it. it's a hard no. Stay away from it. it's a hard no. Stay away from it. People older than that are going to have People older than that are going to have People older than that are going to have a varied response. Could be like a cup a varied response. Could be like a cup a varied response. Could be like a cup of strong coffee um or two or an energy of strong coffee um or two or an energy of strong coffee um or two or an energy drink or two. I mean, some of these drink or two. I mean, some of these drink or two. I mean, some of these energy drinks now, I mean, they pack a energy drinks now, I mean, they pack a energy drinks now, I mean, they pack a serious punch. And you look at the total serious punch. And you look at the total serious punch. And you look at the total caffeine count and it's not that high, caffeine count and it's not that high, caffeine count and it's not that high, &gt;&gt; but then you look at the serving number &gt;&gt; but then you look at the serving number &gt;&gt; but then you look at the serving number and you look at the other things that and you look at the other things that and you look at the other things that are in there are in there are in there &gt;&gt; that serve to amplify the &gt;&gt; that serve to amplify the &gt;&gt; that serve to amplify the neuromodulator effect like increased neuromodulator effect like increased neuromodulator effect like increased dopamine, epinephrine. I mean, they've dopamine, epinephrine. I mean, they've dopamine, epinephrine. I mean, they've got hooperine, um, alphagpc, they've got hooperine, um, alphagpc, they've got hooperine, um, alphagpc, they've got, um, things to enhance the serotonin got, um, things to enhance the serotonin got, um, things to enhance the serotonin pathway, they've got things to take away pathway, they've got things to take away pathway, they've got things to take away the jitters like eltheanine plus the jitters like eltheanine plus the jitters like eltheanine plus the caffeine plus some additional caffeine plus some additional caffeine plus some additional stimulants. And pretty soon you go, stimulants. And pretty soon you go, stimulants. And pretty soon you go, yeah, the caffeine count isn't that yeah, the caffeine count isn't that yeah, the caffeine count isn't that high. But what you've got is a is a high. But what you've got is a is a high. But what you've got is a is a neurom modulator cocktail in there. So, neurom modulator cocktail in there. So, neurom modulator cocktail in there. So, um, and you'd say, okay, for adults, use um, and you'd say, okay, for adults, use um, and you'd say, okay, for adults, use with caution, figure out minimal with caution, figure out minimal with caution, figure out minimal effective dose, and be aware that it effective dose, and be aware that it effective dose, and be aware that it could be habit forming in a serious way. could be habit forming in a serious way. could be habit forming in a serious way. it something like that. But then I would it something like that. But then I would it something like that. But then I would probably also create a third category probably also create a third category probably also create a third category which is and I'm gonna get the which is and I'm gonna get the which is and I'm gonna get the pronunciation wrong but the seven pronunciation wrong but the seven pronunciation wrong but the seven hydroxy metabolite of metro metroinine hydroxy metabolite of metro metroinine hydroxy metabolite of metro metroinine &gt;&gt; metroine &gt;&gt; metroine &gt;&gt; metroine &gt;&gt; metroine um &gt;&gt; metroine um &gt;&gt; metroine um &gt;&gt; or metrogenine something &gt;&gt; or metrogenine something &gt;&gt; or metrogenine something &gt;&gt; metroine seven hydroxy metroenine um &gt;&gt; metroine seven hydroxy metroenine um &gt;&gt; metroine seven hydroxy metroenine um tragenine tragedy okay should be um if I tragenine tragedy okay should be um if I tragenine tragedy okay should be um if I were FDA commissioner I'd say this just were FDA commissioner I'd say this just were FDA commissioner I'd say this just sounds all bad just flat out make it sounds all bad just flat out make it sounds all bad just flat out make it illegal &gt;&gt; so you're not making illegal you're &gt;&gt; so you're not making illegal you're &gt;&gt; so you're not making illegal you're making the opioid like derivative making the opioid like derivative making the opioid like derivative uh illegal or extremely hard to get or uh illegal or extremely hard to get or uh illegal or extremely hard to get or maybe you need some additional um maybe you need some additional um maybe you need some additional um barriers there. Why isn't it that way? I barriers there. Why isn't it that way? I barriers there. Why isn't it that way? I mean, why did we sit down here today mean, why did we sit down here today mean, why did we sit down here today ready to ask you should cratom be ready to ask you should cratom be ready to ask you should cratom be illegal when we're really talking about illegal when we're really talking about illegal when we're really talking about two different use categories, younger two different use categories, younger two different use categories, younger and adult people, and we're talking and adult people, and we're talking and adult people, and we're talking about basically two completely different about basically two completely different about basically two completely different compounds. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, even very different &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, even very different &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, even very different products, period. Right. So, products, period. Right. So, products, period. Right. So, uh, it's extremely complicated uh, it's extremely complicated uh, it's extremely complicated because under the FDA's dietary because under the FDA's dietary because under the FDA's dietary ingredient rules, a metabolite of a ingredient rules, a metabolite of a ingredient rules, a metabolite of a dietary ingredient can also be dietary ingredient can also be dietary ingredient can also be considered a dietary ingredient. considered a dietary ingredient. considered a dietary ingredient. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; So, this is kind of the loophole, if you &gt;&gt; So, this is kind of the loophole, if you &gt;&gt; So, this is kind of the loophole, if you will, that's allowing this to be in the will, that's allowing this to be in the will, that's allowing this to be in the marketplace. But there's several group marketplace. But there's several group marketplace. But there's several group of advocacy um nonprofit organizations of advocacy um nonprofit organizations of advocacy um nonprofit organizations out there. Um there's Americanratom out there. Um there's Americanratom out there. Um there's Americanratom Association, there's a globalum Association, there's a globalum Association, there's a globalum coalition, there's a holistic coalition, there's a holistic coalition, there's a holistic alternative recovery um group. alternative recovery um group. alternative recovery um group. &gt;&gt; What's the role? Are these people who &gt;&gt; What's the role? Are these people who &gt;&gt; What's the role? Are these people who are looking at this as a as a good are looking at this as a as a good are looking at this as a as a good alternative to opioid abuse? alternative to opioid abuse? alternative to opioid abuse? &gt;&gt; So in many of the cases, yes, all of &gt;&gt; So in many of the cases, yes, all of &gt;&gt; So in many of the cases, yes, all of the cases, yes. So I should say that um the cases, yes. So I should say that um the cases, yes. So I should say that um the American cratom association and the American cratom association and the American cratom association and global uhratom coalition are much more global uhratom coalition are much more global uhratom coalition are much more um advocating for science-based um advocating for science-based um advocating for science-based information and knowledge around information and knowledge around information and knowledge around andratom products and putting actual andratom products and putting actual andratom products and putting actual guidelines in place that will give some guidelines in place that will give some guidelines in place that will give some regulation to the industry regulation to the industry regulation to the industry um that they claim the FDA is not um that they claim the FDA is not um that they claim the FDA is not doing right now. The FDA is just letting doing right now. The FDA is just letting doing right now. The FDA is just letting it exist in the marketplace in whatever it exist in the marketplace in whatever it exist in the marketplace in whatever form, shape, size it wants to. Um, some form, shape, size it wants to. Um, some form, shape, size it wants to. Um, some of these groups are really trying to of these groups are really trying to of these groups are really trying to put guard rails around what a product put guard rails around what a product put guard rails around what a product should be, what should be on the label, should be, what should be on the label, should be, what should be on the label, what a serving size should be, what a serving size should be, what a serving size should be, what limits of alkaloid content should be. Um limits of alkaloid content should be. Um limits of alkaloid content should be. Um there's this other group, the heart there's this other group, the heart there's this other group, the heart group, which is really uh a proponent group, which is really uh a proponent group, which is really uh a proponent for this 7 hydroxy product and saying for this 7 hydroxy product and saying for this 7 hydroxy product and saying that it's out there to reduce harm. It's that it's out there to reduce harm. It's that it's out there to reduce harm. It's out there to help people benefit from a out there to help people benefit from a out there to help people benefit from a product that is not an opioid, right? product that is not an opioid, right? product that is not an opioid, right? But it is purely an opioid, but it's not But it is purely an opioid, but it's not But it is purely an opioid, but it's not a prescription opioid. And they're a prescription opioid. And they're a prescription opioid. And they're saying it's reducing harm weight. I saying it's reducing harm weight. I saying it's reducing harm weight. I don't know that anybody has evidence to don't know that anybody has evidence to don't know that anybody has evidence to demonstrate that yet. There's no solid demonstrate that yet. There's no solid demonstrate that yet. There's no solid evidence. There's some again anecdotal evidence. There's some again anecdotal evidence. There's some again anecdotal evidence. They released a statement evidence. They released a statement evidence. They released a statement recently um suggesting that there's no recently um suggesting that there's no recently um suggesting that there's no mention of these in the FDA's databases mention of these in the FDA's databases mention of these in the FDA's databases of adverse events, the fears database. of adverse events, the fears database. of adverse events, the fears database. Um, but then again, it makes you wonder Um, but then again, it makes you wonder Um, but then again, it makes you wonder if these products have only been in the if these products have only been in the if these products have only been in the marketplace for a couple of years, um, marketplace for a couple of years, um, marketplace for a couple of years, um, is there even a coding to put it into is there even a coding to put it into is there even a coding to put it into the fears database so that can even be the fears database so that can even be the fears database so that can even be recognized? &gt;&gt; If somebody were to take um, a catratom &gt;&gt; If somebody were to take um, a catratom &gt;&gt; If somebody were to take um, a catratom product, either an isolate or the plant product, either an isolate or the plant product, either an isolate or the plant product, and then drink alcohol, are product, and then drink alcohol, are product, and then drink alcohol, are they at greater risk for uh, dying from they at greater risk for uh, dying from they at greater risk for uh, dying from respiratory failure? in the same way respiratory failure? in the same way respiratory failure? in the same way that if somebody takes an opioid and that if somebody takes an opioid and that if somebody takes an opioid and drinks um they can die. Actually, sadly, drinks um they can die. Actually, sadly, drinks um they can die. Actually, sadly, I know a lot of cases of this of people I know a lot of cases of this of people I know a lot of cases of this of people who even took a prescription opioid a who even took a prescription opioid a who even took a prescription opioid a day before um an afternoon or night of day before um an afternoon or night of day before um an afternoon or night of drinking and were pretty good drinkers drinking and were pretty good drinkers drinking and were pretty good drinkers if I'm if I'm say it wasn't was not uh if I'm if I'm say it wasn't was not uh if I'm if I'm say it wasn't was not uh someone real close to me, but from what someone real close to me, but from what someone real close to me, but from what I understand were good drinkers and then I understand were good drinkers and then I understand were good drinkers and then end up dying in their typically in their end up dying in their typically in their end up dying in their typically in their sleep after the night of drinking. is sleep after the night of drinking. is sleep after the night of drinking. is not uncommon. Yeah. not uncommon. Yeah. not uncommon. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And this is independent of all the &gt;&gt; And this is independent of all the &gt;&gt; And this is independent of all the fentinyl issues. Correct. Right. fentinyl issues. Correct. Right. fentinyl issues. Correct. Right. Correct. &gt;&gt; Um doesratom have the same potential &gt;&gt; Um doesratom have the same potential &gt;&gt; Um doesratom have the same potential risk. &gt;&gt; So as a whole, it's hard to say. No, &gt;&gt; So as a whole, it's hard to say. No, &gt;&gt; So as a whole, it's hard to say. No, nobody's done any studies combining nobody's done any studies combining nobody's done any studies combining this. In fact, interestingly enough, the this. In fact, interestingly enough, the this. In fact, interestingly enough, the studies that have been done with alcohol studies that have been done with alcohol studies that have been done with alcohol are looking at reduction of alcohol are looking at reduction of alcohol are looking at reduction of alcohol intake. So it has been reported intake. So it has been reported intake. So it has been reported anecdotally again thatratom actually anecdotally again thatratom actually anecdotally again thatratom actually reduces alcohol consumption. reduces alcohol consumption. reduces alcohol consumption. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Um and this has been anecdotally &gt;&gt; Um and this has been anecdotally &gt;&gt; Um and this has been anecdotally mentioned by many people that use it. Um mentioned by many people that use it. Um mentioned by many people that use it. Um you know I just don't have the interest you know I just don't have the interest you know I just don't have the interest in drinking anymore or I can have a in drinking anymore or I can have a in drinking anymore or I can have a couple drinks and I'm not trying to get couple drinks and I'm not trying to get couple drinks and I'm not trying to get drunk. Now, there's a lot to unpack drunk. Now, there's a lot to unpack drunk. Now, there's a lot to unpack there because there could be all kinds there because there could be all kinds there because there could be all kinds of different things happening of different things happening of different things happening pharmaccoinetically, drug interaction pharmaccoinetically, drug interaction pharmaccoinetically, drug interaction wise, if you will, just like you're wise, if you will, just like you're wise, if you will, just like you're mentioning. Um, there are groups that mentioning. Um, there are groups that mentioning. Um, there are groups that are funded now. We're not one of them, are funded now. We're not one of them, are funded now. We're not one of them, um, from the National Institute of um, from the National Institute of um, from the National Institute of Alcohol, Alcoholism, uh, alcohol abuse, Alcohol, Alcoholism, uh, alcohol abuse, Alcohol, Alcoholism, uh, alcohol abuse, um, and IA to study specifically, uh, as um, and IA to study specifically, uh, as um, and IA to study specifically, uh, as a harm reduction agent in alcohol use a harm reduction agent in alcohol use a harm reduction agent in alcohol use disorders. Interesting. Such an disorders. Interesting. Such an disorders. Interesting. Such an interesting molecule, right? We're interesting molecule, right? We're interesting molecule, right? We're talking about a molecule that can be talking about a molecule that can be talking about a molecule that can be potentially used to help wean people off potentially used to help wean people off potentially used to help wean people off opioids, maybe even limit alcohol opioids, maybe even limit alcohol opioids, maybe even limit alcohol consumption for people with alcohol use consumption for people with alcohol use consumption for people with alcohol use disorder, what used to be called disorder, what used to be called disorder, what used to be called alcoholism, &gt;&gt; and at the same time can serve as a &gt;&gt; and at the same time can serve as a &gt;&gt; and at the same time can serve as a stimulant and maybe even an aphrodisiac. stimulant and maybe even an aphrodisiac. stimulant and maybe even an aphrodisiac. Is there any uh are there any data, Is there any uh are there any data, Is there any uh are there any data, excuse me, um about the binding sites in excuse me, um about the binding sites in excuse me, um about the binding sites in the brain and some of the pathways that the brain and some of the pathways that the brain and some of the pathways that would make this molecule an aphrodisiac? would make this molecule an aphrodisiac? would make this molecule an aphrodisiac? Not specifically. Not specifically. Not specifically. So it you know I earlier said it's So it you know I earlier said it's So it you know I earlier said it's kind of nature's Viagra but it's not kind of nature's Viagra but it's not kind of nature's Viagra but it's not interacting with the phosphodiestase interacting with the phosphodiestase interacting with the phosphodiestase pathways. &gt;&gt; It's not causing vasoddilation that we &gt;&gt; It's not causing vasoddilation that we &gt;&gt; It's not causing vasoddilation that we are aware of which is what Viagra are aware of which is what Viagra are aware of which is what Viagra basically does. Right. basically does. Right. basically does. Right. &gt;&gt; Limits the enzyme that um uh that &gt;&gt; Limits the enzyme that um uh that &gt;&gt; Limits the enzyme that um uh that would lead to vasa constriction. would lead to vasa constriction. would lead to vasa constriction. &gt;&gt; Correct. So you have we &gt;&gt; Correct. So you have we &gt;&gt; Correct. So you have we don't really have clear evidence of don't really have clear evidence of don't really have clear evidence of that. And what it may be is that that. And what it may be is that that. And what it may be is that it's this increased um sort of it's this increased um sort of it's this increased um sort of stimulants stamina activity. But but stimulants stamina activity. But but stimulants stamina activity. But but let's back up to one of the very first let's back up to one of the very first let's back up to one of the very first goals when we were funded by the goals when we were funded by the goals when we were funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse to National Institute on Drug Abuse to National Institute on Drug Abuse to study this. Um the main question study this. Um the main question study this. Um the main question that was asked was can you isolate as that was asked was can you isolate as that was asked was can you isolate as many of these 20 to 40 alkaloids as many of these 20 to 40 alkaloids as many of these 20 to 40 alkaloids as possible purify them and tell us what each one purify them and tell us what each one purify them and tell us what each one does individually. does individually. does individually. Okay. So the easy one to get was Okay. So the easy one to get was Okay. So the easy one to get was Mitrogon and if you look at the Mitrogon and if you look at the Mitrogon and if you look at the majority of the literature around and majority of the literature around and majority of the literature around and there's almost a thousand papers in there's almost a thousand papers in there's almost a thousand papers in PubMed now. I looked this morning uh PubMed now. I looked this morning uh PubMed now. I looked this morning uh just on we account for almost 10% of just on we account for almost 10% of just on we account for almost 10% of that from my lab by the way. that from my lab by the way. that from my lab by the way. &gt;&gt; You guys are prolific. &gt;&gt; You guys are prolific. &gt;&gt; You guys are prolific. &gt;&gt; Um and the vast majority of the studies &gt;&gt; Um and the vast majority of the studies &gt;&gt; Um and the vast majority of the studies that are in the literature now have been that are in the literature now have been that are in the literature now have been done with the major alkaloid metroin. done with the major alkaloid metroin. done with the major alkaloid metroin. And I always remind my lab and my team And I always remind my lab and my team And I always remind my lab and my team and my collaborators, metroin does not and my collaborators, metroin does not and my collaborators, metroin does not equal. Is a complex natural product with all Is a complex natural product with all Is a complex natural product with all these other alkaloids in it. And so these other alkaloids in it. And so these other alkaloids in it. And so let's I wanted to come back to this. So let's I wanted to come back to this. So let's I wanted to come back to this. So let's just unpack those alkaloids very let's just unpack those alkaloids very let's just unpack those alkaloids very quickly um just to tell you what's going quickly um just to tell you what's going quickly um just to tell you what's going on. So metroin the major alkaloid on. So metroin the major alkaloid on. So metroin the major alkaloid actually has affinity for opioid actually has affinity for opioid actually has affinity for opioid receptors but very weak affinity and receptors but very weak affinity and receptors but very weak affinity and doesn't do much from an analesia or doesn't do much from an analesia or doesn't do much from an analesia or painkilling perspective which you would painkilling perspective which you would painkilling perspective which you would think the major one that's what it's think the major one that's what it's think the major one that's what it's there for that's what's going on. It there for that's what's going on. It there for that's what's going on. It also interacts with a couple other also interacts with a couple other also interacts with a couple other important neurotransmitter systems. And important neurotransmitter systems. And important neurotransmitter systems. And there are other alkaloids within the there are other alkaloids within the there are other alkaloids within the plant that are majorly exposed when you plant that are majorly exposed when you plant that are majorly exposed when you ingest the whole plant product into our ingest the whole plant product into our ingest the whole plant product into our bodies that are heavily interacting with bodies that are heavily interacting with bodies that are heavily interacting with serotonin system. So our sort of satiety serotonin system. So our sort of satiety serotonin system. So our sort of satiety center um our mood elevating center um our mood elevating center um our mood elevating center if you will. most of our if you will. most of our if you will. most of our anti-depressants are targeting uh anti-depressants are targeting uh anti-depressants are targeting uh increased levels of serotonin and increased levels of serotonin and increased levels of serotonin and increased levels of norepinephrine in increased levels of norepinephrine in increased levels of norepinephrine in our bodies. Um and so we know that we're our bodies. Um and so we know that we're our bodies. Um and so we know that we're engaging and activating the serotonin engaging and activating the serotonin engaging and activating the serotonin system, which by the way is also system, which by the way is also system, which by the way is also involved in pain processing. Um, and involved in pain processing. Um, and involved in pain processing. Um, and then some of these alkyoids are heavily then some of these alkyoids are heavily then some of these alkyoids are heavily hitting the adinuric receptors, which is hitting the adinuric receptors, which is hitting the adinuric receptors, which is our stimulant sort of activity centers. our stimulant sort of activity centers. our stimulant sort of activity centers. Uh, our fight orflight sort of system, Uh, our fight orflight sort of system, Uh, our fight orflight sort of system, if you will. Um, and if you will. Um, and if you will. Um, and it makes it into this very complex it makes it into this very complex it makes it into this very complex alphabet soup, what I like to call a alphabet soup, what I like to call a alphabet soup, what I like to call a complex symphony orchestra that's complex symphony orchestra that's complex symphony orchestra that's playing multiple instruments in our playing multiple instruments in our playing multiple instruments in our brain at the same time. brain at the same time. brain at the same time. And some people say that this is the And some people say that this is the And some people say that this is the best pain relief they've ever had. And I best pain relief they've ever had. And I best pain relief they've ever had. And I come back to it as a science and now come back to it as a science and now come back to it as a science and now saying, okay, we've looked at all these saying, okay, we've looked at all these saying, okay, we've looked at all these different mechanisms that are involved. different mechanisms that are involved. different mechanisms that are involved. We've never treated pain We've never treated pain We've never treated pain from those three prongs at once from those three prongs at once from those three prongs at once in a single drug or in a cocktail of in a single drug or in a cocktail of in a single drug or in a cocktail of drugs in a human. Can you list those off drugs in a human. Can you list those off drugs in a human. Can you list those off the three? the three? the three? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So those three are opioid which &gt;&gt; Yeah. So those three are opioid which &gt;&gt; Yeah. So those three are opioid which obviously we use to treat pain, obviously we use to treat pain, obviously we use to treat pain, serotonin, &gt;&gt; which we sometimes use now for chronic &gt;&gt; which we sometimes use now for chronic &gt;&gt; which we sometimes use now for chronic pain. &gt;&gt; Um drugs like amatipptalene which is a &gt;&gt; Um drugs like amatipptalene which is a &gt;&gt; Um drugs like amatipptalene which is a serotonin uh reuptake inhibitor old serotonin uh reuptake inhibitor old serotonin uh reuptake inhibitor old school triccyclic anti-depressant used a school triccyclic anti-depressant used a school triccyclic anti-depressant used a lot for neuropathic pain before things lot for neuropathic pain before things lot for neuropathic pain before things like gabapentin neurontin came along or like gabapentin neurontin came along or like gabapentin neurontin came along or pregabalin. Uh and then the adinuric pregabalin. Uh and then the adinuric pregabalin. Uh and then the adinuric system. the adinuric system which is system. the adinuric system which is system. the adinuric system which is actually one that we target in some of actually one that we target in some of actually one that we target in some of the side effects of opioid withdrawal uh the side effects of opioid withdrawal uh the side effects of opioid withdrawal uh with drugs like clonodine which are with drugs like clonodine which are with drugs like clonodine which are alpha 2 receptor agonist that help shut alpha 2 receptor agonist that help shut alpha 2 receptor agonist that help shut down neurotransmission in our brain. down neurotransmission in our brain. down neurotransmission in our brain. This is really fascinating because all This is really fascinating because all This is really fascinating because all three of these neurotransmitter systems three of these neurotransmitter systems three of these neurotransmitter systems are intimately involved in pain are intimately involved in pain are intimately involved in pain processing. And we've always looked at processing. And we've always looked at processing. And we've always looked at um and I'll say this from a um and I'll say this from a um and I'll say this from a medicinal chemist standpoint. Medicinal medicinal chemist standpoint. Medicinal medicinal chemist standpoint. Medicinal chemist goal are to make the best chemist goal are to make the best chemist goal are to make the best compounds, the most selective compounds compounds, the most selective compounds compounds, the most selective compounds for one target so pharmacologists can for one target so pharmacologists can for one target so pharmacologists can figure out what that target is doing. figure out what that target is doing. figure out what that target is doing. And here's another example from nature And here's another example from nature And here's another example from nature that's saying, "Look, if we hit all of that's saying, "Look, if we hit all of that's saying, "Look, if we hit all of these targets at once, these targets at once, these targets at once, you don't have to step on the gas quite you don't have to step on the gas quite you don't have to step on the gas quite as hard on each one and you get some as hard on each one and you get some as hard on each one and you get some kind of relief." And that's why I'm kind of relief." And that's why I'm kind of relief." And that's why I'm saying what I hear from a lot of people saying what I hear from a lot of people saying what I hear from a lot of people is less is more. is less is more. is less is more. So, a lot of people that are reporting So, a lot of people that are reporting So, a lot of people that are reporting pain relief or mood elevation, they're pain relief or mood elevation, they're pain relief or mood elevation, they're not reporting psychoactivity. not reporting psychoactivity. not reporting psychoactivity. They're getting the benefit without the They're getting the benefit without the They're getting the benefit without the psychoactivity. But if you have the goal psychoactivity. But if you have the goal psychoactivity. But if you have the goal when you take these products that you when you take these products that you when you take these products that you want to get high or you should feel like want to get high or you should feel like want to get high or you should feel like you're on a drug, then that's I think you're on a drug, then that's I think you're on a drug, then that's I think where people are starting to push in where people are starting to push in where people are starting to push in saying, "Well, I've I obviously can't be saying, "Well, I've I obviously can't be saying, "Well, I've I obviously can't be benefiting from this if I'm not feeling benefiting from this if I'm not feeling benefiting from this if I'm not feeling like I'm on a drug." Right. Senator I like I'm on a drug." Right. Senator I like I'm on a drug." Right. Senator I want to say first of all thank you for want to say first of all thank you for want to say first of all thank you for that description of this tripartite um that description of this tripartite um that description of this tripartite um uh effect of theratom plant and how uh effect of theratom plant and how uh effect of theratom plant and how pain relief in its ideal form not too pain relief in its ideal form not too pain relief in its ideal form not too much sedative effect pain gone but still much sedative effect pain gone but still much sedative effect pain gone but still the noradinurgic effect where people the noradinurgic effect where people the noradinurgic effect where people aren't sedated to the point where they aren't sedated to the point where they aren't sedated to the point where they can't do anything is ideal and that what can't do anything is ideal and that what can't do anything is ideal and that what you said also really highlights and you said also really highlights and you said also really highlights and you and you said it better than I ever could and you said it better than I ever could and you said it better than I ever could that what we do in science and medicine, that what we do in science and medicine, that what we do in science and medicine, reductionist science and medicine is reductionist science and medicine is reductionist science and medicine is we're trying to isolate receptors and we're trying to isolate receptors and we're trying to isolate receptors and pathways and dose response curves and pathways and dose response curves and pathways and dose response curves and we're trying to come up with essentially we're trying to come up with essentially we're trying to come up with essentially pills of isolated compounds, pills of isolated compounds, pills of isolated compounds, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; that hit one maybe two of these &gt;&gt; that hit one maybe two of these &gt;&gt; that hit one maybe two of these different pathways. Um, in fact, it's different pathways. Um, in fact, it's different pathways. Um, in fact, it's interesting that whenever a drug um interesting that whenever a drug um interesting that whenever a drug um impacts multiple pathways, we call them impacts multiple pathways, we call them impacts multiple pathways, we call them offtarget effects, right? offtarget effects, right? offtarget effects, right? &gt;&gt; Right? that just that language alone it &gt;&gt; Right? that just that language alone it &gt;&gt; Right? that just that language alone it tells you everything you need to know tells you everything you need to know tells you everything you need to know which is that you're trying to target which is that you're trying to target which is that you're trying to target specific receptors but the and pathways specific receptors but the and pathways specific receptors but the and pathways but the way that the brain works isn't but the way that the brain works isn't but the way that the brain works isn't like that right the earlier we were like that right the earlier we were like that right the earlier we were talking about breathing I mean the talking about breathing I mean the talking about breathing I mean the cardiorespiratory system are intimately cardiorespiratory system are intimately cardiorespiratory system are intimately involved and it's no surprise involved and it's no surprise involved and it's no surprise therefore that you have some of the same therefore that you have some of the same therefore that you have some of the same receptors and systems involved but you receptors and systems involved but you receptors and systems involved but you mentioned uh increasing serotonin for mentioned uh increasing serotonin for mentioned uh increasing serotonin for the treatment of depression SSRIs these the treatment of depression SSRIs these the treatment of depression SSRIs these days a lot of people are down on days a lot of people are down on days a lot of people are down on SSRIs because of the negative side SSRIs because of the negative side SSRIs because of the negative side effects, reduced libido, appetite, or effects, reduced libido, appetite, or effects, reduced libido, appetite, or increased appetite. Um, I will say in increased appetite. Um, I will say in increased appetite. Um, I will say in fairness to SSRIs, uh, SSRIs have helped fairness to SSRIs, uh, SSRIs have helped fairness to SSRIs, uh, SSRIs have helped a great many people, especially with a great many people, especially with a great many people, especially with people with, um, true clinical OCD. people with, um, true clinical OCD. people with, um, true clinical OCD. &gt;&gt; These are not people that are obsessive &gt;&gt; These are not people that are obsessive &gt;&gt; These are not people that are obsessive of nature. These are people who are of nature. These are people who are of nature. These are people who are really stricken by their OCD. So, there really stricken by their OCD. So, there really stricken by their OCD. So, there are places where SSRIs are valuable. But are places where SSRIs are valuable. But are places where SSRIs are valuable. But um I think the interesting thing to um I think the interesting thing to um I think the interesting thing to me is always that a really good me is always that a really good me is always that a really good scientific study isolates variables so scientific study isolates variables so scientific study isolates variables so that you can assign any observed effect that you can assign any observed effect that you can assign any observed effect to that compound at that dose or um that to that compound at that dose or um that to that compound at that dose or um that behavior uh at that frequency um in that behavior uh at that frequency um in that behavior uh at that frequency um in that population. But that's just the nature population. But that's just the nature population. But that's just the nature of reductionist science. Um plants on of reductionist science. Um plants on of reductionist science. Um plants on the other hand as you've pointed out the other hand as you've pointed out the other hand as you've pointed out before um before um before um you know the fact that they hit multiple you know the fact that they hit multiple you know the fact that they hit multiple pathways and that when the dosages are pathways and that when the dosages are pathways and that when the dosages are appropriate it seems like they can be appropriate it seems like they can be appropriate it seems like they can be very beneficial in certain areas right very beneficial in certain areas right very beneficial in certain areas right I'm not suggesting people use but you I'm not suggesting people use but you I'm not suggesting people use but you know um theratom leaf it sounds like know um theratom leaf it sounds like know um theratom leaf it sounds like could be very beneficial for people in could be very beneficial for people in could be very beneficial for people in certain contexts not just people trying certain contexts not just people trying certain contexts not just people trying to get over opioid addiction but maybe to get over opioid addiction but maybe to get over opioid addiction but maybe pain relief etc. But you have to kind of pain relief etc. But you have to kind of pain relief etc. But you have to kind of wonder, this is kind of a um wonder, this is kind of a um wonder, this is kind of a um philosophical spiritual question. I mean, it's kind of spiritual question. I mean, it's kind of spiritual question. I mean, it's kind of amazing that these plants contain a amazing that these plants contain a amazing that these plants contain a compound or set of compounds that can compound or set of compounds that can compound or set of compounds that can activate the pathways that we're seeking activate the pathways that we're seeking activate the pathways that we're seeking them to activate in a desired way. them to activate in a desired way. them to activate in a desired way. &gt;&gt; Plants, by the way, can also kill you &gt;&gt; Plants, by the way, can also kill you &gt;&gt; Plants, by the way, can also kill you folks or make you crazy if you take too folks or make you crazy if you take too folks or make you crazy if you take too many of them, legitimately crazy, um or many of them, legitimately crazy, um or many of them, legitimately crazy, um or dead. But you kind of have to wonder dead. But you kind of have to wonder dead. But you kind of have to wonder like you can ask the why question but you'll you can ask the why question but you'll you can ask the why question but you'll never get there. I wasn't consulted at never get there. I wasn't consulted at never get there. I wasn't consulted at the design phase and neither were you. the design phase and neither were you. the design phase and neither were you. Um but it is kind of beyond statistical Um but it is kind of beyond statistical Um but it is kind of beyond statistical probability to assume that a plant would probability to assume that a plant would probability to assume that a plant would contain the solution to pain by dosing contain the solution to pain by dosing contain the solution to pain by dosing each of the impact on these different each of the impact on these different each of the impact on these different pathways at just the right way. And yet pathways at just the right way. And yet pathways at just the right way. And yet &gt;&gt; it sounds like such a plant exists. &gt;&gt; it sounds like such a plant exists. &gt;&gt; it sounds like such a plant exists. Yeah. And that plant is Yeah. And that plant is Yeah. And that plant is &gt;&gt; this has been the fascinating part and I &gt;&gt; this has been the fascinating part and I &gt;&gt; this has been the fascinating part and I have to just say one of the biggest I have to just say one of the biggest I have to just say one of the biggest changes in my entire research program changes in my entire research program changes in my entire research program was when we moved to the University of was when we moved to the University of was when we moved to the University of Florida and the University of Florida is Florida and the University of Florida is Florida and the University of Florida is unique in that we have our college of unique in that we have our college of unique in that we have our college of medicine and we have all the health medicine and we have all the health medicine and we have all the health sciences on one campus including sciences on one campus including sciences on one campus including veterinary medicine which we also work veterinary medicine which we also work veterinary medicine which we also work with and we're doing clinical trials with and we're doing clinical trials with and we're doing clinical trials with them and companion dogs, which is a with them and companion dogs, which is a with them and companion dogs, which is a whole another discussion. whole another discussion. whole another discussion. &gt;&gt; Animals need pain relief, too. &gt;&gt; Animals need pain relief, too. &gt;&gt; Animals need pain relief, too. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And we have very poor pain control in &gt;&gt; And we have very poor pain control in &gt;&gt; And we have very poor pain control in animals, particularly in dogs. Um, we animals, particularly in dogs. Um, we animals, particularly in dogs. Um, we can come back to that if you want. Um, can come back to that if you want. Um, can come back to that if you want. Um, but most universities in the United States, most universities in the United States, most universities in the United States, state universities, state universities, state universities, have either the medical college or they have either the medical college or they have either the medical college or they have the agricultural college. have the agricultural college. have the agricultural college. The University of Florida has both 800 The University of Florida has both 800 The University of Florida has both 800 lb gorillas. if you will in the same lb gorillas. if you will in the same lb gorillas. if you will in the same system. So, University of Florida is system. So, University of Florida is system. So, University of Florida is extremely well known around the state of extremely well known around the state of extremely well known around the state of Florida and around the country for their Florida and around the country for their Florida and around the country for their unit called IFAUS, which is the unit called IFAUS, which is the unit called IFAUS, which is the Institute for Food and Agricultural Institute for Food and Agricultural Institute for Food and Agricultural Sciences, which has a service um Sciences, which has a service um Sciences, which has a service um facility in every single county in the facility in every single county in the facility in every single county in the state of Florida to work with state of Florida to work with state of Florida to work with agricultural industry. Um and we've agricultural industry. Um and we've agricultural industry. Um and we've worked with plant scientists on to worked with plant scientists on to worked with plant scientists on to understand what is this plant doing and understand what is this plant doing and understand what is this plant doing and what's it why is it producing what is what's it why is it producing what is what's it why is it producing what is producing why are these chemicals there. producing why are these chemicals there. producing why are these chemicals there. So to get to the answer to your question So to get to the answer to your question So to get to the answer to your question we think we've figured out why the we think we've figured out why the we think we've figured out why the plants are producing this. It's plants are producing this. It's plants are producing this. It's definitely not for our benefit. definitely not for our benefit. definitely not for our benefit. So plants produce chemical defense all So plants produce chemical defense all So plants produce chemical defense all the time. Right? The alkyoids are by the time. Right? The alkyoids are by the time. Right? The alkyoids are by the way bitter compounds by nature. So most way bitter compounds by nature. So most way bitter compounds by nature. So most of the time they're anti-feedant to make of the time they're anti-feedant to make of the time they're anti-feedant to make sure that the passing by uh deer, sure that the passing by uh deer, sure that the passing by uh deer, giraffe, whatever is not going to eat giraffe, whatever is not going to eat giraffe, whatever is not going to eat all the leaves off of that tree. They're all the leaves off of that tree. They're all the leaves off of that tree. They're going to have a couple and realize this going to have a couple and realize this going to have a couple and realize this is nasty. I don't want to do this. I'm is nasty. I don't want to do this. I'm is nasty. I don't want to do this. I'm going to move on to the next plant. Um going to move on to the next plant. Um going to move on to the next plant. Um however interestingly enough metro however interestingly enough metro however interestingly enough metro speciosa thermome tree does not grow uh speciosa thermome tree does not grow uh speciosa thermome tree does not grow uh in a place where it's going to be in a place where it's going to be in a place where it's going to be attacked by herbivorous animals. These attacked by herbivorous animals. These attacked by herbivorous animals. These grow in very swampy grow in very swampy grow in very swampy um conditions and in those swampy um conditions and in those swampy um conditions and in those swampy conditions it's very humid. It's on the conditions it's very humid. It's on the conditions it's very humid. It's on the equator. It's incredibly hot. Um, and what grows It's incredibly hot. Um, and what grows It's incredibly hot. Um, and what grows in hot, humid environments? Fungus. in hot, humid environments? Fungus. in hot, humid environments? Fungus. These compounds that the tree is These compounds that the tree is These compounds that the tree is producing, which yes, they seem to producing, which yes, they seem to producing, which yes, they seem to interact with our neurotransmitter interact with our neurotransmitter interact with our neurotransmitter systems for whatever reason, are highly systems for whatever reason, are highly systems for whatever reason, are highly effective antifungal agents for the effective antifungal agents for the effective antifungal agents for the plant to ensure its ability to survive plant to ensure its ability to survive plant to ensure its ability to survive and stay in that environment and thrive and stay in that environment and thrive and stay in that environment and thrive in that environment. in that environment. in that environment. &gt;&gt; Is it a good antifungal potentially in &gt;&gt; Is it a good antifungal potentially in &gt;&gt; Is it a good antifungal potentially in humans as well? So that's a great humans as well? So that's a great humans as well? So that's a great question, right? We've we've we decided question, right? We've we've we decided question, right? We've we've we decided we would look at this from human we would look at this from human we would look at this from human pathogenic fungus. So what fungus pathogenic fungus. So what fungus pathogenic fungus. So what fungus disease-causing fungi in humans? So far we haven't seen fungi in humans? So far we haven't seen fungi in humans? So far we haven't seen anything. But as far as agriculturally anything. But as far as agriculturally anything. But as far as agriculturally important fungus, it seems to be able to important fungus, it seems to be able to important fungus, it seems to be able to be very potent on some of these. And so be very potent on some of these. And so be very potent on some of these. And so we're actually looking heavily into uh we're actually looking heavily into uh we're actually looking heavily into uh this area. So there's this area. So there's this area. So there's parts of the chemical structures that parts of the chemical structures that parts of the chemical structures that are conserved on all of the alkyoids are conserved on all of the alkyoids are conserved on all of the alkyoids that we see this tree producing. And that we see this tree producing. And that we see this tree producing. And that chemical structure actually the that chemical structure actually the that chemical structure actually the way that it tipped us off was we way that it tipped us off was we way that it tipped us off was we equated that back to a naturally equated that back to a naturally equated that back to a naturally occurring antifungal that's already used occurring antifungal that's already used occurring antifungal that's already used in the agricultural industry. in the agricultural industry. in the agricultural industry. um has the exact same chemical pattern um has the exact same chemical pattern um has the exact same chemical pattern what we call a moyet or a function u in what we call a moyet or a function u in what we call a moyet or a function u in the molecule and those are uh called the molecule and those are uh called the molecule and those are uh called strobalins the molecules that are used and they're the molecules that are used and they're the molecules that are used and they're used in USDA agricultural industry as used in USDA agricultural industry as used in USDA agricultural industry as anti-natural antifungals anti-natural antifungals anti-natural antifungals so we always kind of made the joke that so we always kind of made the joke that so we always kind of made the joke that if this gets put into the controlled if this gets put into the controlled if this gets put into the controlled substance act well we we'll just go to substance act well we we'll just go to substance act well we we'll just go to the agricultural chemical pathway and the agricultural chemical pathway and the agricultural chemical pathway and see if we can develop new antifungals see if we can develop new antifungals see if we can develop new antifungals for the egg industry, particularly in a for the egg industry, particularly in a for the egg industry, particularly in a state like Florida that's very hot and state like Florida that's very hot and state like Florida that's very hot and humid, um that could benefit from humid, um that could benefit from humid, um that could benefit from good antifungals. So, there's a reason good antifungals. So, there's a reason good antifungals. So, there's a reason that plants are producing the molecules that plants are producing the molecules that plants are producing the molecules they're producing. Um, but through trial they're producing. Um, but through trial they're producing. Um, but through trial and error, as we've talked about before, and error, as we've talked about before, and error, as we've talked about before, through watching, um, and historical through watching, um, and historical through watching, um, and historical just trying things, uh, the f around and just trying things, uh, the f around and just trying things, uh, the f around and find out, you know, figure out there's find out, you know, figure out there's find out, you know, figure out there's some benefit to humans from these some benefit to humans from these some benefit to humans from these plants, right? plants, right? plants, right? &gt;&gt; Plants are protecting themselves and &gt;&gt; Plants are protecting themselves and &gt;&gt; Plants are protecting themselves and trying to evolve. trying to evolve. trying to evolve. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Just like any other species. uh years &gt;&gt; Just like any other species. uh years &gt;&gt; Just like any other species. uh years ago uh I had a friend who's a very ago uh I had a friend who's a very ago uh I had a friend who's a very serious about Chinese medicine like serious about Chinese medicine like serious about Chinese medicine like practitioner um and I said what sorts of practitioner um and I said what sorts of practitioner um and I said what sorts of goodies does Chinese medicine offer for goodies does Chinese medicine offer for goodies does Chinese medicine offer for somebody who's interested in uh you know somebody who's interested in uh you know somebody who's interested in uh you know supplements and medicine and formal supplements and medicine and formal supplements and medicine and formal medicine also um and they gave me don't medicine also um and they gave me don't medicine also um and they gave me don't do this at home kids they gave me a an do this at home kids they gave me a an do this at home kids they gave me a an alkyoid that's from um gecko skin that's alkyoid that's from um gecko skin that's alkyoid that's from um gecko skin that's been shed been shed been shed &gt;&gt; and uh it's a stimulant &gt;&gt; and uh it's a stimulant &gt;&gt; and uh it's a stimulant And um it's very bitter. I know cuz I And um it's very bitter. I know cuz I And um it's very bitter. I know cuz I opened the capsule and I taste it before opened the capsule and I taste it before opened the capsule and I taste it before I took it. I took it. I took it. &gt;&gt; And it was a pretty decent &gt;&gt; And it was a pretty decent &gt;&gt; And it was a pretty decent stimulant. Um I prefer caffeine, stimulant. Um I prefer caffeine, stimulant. Um I prefer caffeine, &gt;&gt; but it was a you know a nice arc &gt;&gt; but it was a you know a nice arc &gt;&gt; but it was a you know a nice arc stimulant and it had it was clearly a stimulant and it had it was clearly a stimulant and it had it was clearly a stimulant. And you think, okay, well, stimulant. And you think, okay, well, stimulant. And you think, okay, well, how did they arrive at this? Well, um how did they arrive at this? Well, um how did they arrive at this? Well, um somebody observed that geckos are able somebody observed that geckos are able somebody observed that geckos are able to survive in a area where there are a to survive in a area where there are a to survive in a area where there are a lot of birds that feed on reptiles and lot of birds that feed on reptiles and lot of birds that feed on reptiles and other small critters. And that's the way other small critters. And that's the way other small critters. And that's the way that the geckos have learned to um be that the geckos have learned to um be that the geckos have learned to um be less tasty, be bitter. less tasty, be bitter. less tasty, be bitter. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Because if you're sweet or you're a &gt;&gt; Because if you're sweet or you're a &gt;&gt; Because if you're sweet or you're a great protein snack, which most every great protein snack, which most every great protein snack, which most every moving organism is, well then uh you moving organism is, well then uh you moving organism is, well then uh you you're better off being bitter than you're better off being bitter than you're better off being bitter than being sweet. being sweet. being sweet. &gt;&gt; Species won't be around long. &gt;&gt; Species won't be around long. &gt;&gt; Species won't be around long. &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, so there's a lot of this &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, so there's a lot of this &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, so there's a lot of this out there. Um couple of days ago I asked out there. Um couple of days ago I asked out there. Um couple of days ago I asked my ex audience, does anyone have any um my ex audience, does anyone have any um my ex audience, does anyone have any um questions about uh a lot of praise for questions about uh a lot of praise for questions about uh a lot of praise for you and your efforts to really be uh you and your efforts to really be uh you and your efforts to really be uh discerning and nuanced about the discerning and nuanced about the discerning and nuanced about the messaging aroundratom and for your the messaging aroundratom and for your the messaging aroundratom and for your work. So um someone asked something that work. So um someone asked something that work. So um someone asked something that I had no idea what it means but that but I had no idea what it means but that but I had no idea what it means but that but this person is a researcher. I know this person is a researcher. I know this person is a researcher. I know them. and they're a well-known them. and they're a well-known them. and they're a well-known neuroscientist and they asked, "Is there neuroscientist and they asked, "Is there neuroscientist and they asked, "Is there really a difference between white vein, really a difference between white vein, really a difference between white vein, red vein, and brown vein?" red vein, and brown vein?" red vein, and brown vein?" What are we talking about here? What are we talking about here? What are we talking about here? &gt;&gt; I'll answer the question very quickly. &gt;&gt; I'll answer the question very quickly. &gt;&gt; I'll answer the question very quickly. Most of this is marketing. Um but what Most of this is marketing. Um but what Most of this is marketing. Um but what we realized um is that there's on what we realized um is that there's on what we realized um is that there's on the tree itself, the treere's leaves the tree itself, the treere's leaves the tree itself, the treere's leaves have veins and those veins are red in have veins and those veins are red in have veins and those veins are red in some cases or green in other cases or some cases or green in other cases or some cases or green in other cases or white. You can think about this like white. You can think about this like white. You can think about this like rainbow chard at the supermarket, right? rainbow chard at the supermarket, right? rainbow chard at the supermarket, right? You you know they got beautiful colors You you know they got beautiful colors You you know they got beautiful colors or rhubarb or whatever you want to or rhubarb or whatever you want to or rhubarb or whatever you want to &gt;&gt; blood oranges versus Yeah. Sure. &gt;&gt; blood oranges versus Yeah. Sure. &gt;&gt; blood oranges versus Yeah. Sure. So, so what we have seen and I and Sure. So, so what we have seen and I and Sure. So, so what we have seen and I and I'm going to caveat this answer too I'm going to caveat this answer too I'm going to caveat this answer too because a lot of a lot of marketing goes because a lot of a lot of marketing goes because a lot of a lot of marketing goes into this white vein, red vein, brown into this white vein, red vein, brown into this white vein, red vein, brown vein, green vein, um, yellow vein. vein, green vein, um, yellow vein. vein, green vein, um, yellow vein. They're actually five colors of products They're actually five colors of products They're actually five colors of products that come into the United States. that come into the United States. that come into the United States. And it has to do with how those have And it has to do with how those have And it has to do with how those have been cured or dried after they've been cured or dried after they've been cured or dried after they've been harvested. So, green leaves, fresh, not dried very So, green leaves, fresh, not dried very So, green leaves, fresh, not dried very much, dried in a cool environment indoors. dried in a cool environment indoors. dried in a cool environment indoors. They're going to retain the greenish They're going to retain the greenish They're going to retain the greenish color. Um, and they're ground and color. Um, and they're ground and color. Um, and they're ground and pulverized and that powder comes in pulverized and that powder comes in pulverized and that powder comes in green. Then, that's it. That's your green vein. Then, that's it. That's your green vein. Then, that's it. That's your green vein. Many in many cases and vice verss. Many in many cases and vice verss. Many in many cases and vice verss. It it really depends on how the color of It it really depends on how the color of It it really depends on how the color of the leaf material was. We grow these the leaf material was. We grow these the leaf material was. We grow these trees at the University of Florida and trees at the University of Florida and trees at the University of Florida and it's interesting because if they and it's interesting because if they and it's interesting because if they can get sunburned and they can they can get sunburned and they can they can get sunburned and they can they're undercover canopy crop. they're undercover canopy crop. they're undercover canopy crop. So the trees naturally exist sort of So the trees naturally exist sort of So the trees naturally exist sort of underneath a higher canopy of trees. So underneath a higher canopy of trees. So underneath a higher canopy of trees. So they're shade grown. Okay. if they get they're shade grown. Okay. if they get they're shade grown. Okay. if they get direct exposure into the sun, they'll direct exposure into the sun, they'll direct exposure into the sun, they'll actually burn and the leaves will start actually burn and the leaves will start actually burn and the leaves will start to turn brownish red. Um, we've done to turn brownish red. Um, we've done to turn brownish red. Um, we've done that with specific wavelength light that with specific wavelength light that with specific wavelength light studies and green houses and whatnot, studies and green houses and whatnot, studies and green houses and whatnot, too. Um, but they'll also get damaged too. Um, but they'll also get damaged too. Um, but they'll also get damaged when it gets cold and they'll get when it gets cold and they'll get when it gets cold and they'll get brownish color or they'll turn reddish brownish color or they'll turn reddish brownish color or they'll turn reddish color again that. So, it's some sort of color again that. So, it's some sort of color again that. So, it's some sort of response, chemical response, but it is a response, chemical response, but it is a response, chemical response, but it is a chemical response. And this is where I chemical response. And this is where I chemical response. And this is where I put the caveat in because when we've put the caveat in because when we've put the caveat in because when we've isolated when we've not isolated but isolated when we've not isolated but isolated when we've not isolated but we've analyzed we've analyzed we've analyzed the different strains and colors of the different strains and colors of the different strains and colors of powders for their alkaloid content. powders for their alkaloid content. powders for their alkaloid content. They're all very similar. So the They're all very similar. So the They're all very similar. So the alkaloid is not changing. alkaloid is not changing. alkaloid is not changing. So we always said it's kind of a So we always said it's kind of a So we always said it's kind of a marketing deal and it's a more of a marketing deal and it's a more of a marketing deal and it's a more of a potential placebo thing like oh this is potential placebo thing like oh this is potential placebo thing like oh this is more relaxing. This is more pain. more relaxing. This is more pain. more relaxing. This is more pain. &gt;&gt; This is very reminiscent of the indica &gt;&gt; This is very reminiscent of the indica &gt;&gt; This is very reminiscent of the indica sativa. Yeah. Question that I got around sativa. Yeah. Question that I got around sativa. Yeah. Question that I got around cannabis. And yet when you cannabis. And yet when you cannabis. And yet when you &gt;&gt; talk to users of indacica versus sativa &gt;&gt; talk to users of indacica versus sativa &gt;&gt; talk to users of indacica versus sativa and different strains and different and different strains and different and different strains and different amounts of tarpen and types of tarpen amounts of tarpen and types of tarpen amounts of tarpen and types of tarpen and cannabis, people will swear by the and cannabis, people will swear by the and cannabis, people will swear by the vastly different effects of these vastly different effects of these vastly different effects of these things. But it became clear to me anyway things. But it became clear to me anyway things. But it became clear to me anyway that some of that, not all of it, some that some of that, not all of it, some that some of that, not all of it, some of it is related to the fact that you of it is related to the fact that you of it is related to the fact that you have different um uh you call them have different um uh you call them have different um uh you call them chains of custody as you go from the chains of custody as you go from the chains of custody as you go from the plant to the product. plant to the product. plant to the product. &gt;&gt; So people will associate a particular &gt;&gt; So people will associate a particular &gt;&gt; So people will associate a particular effect with a given product. effect with a given product. effect with a given product. &gt;&gt; That product might be labeled green vein &gt;&gt; That product might be labeled green vein &gt;&gt; That product might be labeled green vein or red vein. So the effects may indeed or red vein. So the effects may indeed or red vein. So the effects may indeed differ, but it's hard to trace back to differ, but it's hard to trace back to differ, but it's hard to trace back to the actual differences in green vein the actual differences in green vein the actual differences in green vein versus red vein. That's what I'm versus red vein. That's what I'm versus red vein. That's what I'm gathering from gathering from gathering from &gt;&gt; in terms of their alkyoidal makeup. So &gt;&gt; in terms of their alkyoidal makeup. So &gt;&gt; in terms of their alkyoidal makeup. So when we analyze things and let me when we analyze things and let me when we analyze things and let me just let me take a step back here. So just let me take a step back here. So just let me take a step back here. So plants produce many classes of chemicals plants produce many classes of chemicals plants produce many classes of chemicals right alkoids are the ones that right alkoids are the ones that right alkoids are the ones that traditionally people think of with traditionally people think of with traditionally people think of with pharmacological activity that are pharmacological activity that are pharmacological activity that are interesting that are going to have interesting that are going to have interesting that are going to have psychoactive activity. So most people psychoactive activity. So most people psychoactive activity. So most people focus on alkyoids as being the focus on alkyoids as being the focus on alkyoids as being the biologically relevant biologically relevant biologically relevant &gt;&gt; plant materials. You mentioned cannabis. &gt;&gt; plant materials. You mentioned cannabis. &gt;&gt; plant materials. You mentioned cannabis. Cannabis has no alkyoids. Cannabis has no alkyoids. Cannabis has no alkyoids. So those are tarpen which is another So those are tarpen which is another So those are tarpen which is another chemical class of molecules. They do not chemical class of molecules. They do not chemical class of molecules. They do not contain nitrogens. Um and they we now contain nitrogens. Um and they we now contain nitrogens. Um and they we now know interact with specific proteins in know interact with specific proteins in know interact with specific proteins in our body as well like canabonoid our body as well like canabonoid our body as well like canabonoid receptors. So receptors. So receptors. So it plants are producing many classes of it plants are producing many classes of it plants are producing many classes of compounds. They produce steroids what of compounds. They produce steroids what of compounds. They produce steroids what we call phytostereroids. They produce we call phytostereroids. They produce we call phytostereroids. They produce tannins. Um, which anybody who's like me tannins. Um, which anybody who's like me tannins. Um, which anybody who's like me and likes wine, you know, you talk about and likes wine, you know, you talk about and likes wine, you know, you talk about tannins and all the different types of tannins and all the different types of tannins and all the different types of tannins that can be present in a wine tannins that can be present in a wine tannins that can be present in a wine &gt;&gt; or tea &gt;&gt; or tea &gt;&gt; or tea &gt;&gt; or teas. Yeah. Um, and to that point, &gt;&gt; or teas. Yeah. Um, and to that point, &gt;&gt; or teas. Yeah. Um, and to that point, there's antioxidant type compounds in there's antioxidant type compounds in there's antioxidant type compounds in there. Um, you know, all kinds of there. Um, you know, all kinds of there. Um, you know, all kinds of classes of chemicals. classes of chemicals. classes of chemicals. No one to my knowledge has studied No one to my knowledge has studied No one to my knowledge has studied anything other than the alkaloids in the anything other than the alkaloids in the anything other than the alkaloids in the cranium plant. Likewise with cannabis, a cranium plant. Likewise with cannabis, a cranium plant. Likewise with cannabis, a lot of it hasn't been explored besides lot of it hasn't been explored besides lot of it hasn't been explored besides THC and CBD. THC and CBD. THC and CBD. &gt;&gt; And many of it is because it's s in &gt;&gt; And many of it is because it's s in &gt;&gt; And many of it is because it's s in such low quantity. And coming back to such low quantity. And coming back to such low quantity. And coming back to the point when we talk about most of the point when we talk about most of the point when we talk about most of those studies that have been in the those studies that have been in the those studies that have been in the literature have been done with the major literature have been done with the major literature have been done with the major alkaloid because that's the thing that alkaloid because that's the thing that alkaloid because that's the thing that people can get a hold of. It's easy to people can get a hold of. It's easy to people can get a hold of. It's easy to isolate purify and if it's the major isolate purify and if it's the major isolate purify and if it's the major alkaloid by default it should be causing alkaloid by default it should be causing alkaloid by default it should be causing the activity. the activity. the activity. &gt;&gt; It makes for good science, right? It's &gt;&gt; It makes for good science, right? It's &gt;&gt; It makes for good science, right? It's hard to risk somebody's uh PhD career on hard to risk somebody's uh PhD career on hard to risk somebody's uh PhD career on a uh gene or molecule that's in low on a uh gene or molecule that's in low on a uh gene or molecule that's in low abundance yet you want to air abundance yet you want to air abundance yet you want to air towards probability of success. towards probability of success. towards probability of success. &gt;&gt; Okay. So there's your answer on white &gt;&gt; Okay. So there's your answer on white &gt;&gt; Okay. So there's your answer on white vein, red vein, brown vein. Sounds like vein, red vein, brown vein. Sounds like vein, red vein, brown vein. Sounds like it's more product dependent and source it's more product dependent and source it's more product dependent and source dependent in terms of the for the user dependent in terms of the for the user dependent in terms of the for the user the potential user and maybe you the potential user and maybe you the potential user and maybe you shouldn't trust the marketing. shouldn't trust the marketing. shouldn't trust the marketing. &gt;&gt; I mean just finalize that with the &gt;&gt; I mean just finalize that with the &gt;&gt; I mean just finalize that with the fact that we don't know if there's other fact that we don't know if there's other fact that we don't know if there's other changes in chemical composition outside changes in chemical composition outside changes in chemical composition outside the alkaloids. So the alkaloids. So the alkaloids. So &gt;&gt; there could be something there. Is there &gt;&gt; there could be something there. Is there &gt;&gt; there could be something there. Is there a potential use forratom as an a potential use forratom as an a potential use forratom as an anti-depressant? &gt;&gt; I think that's probably one of the areas &gt;&gt; I think that's probably one of the areas &gt;&gt; I think that's probably one of the areas that needs to be investigated that needs to be investigated that needs to be investigated um much more thoroughly. Uh I we got um much more thoroughly. Uh I we got um much more thoroughly. Uh I we got uh a specific marching order. We were uh a specific marching order. We were uh a specific marching order. We were looking at many things including looking at many things including looking at many things including regulation of blood glucose. So we can regulation of blood glucose. So we can regulation of blood glucose. So we can talk about a lot of potential things talk about a lot of potential things talk about a lot of potential things that are going on. Um but the mood that are going on. Um but the mood that are going on. Um but the mood elevation and the um the sort of elevation and the um the sort of elevation and the um the sort of overall well-being feeling that many overall well-being feeling that many overall well-being feeling that many people report people report people report um it it's all anecdotal, right? But at um it it's all anecdotal, right? But at um it it's all anecdotal, right? But at certain point anecdotal is a signal certain point anecdotal is a signal certain point anecdotal is a signal because it tells you once enough people because it tells you once enough people because it tells you once enough people are saying this it must be something. So are saying this it must be something. So are saying this it must be something. So we need to pursue that and we need to do we need to pursue that and we need to do we need to pursue that and we need to do it in very good controlled clinical it in very good controlled clinical it in very good controlled clinical trials with humans so that we can trials with humans so that we can trials with humans so that we can understand if there is true benefit. understand if there is true benefit. understand if there is true benefit. Next question for you is and this was a Next question for you is and this was a Next question for you is and this was a very common question very common question very common question how to get offratom. Uh this person says how to get offratom. Uh this person says how to get offratom. Uh this person says u my brother was on it um and is having u my brother was on it um and is having u my brother was on it um and is having a dreadful time um with it. He takes it a dreadful time um with it. He takes it a dreadful time um with it. He takes it now just to feel normal. He feels like now just to feel normal. He feels like now just to feel normal. He feels like he's a slave toratom. We don't know what he's a slave toratom. We don't know what he's a slave toratom. We don't know what product he's taking or how much. But I product he's taking or how much. But I product he's taking or how much. But I will tell you even though that's just will tell you even though that's just will tell you even though that's just one question. This came up numerous one question. This came up numerous one question. This came up numerous times. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and it's a great question &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and it's a great question &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and it's a great question unfortunately without answer right now. unfortunately without answer right now. unfortunately without answer right now. But I do want to I do want to stress But I do want to I do want to stress But I do want to I do want to stress uh a very important piece of this uh a very important piece of this uh a very important piece of this research and what we're trying to research and what we're trying to research and what we're trying to understand. Um, I've talked a lot more about the Um, I've talked a lot more about the Um, I've talked a lot more about the chemical nature and the pharmacology and chemical nature and the pharmacology and chemical nature and the pharmacology and differences in pharmaccoinetics and differences in pharmaccoinetics and differences in pharmaccoinetics and potential benefits with this plant, but potential benefits with this plant, but potential benefits with this plant, but it's clear that there's potential harm it's clear that there's potential harm it's clear that there's potential harm as well. Um, and we've seen that as well. Um, and we've seen that as well. Um, and we've seen that in many stories. These are examples in many stories. These are examples in many stories. These are examples of that. I have um a pretty routine of that. I have um a pretty routine of that. I have um a pretty routine lunch with addiction physicians in lunch with addiction physicians in lunch with addiction physicians in Gainesville, Florida. And um precoid Gainesville, Florida. And um precoid Gainesville, Florida. And um precoid many of them said, "Hey, um this will be many of them said, "Hey, um this will be many of them said, "Hey, um this will be interesting to you. One of our patients interesting to you. One of our patients interesting to you. One of our patients came in uh an opioid treatment and said came in uh an opioid treatment and said came in uh an opioid treatment and said they started using cratom and they're they started using cratom and they're they started using cratom and they're doing much better and they're doing much better and they're doing much better and they're benefiting." And then we didn't see each other for a And then we didn't see each other for a And then we didn't see each other for a couple years because of COVID and we couple years because of COVID and we couple years because of COVID and we resumed our lunches and they said, "You resumed our lunches and they said, "You resumed our lunches and they said, "You won't believe what we're seeing now. won't believe what we're seeing now. won't believe what we're seeing now. People are coming in seeking treatment People are coming in seeking treatment People are coming in seeking treatment to get off." We've unpacked a lot of to get off." We've unpacked a lot of to get off." We've unpacked a lot of discussions over a lunch table discussions over a lunch table discussions over a lunch table and trying to figure these things out. and trying to figure these things out. and trying to figure these things out. Most medical practitioners medical practitioners medical practitioners go to the fact that this is opioid like go to the fact that this is opioid like go to the fact that this is opioid like and they're using bupinorphine and they're using bupinorphine and they're using bupinorphine or suboxone which is our one of our gold or suboxone which is our one of our gold or suboxone which is our one of our gold standard treatments or even methadone to standard treatments or even methadone to standard treatments or even methadone to get individuals off ofratom and they say get individuals off ofratom and they say get individuals off ofratom and they say it's working it's working it's working but my problem with that is we've but my problem with that is we've but my problem with that is we've said already this is not a typical ical said already this is not a typical ical said already this is not a typical ical opioid is not a typical opioid. It's atypical is not a typical opioid. It's atypical is not a typical opioid. It's atypical for sure. It's having these other for sure. It's having these other for sure. It's having these other pharmarmacologies. And so yes, we may have success in And so yes, we may have success in And so yes, we may have success in converting people from taking by putting converting people from taking by putting converting people from taking by putting them on an opioid, them on an opioid, them on an opioid, which many of them might have been which many of them might have been which many of them might have been trying to get off of in the first place trying to get off of in the first place trying to get off of in the first place with this. But the pharmacology ofratom with this. But the pharmacology ofratom with this. But the pharmacology ofratom is so complex and different that you're is so complex and different that you're is so complex and different that you're only pressing one of those levers in the only pressing one of those levers in the only pressing one of those levers in the system that we just talked about is at system that we just talked about is at system that we just talked about is at least tripartide in its activities. least tripartide in its activities. least tripartide in its activities. Right? So you're ignoring the serotonin Right? So you're ignoring the serotonin Right? So you're ignoring the serotonin piece. You're ignoring the adinuric piece. You're ignoring the adinuric piece. You're ignoring the adinuric piece by only giving an opioid like piece by only giving an opioid like piece by only giving an opioid like methadone or buponorphine. methadone or buponorphine. methadone or buponorphine. Is that the right way? I don't know. I Is that the right way? I don't know. I Is that the right way? I don't know. I don't know the answer to that question. don't know the answer to that question. don't know the answer to that question. We know that in certain cases when we've We know that in certain cases when we've We know that in certain cases when we've tested animals and we've pushed them tested animals and we've pushed them tested animals and we've pushed them into um toxic levels of certain into um toxic levels of certain into um toxic levels of certain alkyoids, notratum itself, but we alkyoids, notratum itself, but we alkyoids, notratum itself, but we know that in many cases opioid know that in many cases opioid know that in many cases opioid antagonist won't reverse some of those antagonist won't reverse some of those antagonist won't reverse some of those effects &gt;&gt; because of this these um nonopioid &gt;&gt; because of this these um nonopioid &gt;&gt; because of this these um nonopioid pathway effects. So it sounds like for pathway effects. So it sounds like for pathway effects. So it sounds like for this person's brother or sister or this person's brother or sister or this person's brother or sister or somebody that wants to get offratum somebody that wants to get offratum somebody that wants to get offratum suppressing the same pathways that are suppressing the same pathways that are suppressing the same pathways that are used to get people off opioids like used to get people off opioids like used to get people off opioids like buprenorphine uh neoxone uh neoxone uh neoxone etc could be useful but there could be etc could be useful but there could be etc could be useful but there could be still other um aspects of dependency still other um aspects of dependency still other um aspects of dependency related toratom that those won't related toratom that those won't related toratom that those won't resolve. That's what I'm hearing. That's resolve. That's what I'm hearing. That's resolve. That's what I'm hearing. That's that is and the and the concern is that is and the and the concern is that is and the and the concern is by moving someone from a cratom product by moving someone from a cratom product by moving someone from a cratom product to a pure opioid product like are you to a pure opioid product like are you to a pure opioid product like are you actually potentially making things worse because potentially making things worse because potentially making things worse because it's going to be hard for them now to it's going to be hard for them now to it's going to be hard for them now to get off of those products? It's a get off of those products? It's a get off of those products? It's a circular question, right? It's very circular question, right? It's very circular question, right? It's very difficult to answer. And this is one of difficult to answer. And this is one of difficult to answer. And this is one of the things we're really trying to get to the things we're really trying to get to the things we're really trying to get to the bottom of what is what is a better the bottom of what is what is a better the bottom of what is what is a better what is a more appropriate treatment. what is a more appropriate treatment. what is a more appropriate treatment. But for right now, it seems that what is But for right now, it seems that what is But for right now, it seems that what is working is opioid use disorder working is opioid use disorder working is opioid use disorder treatments. &gt;&gt; Buponorphine, &gt;&gt; Buponorphine, &gt;&gt; Buponorphine, &gt;&gt; buponorphine. &gt;&gt; buponorphine. &gt;&gt; buponorphine. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I will say there were a number of people &gt;&gt; I will say there were a number of people &gt;&gt; I will say there were a number of people in the response, and obviously this in the response, and obviously this in the response, and obviously this isn't a formal study, who said best way isn't a formal study, who said best way isn't a formal study, who said best way to get off it, not to start, right? Just to get off it, not to start, right? Just to get off it, not to start, right? Just don't touch it. There were a lot of don't touch it. There were a lot of don't touch it. There were a lot of don't touch this stuff. That's based on don't touch this stuff. That's based on don't touch this stuff. That's based on observation, it seems. I'm, you know, observation, it seems. I'm, you know, observation, it seems. I'm, you know, I'm uh it's conjecture here, but I'm uh it's conjecture here, but I'm uh it's conjecture here, but based on observation um that they know based on observation um that they know based on observation um that they know people have had a terrible time getting people have had a terrible time getting people have had a terrible time getting off it. Like the best way to avoid off it. Like the best way to avoid off it. Like the best way to avoid dependence is to not start. Um there dependence is to not start. Um there dependence is to not start. Um there were a couple um questions about uh that were a couple um questions about uh that were a couple um questions about uh that specifically um and the effect on the serotonin um and the effect on the serotonin um and the effect on the serotonin system. Is there um you know is you system. Is there um you know is you system. Is there um you know is you could imagine if you're trying to come could imagine if you're trying to come could imagine if you're trying to come offratum at because of an opioid like dependence at because of an opioid like dependence at because of an opioid like dependence uh taking uh bupinorphine maybe doing uh taking uh bupinorphine maybe doing uh taking uh bupinorphine maybe doing other things to support the serotonin other things to support the serotonin other things to support the serotonin system at the same time like it doesn't system at the same time like it doesn't system at the same time like it doesn't have to be just one treatment but have to be just one treatment but have to be just one treatment but obviously this has to be overseen by obviously this has to be overseen by obviously this has to be overseen by somebody that can prescribe these drugs. somebody that can prescribe these drugs. somebody that can prescribe these drugs. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No. And I and I think the key &gt;&gt; Yeah. No. And I and I think the key &gt;&gt; Yeah. No. And I and I think the key there is not ignoring and trying there is not ignoring and trying there is not ignoring and trying to do it on your own, but getting to do it on your own, but getting to do it on your own, but getting medical professional help and getting medical professional help and getting medical professional help and getting someone that can give you not only a uh someone that can give you not only a uh someone that can give you not only a uh you know medication assistance in you know medication assistance in you know medication assistance in treatment, but giving you um support of treatment, but giving you um support of treatment, but giving you um support of treatment, in other words, counseling um treatment, in other words, counseling um treatment, in other words, counseling um and social aspects of that as well. and social aspects of that as well. and social aspects of that as well. &gt;&gt; I'm going to just tell you one comment &gt;&gt; I'm going to just tell you one comment &gt;&gt; I'm going to just tell you one comment that somebody asked. I relay to you that somebody asked. I relay to you that somebody asked. I relay to you because I think it's informative for because I think it's informative for because I think it's informative for everybody and then I'll I have one more everybody and then I'll I have one more everybody and then I'll I have one more question from um from the online question from um from the online question from um from the online audience. Um please tell your guest I audience. Um please tell your guest I audience. Um please tell your guest I quit prescribed topical boot trans quit prescribed topical boot trans quit prescribed topical boot trans patches for lower back pain cold turkey patches for lower back pain cold turkey patches for lower back pain cold turkey by switching toratom as an alternative by switching toratom as an alternative by switching toratom as an alternative treatment. They wanted you to know that. treatment. They wanted you to know that. treatment. They wanted you to know that. So this is somebody for whom it was So this is somebody for whom it was So this is somebody for whom it was effective and apparently they wanted you effective and apparently they wanted you effective and apparently they wanted you in particular to know that. I appreciate in particular to know that. I appreciate in particular to know that. I appreciate that comment and it's not an uncommon that comment and it's not an uncommon that comment and it's not an uncommon theme that I've heard and I've gotten theme that I've heard and I've gotten theme that I've heard and I've gotten emails from people that have had emails from people that have had emails from people that have had that story. They've they've been able to that story. They've they've been able to that story. They've they've been able to switch cold turkey and just to switch cold turkey and just to switch cold turkey and just to touch on what you said earlier too. You touch on what you said earlier too. You touch on what you said earlier too. You know, we had a um first case report that know, we had a um first case report that know, we had a um first case report that we published in the literature was in we published in the literature was in we published in the literature was in 2008 with a human case uh with my 2008 with a human case uh with my 2008 with a human case uh with my longtime collaborator Ed Boy Ber uh longtime collaborator Ed Boy Ber uh longtime collaborator Ed Boy Ber uh who's a emergency department physician. who's a emergency department physician. who's a emergency department physician. Um and Ed called me and he said, "You're Um and Ed called me and he said, "You're Um and Ed called me and he said, "You're not going to believe what I have in the not going to believe what I have in the not going to believe what I have in the ED." He said, "I've got someone." ED." He said, "I've got someone." ED." He said, "I've got someone." &gt;&gt; The ED is the &gt;&gt; The ED is the &gt;&gt; The ED is the &gt;&gt; emergency department came in with a &gt;&gt; emergency department came in with a &gt;&gt; emergency department came in with a full-blown seizure. And um but that this full-blown seizure. And um but that this full-blown seizure. And um but that this is all in this paper. It's unpacked. It is all in this paper. It's unpacked. It is all in this paper. It's unpacked. It was what we think happened is that he was what we think happened is that he was what we think happened is that he took a medaphanil, which is a um drug took a medaphanil, which is a um drug took a medaphanil, which is a um drug for actually narcolepsy. He was feeling for actually narcolepsy. He was feeling for actually narcolepsy. He was feeling tired. His his wife uh had these drugs tired. His his wife uh had these drugs tired. His his wife uh had these drugs and so he took this on top of his and so he took this on top of his and so he took this on top of his wellestablished use of this. A lot of wellestablished use of this. A lot of wellestablished use of this. A lot of people use modafanil as a um stimulant people use modafanil as a um stimulant people use modafanil as a um stimulant cognitive enhancer. Very very common cognitive enhancer. Very very common cognitive enhancer. Very very common now. &gt;&gt; You have to remember this took &gt;&gt; You have to remember this took &gt;&gt; You have to remember this took place in 2007. Okay. So the only product place in 2007. Okay. So the only product place in 2007. Okay. So the only product that was in the market at that point in that was in the market at that point in that was in the market at that point in time was leaf. time was leaf. time was leaf. &gt;&gt; So leafratom and modafano. &gt;&gt; So leafratom and modafano. &gt;&gt; So leafratom and modafano. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So um it caused him to have a &gt;&gt; Yeah. So um it caused him to have a &gt;&gt; Yeah. So um it caused him to have a seizure. Uh seizure. Uh seizure. Uh in the emergency department they had no in the emergency department they had no in the emergency department they had no idea what to do. Um, luckily Ed knew me idea what to do. Um, luckily Ed knew me idea what to do. Um, luckily Ed knew me and that we were working on this and we and that we were working on this and we and that we were working on this and we were working on another thing called were working on another thing called were working on another thing called Salvia Divinorum, which is a whole Salvia Divinorum, which is a whole Salvia Divinorum, which is a whole another study about a hallucinogenic another study about a hallucinogenic another study about a hallucinogenic mint plant. Um but mint plant. Um but mint plant. Um but we started talking and when this guy we started talking and when this guy we started talking and when this guy came conscious and was fine by the came conscious and was fine by the came conscious and was fine by the way he quit a habit of delotted which is way he quit a habit of delotted which is way he quit a habit of delotted which is a prescription opioid cold turkey a prescription opioid cold turkey a prescription opioid cold turkey switched toratom no issues switched toratom no issues switched toratom no issues leaf and then after he had the seizure leaf and then after he had the seizure leaf and then after he had the seizure and came to in the hospital um he quit and came to in the hospital um he quit and came to in the hospital um he quit cold turkeyratom cold turkeyratom cold turkeyratom the only thing that he had was a runny the only thing that he had was a runny the only thing that he had was a runny nose and he said he had no desire to go nose and he said he had no desire to go nose and he said he had no desire to go back and take it anymore. Now, at the back and take it anymore. Now, at the back and take it anymore. Now, at the moment in time that happened, this moment in time that happened, this moment in time that happened, this was a N equals one case ever. Um, and my was a N equals one case ever. Um, and my was a N equals one case ever. Um, and my friend Ed said, "This sounds like the friend Ed said, "This sounds like the friend Ed said, "This sounds like the holy grail. If you can get off of it holy grail. If you can get off of it holy grail. If you can get off of it &gt;&gt; off the &gt;&gt; off the &gt;&gt; off the &gt;&gt; you never off the off of &gt;&gt; you never off the off of &gt;&gt; you never off the off of &gt;&gt; and now you don't even have a craving to &gt;&gt; and now you don't even have a craving to &gt;&gt; and now you don't even have a craving to go back to it." All right. Now, that's go back to it." All right. Now, that's go back to it." All right. Now, that's a huge caveat in this story. The guy had a huge caveat in this story. The guy had a huge caveat in this story. The guy had a seizure. a seizure. a seizure. So, significant event occurred that you know significant event occurred that you know significant event occurred that you know he decided at that point in time he was he decided at that point in time he was he decided at that point in time he was never going to touch him again. Speaks never going to touch him again. Speaks never going to touch him again. Speaks to the precariousness of to the precariousness of to the precariousness of polypharmarmacology done at home. polypharmarmacology done at home. polypharmarmacology done at home. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Um and uh I once took modafanil half a &gt;&gt; Um and uh I once took modafanil half a &gt;&gt; Um and uh I once took modafanil half a dose. I'm very susceptible to medication dose. I'm very susceptible to medication dose. I'm very susceptible to medication and it uh kept me up for almost two and it uh kept me up for almost two and it uh kept me up for almost two days. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; And I took it in the morning time. Some &gt;&gt; And I took it in the morning time. Some &gt;&gt; And I took it in the morning time. Some people I know can take it just fine and people I know can take it just fine and people I know can take it just fine and use it as a stimulant when and use it as a stimulant when and use it as a stimulant when traveling, especially to give talks traveling, especially to give talks traveling, especially to give talks after whatnot and for narcopsy, etc. as after whatnot and for narcopsy, etc. as after whatnot and for narcopsy, etc. as well. I'm wondering if we can have a bit well. I'm wondering if we can have a bit well. I'm wondering if we can have a bit more fun um talking about plants and more fun um talking about plants and more fun um talking about plants and some of the things that come from plants some of the things that come from plants some of the things that come from plants and their interesting uses. You and their interesting uses. You and their interesting uses. You mentioned the cocoa plant earlier. Uh, I mentioned the cocoa plant earlier. Uh, I mentioned the cocoa plant earlier. Uh, I don't think anyone except a cocaine user don't think anyone except a cocaine user don't think anyone except a cocaine user would say cocaine is a good thing. I would say cocaine is a good thing. I would say cocaine is a good thing. I mean, it seems to destroy a lot of mean, it seems to destroy a lot of mean, it seems to destroy a lot of lives. And I'm sure there are people who lives. And I'm sure there are people who lives. And I'm sure there are people who can use it at low doses or low frequency can use it at low doses or low frequency can use it at low doses or low frequency and not end up in the gutter uh in one and not end up in the gutter uh in one and not end up in the gutter uh in one way or another, but it does seem to be a way or another, but it does seem to be a way or another, but it does seem to be a fairly destructive compound on the fairly destructive compound on the fairly destructive compound on the whole. Um, and yet, as you mentioned, whole. Um, and yet, as you mentioned, whole. Um, and yet, as you mentioned, that the cocoa leaf has these that the cocoa leaf has these that the cocoa leaf has these interesting compounds when it's um used interesting compounds when it's um used interesting compounds when it's um used as a leaf product. There's a as a leaf product. There's a as a leaf product. There's a similarly sounding um leaf which is the similarly sounding um leaf which is the similarly sounding um leaf which is the cocoa leaf um uh chocolate and then cocoa leaf um uh chocolate and then cocoa leaf um uh chocolate and then there's cacao. And I'm not trying to get there's cacao. And I'm not trying to get there's cacao. And I'm not trying to get down into the um the romper room version down into the um the romper room version down into the um the romper room version of plant medicines here, but of plant medicines here, but of plant medicines here, but &gt;&gt; recently I started eating uh roasted raw &gt;&gt; recently I started eating uh roasted raw &gt;&gt; recently I started eating uh roasted raw cacao beans for their polyphenol cacao beans for their polyphenol cacao beans for their polyphenol content. I actually like the bitterness. content. I actually like the bitterness. content. I actually like the bitterness. Uh they have a lot of fiber. You have to Uh they have a lot of fiber. You have to Uh they have a lot of fiber. You have to not over consume them. You have to make not over consume them. You have to make not over consume them. You have to make sure they're clean source so you don't sure they're clean source so you don't sure they're clean source so you don't consume heavy metals, etc. Right. consume heavy metals, etc. Right. consume heavy metals, etc. Right. &gt;&gt; But um there's a lot of interesting &gt;&gt; But um there's a lot of interesting &gt;&gt; But um there's a lot of interesting healthy stuff coming from plants. So healthy stuff coming from plants. So healthy stuff coming from plants. So let's talk for a moment um if you would let's talk for a moment um if you would let's talk for a moment um if you would about uh the cocoa leaf. about uh the cocoa leaf. about uh the cocoa leaf. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And cocoa and chocolate. I like 100% &gt;&gt; And cocoa and chocolate. I like 100% &gt;&gt; And cocoa and chocolate. I like 100% chocolate. 100% Venezuelan chocolate. 100% Venezuelan chocolate. 100% Venezuelan chocolate. &gt;&gt; Delicious. People might be It sounds &gt;&gt; Delicious. People might be It sounds &gt;&gt; Delicious. People might be It sounds like baking chocolate, but it's like baking chocolate, but it's like baking chocolate, but it's smooth. It's got a bitterness, but a smooth. It's got a bitterness, but a smooth. It's got a bitterness, but a little bit of sweetness. It tickles my little bit of sweetness. It tickles my little bit of sweetness. It tickles my brain just right. It's healthy. It brain just right. It's healthy. It brain just right. It's healthy. It doesn't have sugar. I don't overdo it. doesn't have sugar. I don't overdo it. doesn't have sugar. I don't overdo it. And &gt;&gt; wow. It's it's a um it's a real &gt;&gt; wow. It's it's a um it's a real &gt;&gt; wow. It's it's a um it's a real thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I and it's delicious and I look &gt;&gt; And I and it's delicious and I look &gt;&gt; And I and it's delicious and I look forward to it and I don't feel like I'm forward to it and I don't feel like I'm forward to it and I don't feel like I'm addicted to it because I haven't had any addicted to it because I haven't had any addicted to it because I haven't had any for a little while and I'm fine, but I'm for a little while and I'm fine, but I'm for a little while and I'm fine, but I'm looking forward to it. Tell me about the looking forward to it. Tell me about the looking forward to it. Tell me about the benefits of cocoa and some of the benefits of cocoa and some of the benefits of cocoa and some of the alkaloids and other things that are in alkaloids and other things that are in alkaloids and other things that are in cocoa. This is not to send people out in cocoa. This is not to send people out in cocoa. This is not to send people out to ingest a bunch of sugar sweetened to ingest a bunch of sugar sweetened to ingest a bunch of sugar sweetened chocolate. We're talking about 100% chocolate. We're talking about 100% chocolate. We're talking about 100% cocoa or cacao beans, right? cocoa or cacao beans, right? cocoa or cacao beans, right? &gt;&gt; There's there's real medicinal power in &gt;&gt; There's there's real medicinal power in &gt;&gt; There's there's real medicinal power in this stuff. this stuff. this stuff. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There absolutely is. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah. There absolutely is. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah. There absolutely is. And and it's fascinating, too, because there's it's fascinating, too, because there's it's fascinating, too, because there's a few things that are in there, there's a few things that are in there, there's a few things that are in there, and this is not something that I'm an and this is not something that I'm an and this is not something that I'm an expert on by any means, but um playing expert on by any means, but um playing expert on by any means, but um playing around in these areas, you start to around in these areas, you start to around in these areas, you start to learn and you start to take notice. One learn and you start to take notice. One learn and you start to take notice. One of the main components in chocolate or of the main components in chocolate or of the main components in chocolate or cacao is um a compound called theob cacao is um a compound called theob cacao is um a compound called theob broine. So theob broine broine. So theob broine broine. So theob broine is an alkyoid. It is what we is an alkyoid. It is what we is an alkyoid. It is what we specifically call a zanthine alkyoid specifically call a zanthine alkyoid specifically call a zanthine alkyoid which is identically a cousin almost which is identically a cousin almost which is identically a cousin almost maybe like a maybe like a maybe like a sibling of caffeine. a sibling of caffeine. a sibling of caffeine. Okay. So, uh caffeine is a is a molecule Okay. So, uh caffeine is a is a molecule Okay. So, uh caffeine is a is a molecule again a zanthine alkyoid and it has again a zanthine alkyoid and it has again a zanthine alkyoid and it has three nitrogens that contain methyl three nitrogens that contain methyl three nitrogens that contain methyl groups on them. So a carbon with three groups on them. So a carbon with three groups on them. So a carbon with three hydrogens on them attached to the hydrogens on them attached to the hydrogens on them attached to the nitrogens. And and caffeine is a easy nitrogens. And and caffeine is a easy nitrogens. And and caffeine is a easy one to remember in this class because it one to remember in this class because it one to remember in this class because it is fully methylated. So I call it high is fully methylated. So I call it high is fully methylated. So I call it high test full caffeinated test full caffeinated test full caffeinated uh substituted zanthine alkyoin. And uh substituted zanthine alkyoin. And uh substituted zanthine alkyoin. And then theob bromine has no bromine on it. then theob bromine has no bromine on it. then theob bromine has no bromine on it. It has nothing to do with bromine. I It has nothing to do with bromine. I It has nothing to do with bromine. I have no idea where the name came from, have no idea where the name came from, have no idea where the name came from, but it's missing one of those carbons but it's missing one of those carbons but it's missing one of those carbons that makes it different from caffeine, that makes it different from caffeine, that makes it different from caffeine, but it causes stimulation. It actually but it causes stimulation. It actually but it causes stimulation. It actually improves respiration improves respiration improves respiration um when it's been studied very similar um when it's been studied very similar um when it's been studied very similar to thing things like theopheline to thing things like theopheline to thing things like theopheline um that have been used long time for um that have been used long time for um that have been used long time for asthmatics before we got to the inhalers asthmatics before we got to the inhalers asthmatics before we got to the inhalers and things evolved uh in terms of and things evolved uh in terms of and things evolved uh in terms of our understanding of that treatment. our understanding of that treatment. our understanding of that treatment. But there's also compounds within uh But there's also compounds within uh But there's also compounds within uh cacao that cacao that cacao that very much um mimic our doperic type very much um mimic our doperic type very much um mimic our doperic type system and turn us on to feeling like, system and turn us on to feeling like, system and turn us on to feeling like, you know what, that was really good. I you know what, that was really good. I you know what, that was really good. I want that again. want that again. want that again. &gt;&gt; It's not like a dopamine release that &gt;&gt; It's not like a dopamine release that &gt;&gt; It's not like a dopamine release that you get from a hardcore drug like you get from a hardcore drug like you get from a hardcore drug like cocaine or something like that. No, cocaine or something like that. No, cocaine or something like that. No, &gt;&gt; never done cocaine, but I but I agree. &gt;&gt; never done cocaine, but I but I agree. &gt;&gt; never done cocaine, but I but I agree. It's it's a subtle kind of um push It's it's a subtle kind of um push It's it's a subtle kind of um push toward yeah I'd like more of that but I toward yeah I'd like more of that but I toward yeah I'd like more of that but I feel pretty good and the feel pretty good and the feel pretty good and the anticipation of it is positive anticipation of it is positive anticipation of it is positive &gt;&gt; and you certainly can work and do &gt;&gt; and you certainly can work and do &gt;&gt; and you certainly can work and do other things. It's not uh certainly does other things. It's not uh certainly does other things. It's not uh certainly does not destroy as far as I know uh does not destroy as far as I know uh does not destroy as far as I know uh does not destroy lives. destroy lives. destroy lives. &gt;&gt; It's rewarding. Unfortunately, the &gt;&gt; It's rewarding. Unfortunately, the &gt;&gt; It's rewarding. Unfortunately, the industry to harvest industry to harvest industry to harvest is what destroys the lives, right? So is what destroys the lives, right? So is what destroys the lives, right? So there's a lot of um very poorly sourced there's a lot of um very poorly sourced there's a lot of um very poorly sourced and many of the individuals that and many of the individuals that and many of the individuals that work those fields uh and places are that work those fields uh and places are that work those fields uh and places are really abused and it it's a problem are really abused and it it's a problem are really abused and it it's a problem in the in the chocolate industry as a in the in the chocolate industry as a in the in the chocolate industry as a whole. There's there's some really great whole. There's there's some really great whole. There's there's some really great companies out there that are really companies out there that are really companies out there that are really promoting good sustainably sourced, promoting good sustainably sourced, promoting good sustainably sourced, ethically sourced uh cacao beans. And ethically sourced uh cacao beans. And ethically sourced uh cacao beans. And and you know, that's just a side and you know, that's just a side and you know, that's just a side note for something to look for when note for something to look for when note for something to look for when you're looking for a good solid um solid you're looking for a good solid um solid you're looking for a good solid um solid chocolate source. chocolate source. chocolate source. &gt;&gt; So, ethically sourced. And and you &gt;&gt; So, ethically sourced. And and you &gt;&gt; So, ethically sourced. And and you mentioned cacao beans. So, the mentioned cacao beans. So, the mentioned cacao beans. So, the raw cacao beans that I'm now eating raw cacao beans that I'm now eating raw cacao beans that I'm now eating every morning. Um, usually a not every morning. Um, usually a not every morning. Um, usually a not immediately in the morning, usually like immediately in the morning, usually like immediately in the morning, usually like half hour before my first meal of the half hour before my first meal of the half hour before my first meal of the day, which for me falls a little bit day, which for me falls a little bit day, which for me falls a little bit late morning or closer to lunch, but late morning or closer to lunch, but late morning or closer to lunch, but I'll have five or 10 of those things. I'll have five or 10 of those things. I'll have five or 10 of those things. Boy, do I look forward to it as I Boy, do I look forward to it as I Boy, do I look forward to it as I mentioned. And and those raw cacao beans mentioned. And and those raw cacao beans mentioned. And and those raw cacao beans are essentially the same as the 100% are essentially the same as the 100% are essentially the same as the 100% chocolate in terms of polyphenol content chocolate in terms of polyphenol content chocolate in terms of polyphenol content &gt;&gt; pretty much. I think I mean again I'm &gt;&gt; pretty much. I think I mean again I'm &gt;&gt; pretty much. I think I mean again I'm not an expert and I haven't done not an expert and I haven't done not an expert and I haven't done analysis of those but I'm pretty analysis of those but I'm pretty analysis of those but I'm pretty sure that most of those would be sure that most of those would be sure that most of those would be retained in the processing um into retained in the processing um into retained in the processing um into chocolate as a food. Um you know one chocolate as a food. Um you know one chocolate as a food. Um you know one thing that strikes me is probably one of thing that strikes me is probably one of thing that strikes me is probably one of the first things I ever learned of a the first things I ever learned of a the first things I ever learned of a natural product was the shells for the natural product was the shells for the natural product was the shells for the beans. So, uh, growing up as a kid in beans. So, uh, growing up as a kid in beans. So, uh, growing up as a kid in Pittsburgh, um, there was a lot of rose Pittsburgh, um, there was a lot of rose Pittsburgh, um, there was a lot of rose bushes around and people would use, um, bushes around and people would use, um, bushes around and people would use, um, cacao shells as a fertilizer for the cacao shells as a fertilizer for the cacao shells as a fertilizer for the rose bushes. And so, you would walk by rose bushes. And so, you would walk by rose bushes. And so, you would walk by and as a kid, I would get this waft of and as a kid, I would get this waft of and as a kid, I would get this waft of chocolatey smell chocolatey smell chocolatey smell um, along with that smell of the roses, um, along with that smell of the roses, um, along with that smell of the roses, you know, and it's like, what a you know, and it's like, what a you know, and it's like, what a Valentine's Day. Valentine's Day. Valentine's Day. &gt;&gt; It's like these things were meant to be &gt;&gt; It's like these things were meant to be &gt;&gt; It's like these things were meant to be together. So, it's just a weird side note, just a So, it's just a weird side note, just a So, it's just a weird side note, just a memory that you brought back. But memory that you brought back. But memory that you brought back. But &gt;&gt; I love that. And I really think there's &gt;&gt; I love that. And I really think there's &gt;&gt; I love that. And I really think there's something uh pseudospiritual or something uh pseudospiritual or something uh pseudospiritual or spiritual about these combinations of spiritual about these combinations of spiritual about these combinations of molecules that exist in plants. And molecules that exist in plants. And molecules that exist in plants. And sure, the plants are fending for sure, the plants are fending for sure, the plants are fending for themselves and the fungi are fending for themselves and the fungi are fending for themselves and the fungi are fending for themselves and the birds and the geckos themselves and the birds and the geckos themselves and the birds and the geckos and the humans, but the same biological and the humans, but the same biological and the humans, but the same biological um motifs um motifs um motifs &gt;&gt; are used over and over again throughout &gt;&gt; are used over and over again throughout &gt;&gt; are used over and over again throughout nature. Um, and of course some nature. Um, and of course some nature. Um, and of course some species like insect species rely more on species like insect species rely more on species like insect species rely more on one neurom modulator. We're more a one neurom modulator. We're more a one neurom modulator. We're more a cocktail of cocktail of cocktail of &gt;&gt; serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine, and &gt;&gt; serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine, and &gt;&gt; serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine, and acetylcholine. Uh, and acetylcholine. Uh, and acetylcholine. Uh, &gt;&gt; but there does seem to be um &gt;&gt; but there does seem to be um &gt;&gt; but there does seem to be um something to it. Maybe AI will pull out something to it. Maybe AI will pull out something to it. Maybe AI will pull out some of the um some of the thematics of some of the um some of the thematics of some of the um some of the thematics of that going forward. So, cacao, great. that going forward. So, cacao, great. that going forward. So, cacao, great. So, I'm not alone in my um love of raw So, I'm not alone in my um love of raw So, I'm not alone in my um love of raw cacao beans and 100% chocolate, but look cacao beans and 100% chocolate, but look cacao beans and 100% chocolate, but look for sustainably sourced. Um, for sustainably sourced. Um, for sustainably sourced. Um, &gt;&gt; ethically sourced. &gt;&gt; ethically sourced. &gt;&gt; ethically sourced. &gt;&gt; Ethically, excuse me, ethically sourced. &gt;&gt; Ethically, excuse me, ethically sourced. &gt;&gt; Ethically, excuse me, ethically sourced. Now, that's an important distinction. Now, that's an important distinction. Now, that's an important distinction. So, there's a myth that Coca-Cola at one So, there's a myth that Coca-Cola at one So, there's a myth that Coca-Cola at one point had cocaine in it. Not just the point had cocaine in it. Not just the point had cocaine in it. Not just the coca leaf, but actual cocaine. But then coca leaf, but actual cocaine. But then coca leaf, but actual cocaine. But then you hear various versions of this you hear various versions of this you hear various versions of this mythleend. Uh what's the deal with Coca-Cola, the Uh what's the deal with Coca-Cola, the Uh what's the deal with Coca-Cola, the coca leaf and cocaine? coca leaf and cocaine? coca leaf and cocaine? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's a it's a great old story. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's a it's a great old story. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's a it's a great old story. John Peton was a pharmacist in Atlanta, John Peton was a pharmacist in Atlanta, John Peton was a pharmacist in Atlanta, um home of Coca-Cola these days, uh and um home of Coca-Cola these days, uh and um home of Coca-Cola these days, uh and developed a formula uh that developed a formula uh that developed a formula uh that contained the cocoa leaf extract from contained the cocoa leaf extract from contained the cocoa leaf extract from the cocoa leaf and extract from the cola the cocoa leaf and extract from the cola the cocoa leaf and extract from the cola nut. So, Coca-Cola nut. So, Coca-Cola nut. So, Coca-Cola uh and put this together, sold it as a uh and put this together, sold it as a uh and put this together, sold it as a tonic. It's an interesting just a quick tonic. It's an interesting just a quick tonic. It's an interesting just a quick segue on soft drinks in general. So soft segue on soft drinks in general. So soft segue on soft drinks in general. So soft drinks came about because they weren't drinks came about because they weren't drinks came about because they weren't hard drinks. So it was an alternative to hard drinks. So it was an alternative to hard drinks. So it was an alternative to liquor. So they weren't hard alcohol, liquor. So they weren't hard alcohol, liquor. So they weren't hard alcohol, they were soft drinks or soft beverages. they were soft drinks or soft beverages. they were soft drinks or soft beverages. They also generally had effervescence to They also generally had effervescence to They also generally had effervescence to them or carbonation. Uh and most of them or carbonation. Uh and most of them or carbonation. Uh and most of those were available at a pharmacist those were available at a pharmacist those were available at a pharmacist soda fountain. So, Seven Up had lithium soda fountain. So, Seven Up had lithium soda fountain. So, Seven Up had lithium in it in the past and it was um you know in it in the past and it was um you know in it in the past and it was um you know for mind wellness. Um Pepsi had for mind wellness. Um Pepsi had for mind wellness. Um Pepsi had pepsinogen which is a digestive peptide pepsinogen which is a digestive peptide pepsinogen which is a digestive peptide in it. Um most of the soft drinks Dr. in it. Um most of the soft drinks Dr. in it. Um most of the soft drinks Dr. Pepper was developed by Dr. Pepper in Pepper was developed by Dr. Pepper in Pepper was developed by Dr. Pepper in Waco, Texas and was a special formula Waco, Texas and was a special formula Waco, Texas and was a special formula that he had come up with for well-being that he had come up with for well-being that he had come up with for well-being as well. So all these soft drinks have a as well. So all these soft drinks have a as well. So all these soft drinks have a really cool history, but John Peton's really cool history, but John Peton's really cool history, but John Peton's story of Coca-Cola story of Coca-Cola story of Coca-Cola was actually it goes way back further than actually it goes way back further than actually it goes way back further than Coca-Cola in terms of putting uh Coca Coca-Cola in terms of putting uh Coca Coca-Cola in terms of putting uh Coca Leaf into beverages. Um but we'll Leaf into beverages. Um but we'll Leaf into beverages. Um but we'll just stick with Coca-Cola. So Coca-Cola just stick with Coca-Cola. So Coca-Cola just stick with Coca-Cola. So Coca-Cola um definitely had cocaine in it in um definitely had cocaine in it in um definitely had cocaine in it in its original setting. Um, and then as its original setting. Um, and then as its original setting. Um, and then as time went on and we realized that time went on and we realized that time went on and we realized that cocaine was problematic and addictive, cocaine was problematic and addictive, cocaine was problematic and addictive, um, there was pressure for him to take um, there was pressure for him to take um, there was pressure for him to take that out of the process. And so, and that out of the process. And so, and that out of the process. And so, and what they realized was the cocoa leaf what they realized was the cocoa leaf what they realized was the cocoa leaf and many people that chew cocoa leaf and many people that chew cocoa leaf and many people that chew cocoa leaf talk about the different varieties that talk about the different varieties that talk about the different varieties that are available within South uh, America are available within South uh, America are available within South uh, America and different flavor profiles that are and different flavor profiles that are and different flavor profiles that are there. Well, the specific um one there. Well, the specific um one there. Well, the specific um one that they use for Coca-Cola has a that they use for Coca-Cola has a that they use for Coca-Cola has a definitive flavor profile to it. And definitive flavor profile to it. And definitive flavor profile to it. And when they took that out, it lost the when they took that out, it lost the when they took that out, it lost the flavor that people were used to. Um and flavor that people were used to. Um and flavor that people were used to. Um and so they decided to keep this in so they decided to keep this in so they decided to keep this in there. And Coca-Cola is still the major there. And Coca-Cola is still the major there. And Coca-Cola is still the major importer of cocoa leaves into the United importer of cocoa leaves into the United importer of cocoa leaves into the United States to this day. They do it through a States to this day. They do it through a States to this day. They do it through a company called the Stan Company in New company called the Stan Company in New company called the Stan Company in New Jersey. The leaf comes from uh Peru. Uh comes The leaf comes from uh Peru. Uh comes The leaf comes from uh Peru. Uh comes from a state-run company in Peru that from a state-run company in Peru that from a state-run company in Peru that oversees the production of the cocoa oversees the production of the cocoa oversees the production of the cocoa leaf. Comes into uh this company in New leaf. Comes into uh this company in New leaf. Comes into uh this company in New Jersey. They then process the leaf into Jersey. They then process the leaf into Jersey. They then process the leaf into um two parts. So they take all of the um two parts. So they take all of the um two parts. So they take all of the cocaine and all of the cocaine and all of the cocaine and all of the cocaine metabolites essentially the alkyoids, metabolites essentially the alkyoids, metabolites essentially the alkyoids, right? We talked about these alkaloids. right? We talked about these alkaloids. right? We talked about these alkaloids. They take the alkaloids out and that They take the alkaloids out and that They take the alkaloids out and that gets sent to a pharmaceutical company gets sent to a pharmaceutical company gets sent to a pharmaceutical company and those are processed into cocaine and those are processed into cocaine and those are processed into cocaine which is used as a pharmaceutical still which is used as a pharmaceutical still which is used as a pharmaceutical still to this day. Um, a lot of people to this day. Um, a lot of people to this day. Um, a lot of people probably don't know this but cocaine is probably don't know this but cocaine is probably don't know this but cocaine is the best local anesthetic that's ever the best local anesthetic that's ever the best local anesthetic that's ever been discovered. Uh, it was the template been discovered. Uh, it was the template been discovered. Uh, it was the template for all the local anesthetics that we for all the local anesthetics that we for all the local anesthetics that we use now like lidocaine or bivocaine. use now like lidocaine or bivocaine. use now like lidocaine or bivocaine. um it was the template and it is still um it was the template and it is still um it was the template and it is still the best one that we have and it's used the best one that we have and it's used the best one that we have and it's used almost exclusively for nasal and eye almost exclusively for nasal and eye almost exclusively for nasal and eye surgeries now where you have to stay surgeries now where you have to stay surgeries now where you have to stay awake and you have to be functioning and awake and you have to be functioning and awake and you have to be functioning and we can't intubate you and we can't do we can't intubate you and we can't do we can't intubate you and we can't do these things. So this is the ideal uh these things. So this is the ideal uh these things. So this is the ideal uh drug. Um it's also obviously put into drug. Um it's also obviously put into drug. Um it's also obviously put into lots of drug testing kits and supplies lots of drug testing kits and supplies lots of drug testing kits and supplies and whatnot for the forensics and whatnot for the forensics and whatnot for the forensics industries. But what's the fate of what's left, But what's the fate of what's left, But what's the fate of what's left, right? Well, that cocoa leaf extract, right? Well, that cocoa leaf extract, right? Well, that cocoa leaf extract, the dekalinated extract, deccoonized the dekalinated extract, deccoonized the dekalinated extract, deccoonized extract if you will, um, is the secret extract if you will, um, is the secret extract if you will, um, is the secret sauce if you will, for Coca-Cola still. sauce if you will, for Coca-Cola still. sauce if you will, for Coca-Cola still. So, that is a grass substance, G RA, So, that is a grass substance, G RA, So, that is a grass substance, G RA, generally recognized as safe food generally recognized as safe food generally recognized as safe food substance, and that is the flavoring substance, and that is the flavoring substance, and that is the flavoring agent that gives Coca-Cola its unique agent that gives Coca-Cola its unique agent that gives Coca-Cola its unique flavor. And there was a period of time, flavor. And there was a period of time, flavor. And there was a period of time, I believe it was in the 80s, where I believe it was in the 80s, where I believe it was in the 80s, where Coca-Cola um really wanted to distance itself from um really wanted to distance itself from um really wanted to distance itself from the cocaine industry. Cocaine became the cocaine industry. Cocaine became the cocaine industry. Cocaine became hugely um the drug of choice, sort of hugely um the drug of choice, sort of hugely um the drug of choice, sort of drug of abuse. Uh len bias, one NBA drug of abuse. Uh len bias, one NBA drug of abuse. Uh len bias, one NBA basketball player died from an overdose. basketball player died from an overdose. basketball player died from an overdose. It just became a very nationally It just became a very nationally It just became a very nationally uh aware drug of abuse and there was a uh aware drug of abuse and there was a uh aware drug of abuse and there was a problem associated with cocaine. And so problem associated with cocaine. And so problem associated with cocaine. And so Coca-Cola said, "We're going to cut our Coca-Cola said, "We're going to cut our Coca-Cola said, "We're going to cut our ties with the cocoa plant completely." ties with the cocoa plant completely." ties with the cocoa plant completely." They came out with this product called They came out with this product called They came out with this product called New Coke. And it didn't last long New Coke. And it didn't last long New Coke. And it didn't last long because the flavor profile couldn't be because the flavor profile couldn't be because the flavor profile couldn't be replicated to the old Coke. And uh so replicated to the old Coke. And uh so replicated to the old Coke. And uh so indeed they re uh re-uped their indeed they re uh re-uped their indeed they re uh re-uped their sort of contract uh and have been sort of contract uh and have been sort of contract uh and have been bringing it in ever since. And to this bringing it in ever since. And to this bringing it in ever since. And to this day, uh, Coca-Cola Classic day, uh, Coca-Cola Classic day, uh, Coca-Cola Classic and Coke Zero are the two products. and Coke Zero are the two products. and Coke Zero are the two products. Interestingly enough, um, you know, Diet Interestingly enough, um, you know, Diet Interestingly enough, um, you know, Diet Coke does not taste very much like Coke does not taste very much like Coke does not taste very much like Coca-Cola original. And a lot of people Coca-Cola original. And a lot of people Coca-Cola original. And a lot of people complained about that for a long time. complained about that for a long time. complained about that for a long time. Um, they got smart and made this product Um, they got smart and made this product Um, they got smart and made this product called Coke Zero that has the flavoring called Coke Zero that has the flavoring called Coke Zero that has the flavoring agent from the cocoa plant in it. And lo agent from the cocoa plant in it. And lo agent from the cocoa plant in it. And lo and behold, everyone started saying, and behold, everyone started saying, and behold, everyone started saying, "Gosh, this tastes a lot more like "Gosh, this tastes a lot more like "Gosh, this tastes a lot more like Coca-Cola does." Well, yeah, it's got Coca-Cola does." Well, yeah, it's got Coca-Cola does." Well, yeah, it's got the flavoring ingredient in it. And so, the flavoring ingredient in it. And so, the flavoring ingredient in it. And so, everybody in the United States almost everybody in the United States almost everybody in the United States almost has had a Coke at one point in a time. has had a Coke at one point in a time. has had a Coke at one point in a time. So, you've all had Coca Leaf already in So, you've all had Coca Leaf already in So, you've all had Coca Leaf already in your dietary chain. And I think it'll be your dietary chain. And I think it'll be your dietary chain. And I think it'll be interesting to see where things develop interesting to see where things develop interesting to see where things develop as we start to do more research as the as we start to do more research as the as we start to do more research as the World Health Organization reconsiders um World Health Organization reconsiders um World Health Organization reconsiders um removing uh cocoa leaf from an removing uh cocoa leaf from an removing uh cocoa leaf from an international ban and looking at it international ban and looking at it international ban and looking at it as a potential product to work into food as a potential product to work into food as a potential product to work into food products and develop um further. And so, products and develop um further. And so, products and develop um further. And so, you know, it supposedly has no abuse you know, it supposedly has no abuse you know, it supposedly has no abuse potential as the leaf. Um, but again, potential as the leaf. Um, but again, potential as the leaf. Um, but again, it's that story of isolating that one it's that story of isolating that one it's that story of isolating that one alkyoid out and sort of destroying the alkyoid out and sort of destroying the alkyoid out and sort of destroying the rest of it forever. However, Coca-Cola rest of it forever. However, Coca-Cola rest of it forever. However, Coca-Cola was smart enough to keep sort of a was smart enough to keep sort of a was smart enough to keep sort of a monopoly, if you will, on keeping monopoly, if you will, on keeping monopoly, if you will, on keeping that plant alive uh in their product. that plant alive uh in their product. that plant alive uh in their product. And so, it's there. And um the next And so, it's there. And um the next And so, it's there. And um the next time you have a Coca-Cola or a Coke time you have a Coca-Cola or a Coke time you have a Coca-Cola or a Coke Zero, uh just realize that it's got Zero, uh just realize that it's got Zero, uh just realize that it's got natural product in it. natural product in it. natural product in it. &gt;&gt; That's incredible. And I'll keep that in &gt;&gt; That's incredible. And I'll keep that in &gt;&gt; That's incredible. And I'll keep that in mind the next time I have a Coke Zero. mind the next time I have a Coke Zero. mind the next time I have a Coke Zero. Is there any evidence that what's still Is there any evidence that what's still Is there any evidence that what's still retained from the cocoa plant in retained from the cocoa plant in retained from the cocoa plant in Coca-Cola is psychoactive and not just Coca-Cola is psychoactive and not just Coca-Cola is psychoactive and not just there for flavor? there for flavor? there for flavor? &gt;&gt; That's a great question and that's been &gt;&gt; That's a great question and that's been &gt;&gt; That's a great question and that's been debated quite a bit. So the one thing debated quite a bit. So the one thing debated quite a bit. So the one thing that we know um is that probably it is that we know um is that probably it is that we know um is that probably it is not having any psychoactivity. not having any psychoactivity. not having any psychoactivity. Um and the other thing that we know Um and the other thing that we know Um and the other thing that we know um back to my pharmacy days, we used to um back to my pharmacy days, we used to um back to my pharmacy days, we used to sell Coke syrup. So when Coke is sold uh sell Coke syrup. So when Coke is sold uh sell Coke syrup. So when Coke is sold uh for fountain beverages um it's the for fountain beverages um it's the for fountain beverages um it's the syrup that's then blended with the syrup that's then blended with the syrup that's then blended with the carbonated water uh to make Coca-Cola. carbonated water uh to make Coca-Cola. carbonated water uh to make Coca-Cola. And that's why a lot of people say co And that's why a lot of people say co And that's why a lot of people say co Coca-Cola out of a fountain is so much Coca-Cola out of a fountain is so much Coca-Cola out of a fountain is so much better than out of a can or a bottle better than out of a can or a bottle better than out of a can or a bottle because it is it is a sort of formulated because it is it is a sort of formulated because it is it is a sort of formulated on the spot product if you will. Um yeah on the spot product if you will. Um yeah on the spot product if you will. Um yeah on tap and um Coke syrup we used to sell on tap and um Coke syrup we used to sell on tap and um Coke syrup we used to sell out of the pharmacy for uh nausea and out of the pharmacy for uh nausea and out of the pharmacy for uh nausea and vomiting particularly in pregnant women vomiting particularly in pregnant women vomiting particularly in pregnant women is one of the safest things you could is one of the safest things you could is one of the safest things you could use and it really calms and settles the use and it really calms and settles the use and it really calms and settles the GI tract. And this is interesting GI tract. And this is interesting GI tract. And this is interesting because one of the big um because one of the big um because one of the big um benefits that people report drinking benefits that people report drinking benefits that people report drinking coca tea is that it soothes their GI coca tea is that it soothes their GI coca tea is that it soothes their GI tract and it calms their GI tract and it tract and it calms their GI tract and it tract and it calms their GI tract and it helps um them be able to be alert. Of helps um them be able to be alert. Of helps um them be able to be alert. Of course, the coca tea's got all the course, the coca tea's got all the course, the coca tea's got all the alkyoids in it, but that same GI tract alkyoids in it, but that same GI tract alkyoids in it, but that same GI tract benefit is still there. And that's benefit is still there. And that's benefit is still there. And that's probably what's still remaining within probably what's still remaining within probably what's still remaining within that extract that's now devoid of the that extract that's now devoid of the that extract that's now devoid of the alkyoids. &gt;&gt; And you are not paid for by Coca-Cola. &gt;&gt; And you are not paid for by Coca-Cola. &gt;&gt; And you are not paid for by Coca-Cola. &gt;&gt; No. In fact, we went to Coca-Cola to see &gt;&gt; No. In fact, we went to Coca-Cola to see &gt;&gt; No. In fact, we went to Coca-Cola to see if we could work um with them on if we could work um with them on if we could work um with them on developing uh some type of medications developing uh some type of medications developing uh some type of medications or something from the cocoa leaf. And or something from the cocoa leaf. And or something from the cocoa leaf. And uh I have a former um colleague that is uh I have a former um colleague that is uh I have a former um colleague that is in their natural products division at in their natural products division at in their natural products division at Coca-Cola and they said they won't even Coca-Cola and they said they won't even Coca-Cola and they said they won't even let us touch the cocoa extract. let us touch the cocoa extract. let us touch the cocoa extract. &gt;&gt; Well, and they've also got all that &gt;&gt; Well, and they've also got all that &gt;&gt; Well, and they've also got all that cocaine that they've pulled out of the cocaine that they've pulled out of the cocaine that they've pulled out of the cocoa leaf in this plant in New Jersey. cocoa leaf in this plant in New Jersey. cocoa leaf in this plant in New Jersey. I can only imagine what the security is I can only imagine what the security is I can only imagine what the security is on this place. on this place. on this place. &gt;&gt; I don't I don't know. But if you &gt;&gt; I don't I don't know. But if you &gt;&gt; I don't I don't know. But if you know you can you can fact check me on know you can you can fact check me on know you can you can fact check me on Wikipedia or which is not a great place Wikipedia or which is not a great place Wikipedia or which is not a great place to fact check but uh got my agreement to fact check but uh got my agreement to fact check but uh got my agreement there. But the but this the Ston company there. But the but this the Ston company there. But the but this the Ston company is listed there in New Jersey and their is listed there in New Jersey and their is listed there in New Jersey and their connection to Coca-Cola and this whole connection to Coca-Cola and this whole connection to Coca-Cola and this whole this whole story is actually out there this whole story is actually out there this whole story is actually out there in front of everybody to see. Um it just in front of everybody to see. Um it just in front of everybody to see. Um it just takes knowing where to look and find it. takes knowing where to look and find it. takes knowing where to look and find it. &gt;&gt; Love it. Last question about soda. Is &gt;&gt; Love it. Last question about soda. Is &gt;&gt; Love it. Last question about soda. Is there still lithium in Seven Up? No, there still lithium in Seven Up? No, there still lithium in Seven Up? No, lithium has gone from seven up. But that lithium has gone from seven up. But that lithium has gone from seven up. But that was the whole idea, right? Up mood, lift was the whole idea, right? Up mood, lift was the whole idea, right? Up mood, lift your mood up. Lithium. And we know your mood up. Lithium. And we know your mood up. Lithium. And we know lithium carbonate is still used to this lithium carbonate is still used to this lithium carbonate is still used to this day as a treatment for uh psychosis. So, day as a treatment for uh psychosis. So, day as a treatment for uh psychosis. So, &gt;&gt; I'm curious a bit about you. You know, &gt;&gt; I'm curious a bit about you. You know, &gt;&gt; I'm curious a bit about you. You know, like uh I know a few chemists. Um there like uh I know a few chemists. Um there like uh I know a few chemists. Um there are a couple good jokes about chemists. are a couple good jokes about chemists. are a couple good jokes about chemists. Um, but it's clear that you love Um, but it's clear that you love Um, but it's clear that you love chemistry and you love the chemistry of chemistry and you love the chemistry of chemistry and you love the chemistry of plants and you're also interested in plants and you're also interested in plants and you're also interested in public health and you're interested in public health and you're interested in public health and you're interested in I'm gathering I'm not a psychologist but I'm gathering I'm not a psychologist but I'm gathering I'm not a psychologist but kind of this the psychology behind kind of this the psychology behind kind of this the psychology behind all of this as well. Um, when you were a all of this as well. Um, when you were a all of this as well. Um, when you were a kid were you always were you playing kid were you always were you playing kid were you always were you playing with a chemistry set? with a chemistry set? with a chemistry set? &gt;&gt; Yeah, you would think, right? No, I &gt;&gt; Yeah, you would think, right? No, I &gt;&gt; Yeah, you would think, right? No, I Interestingly enough, my father was a Interestingly enough, my father was a Interestingly enough, my father was a pharmacist and I just never really um pharmacist and I just never really um pharmacist and I just never really um I never really paid attention, but I was I never really paid attention, but I was I never really paid attention, but I was always under tow. Uh and so I saw what always under tow. Uh and so I saw what always under tow. Uh and so I saw what he did and I, you know, I'd see him he did and I, you know, I'd see him he did and I, you know, I'd see him behind a counter at a store somewhere. behind a counter at a store somewhere. behind a counter at a store somewhere. um and just never really thought much um and just never really thought much um and just never really thought much about it. But I knew that he knew a lot about it. But I knew that he knew a lot about it. But I knew that he knew a lot about medicines and he knew a lot about medicines and he knew a lot about medicines and he knew a lot about um healthc care and what he was um healthc care and what he was um healthc care and what he was doing was really trying to benefit doing was really trying to benefit doing was really trying to benefit people and help people. Um and I people and help people. Um and I people and help people. Um and I always thought that to be noble. My always thought that to be noble. My always thought that to be noble. My mother uh interestingly, she was a mother uh interestingly, she was a mother uh interestingly, she was a stay-at-home mom, raised us kids, um but stay-at-home mom, raised us kids, um but stay-at-home mom, raised us kids, um but was very much into education and was a was very much into education and was a was very much into education and was a teacher prior to myself being born. I'm teacher prior to myself being born. I'm teacher prior to myself being born. I'm the oldest. I have a sister um younger the oldest. I have a sister um younger the oldest. I have a sister um younger sister Lisa who's uh a nurse by the way, sister Lisa who's uh a nurse by the way, sister Lisa who's uh a nurse by the way, nurse practitioner. Um, so medicine has nurse practitioner. Um, so medicine has nurse practitioner. Um, so medicine has stayed within the family and science has stayed within the family and science has stayed within the family and science has stayed within the family, but my mother stayed within the family, but my mother stayed within the family, but my mother once we were old enough uh to be on our once we were old enough uh to be on our once we were old enough uh to be on our own, if you will, she went back and own, if you will, she went back and own, if you will, she went back and became a comprehensive science teacher became a comprehensive science teacher became a comprehensive science teacher at the high school level. And so just at the high school level. And so just at the high school level. And so just watching her work through getting her watching her work through getting her watching her work through getting her reertification education process and how reertification education process and how reertification education process and how passionate she was about um educating passionate she was about um educating passionate she was about um educating others uh obviously stuck with me as others uh obviously stuck with me as others uh obviously stuck with me as well. And so those are the things well. And so those are the things well. And so those are the things that drove me. I have no idea where the that drove me. I have no idea where the that drove me. I have no idea where the sort of I really think innate the sort of I really think innate the sort of I really think innate passion came for the chemistry side passion came for the chemistry side passion came for the chemistry side of things, but when I was in high of things, but when I was in high of things, but when I was in high school, I did an independent uh school, I did an independent uh school, I did an independent uh chemistry project to go coming back to chemistry project to go coming back to chemistry project to go coming back to caffeine. Uh caffeine. Uh caffeine. Uh &gt;&gt; I was just curious like what what's the &gt;&gt; I was just curious like what what's the &gt;&gt; I was just curious like what what's the best caffeinated beverage for me to be best caffeinated beverage for me to be best caffeinated beverage for me to be drinking so I can stay up as late as I drinking so I can stay up as late as I drinking so I can stay up as late as I can and have fun. Well, at the time it can and have fun. Well, at the time it can and have fun. Well, at the time it was Jola, which doesn't exist anymore, was Jola, which doesn't exist anymore, was Jola, which doesn't exist anymore, right? But Jolt Cola, uh Mountain Dew right? But Jolt Cola, uh Mountain Dew right? But Jolt Cola, uh Mountain Dew was second. Um, was second. Um, was second. Um, &gt;&gt; yeah. Drank a lot of D Mountain Dew in &gt;&gt; yeah. Drank a lot of D Mountain Dew in &gt;&gt; yeah. Drank a lot of D Mountain Dew in graduate school. I can't say I recommend graduate school. I can't say I recommend graduate school. I can't say I recommend it, but it, but it, but &gt;&gt; No. And I mean that was our I was a &gt;&gt; No. And I mean that was our I was a &gt;&gt; No. And I mean that was our I was a band geek in high school and um band geek in high school and um band geek in high school and um &gt;&gt; what instrument? &gt;&gt; what instrument? &gt;&gt; what instrument? &gt;&gt; I played trumpet and I played piano and &gt;&gt; I played trumpet and I played piano and &gt;&gt; I played trumpet and I played piano and uh a bunch of buddies and I would get uh a bunch of buddies and I would get uh a bunch of buddies and I would get together on Friday nights and we would together on Friday nights and we would together on Friday nights and we would drink a case of Mountain Dew. You know, drink a case of Mountain Dew. You know, drink a case of Mountain Dew. You know, it was like everyone else is out it was like everyone else is out it was like everyone else is out drinking beer. We were doing musical drinking beer. We were doing musical drinking beer. We were doing musical things and drinking Mountain Dew. things and drinking Mountain Dew. things and drinking Mountain Dew. So, it was kind of crazy. But um I just So, it was kind of crazy. But um I just So, it was kind of crazy. But um I just wanted to know what was there, right? wanted to know what was there, right? wanted to know what was there, right? And I wanted to see and I got Vibrin And I wanted to see and I got Vibrin And I wanted to see and I got Vibrin tablets and I extracted the caffeine out tablets and I extracted the caffeine out tablets and I extracted the caffeine out of the Vibrin tablets to quantify how of the Vibrin tablets to quantify how of the Vibrin tablets to quantify how much caffeine was in those. And um still much caffeine was in those. And um still much caffeine was in those. And um still I didn't really think anything of it. I didn't really think anything of it. I didn't really think anything of it. And I decided uh very late in my high And I decided uh very late in my high And I decided uh very late in my high school career that I needed to do school career that I needed to do school career that I needed to do something with my life. I was bored in something with my life. I was bored in something with my life. I was bored in high school. I did not do well. I was high school. I did not do well. I was high school. I did not do well. I was not a great student. I think if I was not a great student. I think if I was not a great student. I think if I was lucky, I graduated with a 3.0 from high lucky, I graduated with a 3.0 from high lucky, I graduated with a 3.0 from high school. Um, and my father said, "You you school. Um, and my father said, "You you school. Um, and my father said, "You you need to decide on something." And and so need to decide on something." And and so need to decide on something." And and so we I said, "Well, pharmacy looks like we I said, "Well, pharmacy looks like we I said, "Well, pharmacy looks like it's been pretty good to you and our it's been pretty good to you and our it's been pretty good to you and our family. We've had a good a good life." I family. We've had a good a good life." I family. We've had a good a good life." I went to pharmacy school and in pharmacy went to pharmacy school and in pharmacy went to pharmacy school and in pharmacy school um taking biochemistry school um taking biochemistry school um taking biochemistry and my first medicinal chemistry course and my first medicinal chemistry course and my first medicinal chemistry course I got taught by a brand new assistant I got taught by a brand new assistant I got taught by a brand new assistant professor someone very relatable uh you professor someone very relatable uh you professor someone very relatable uh you know close in age um just thought the know close in age um just thought the know close in age um just thought the world of this guy and he said hey I'm world of this guy and he said hey I'm world of this guy and he said hey I'm looking for anybody who's interested in looking for anybody who's interested in looking for anybody who's interested in working in a lab to come work in a working in a lab to come work in a working in a lab to come work in a lab and I was like chemistry he's cool lab and I was like chemistry he's cool lab and I was like chemistry he's cool I'd like to didn't know him. So, I went I'd like to didn't know him. So, I went I'd like to didn't know him. So, I went to the lab. Started working in a lab. to the lab. Started working in a lab. to the lab. Started working in a lab. Um, and he told me, he said, "You know, Um, and he told me, he said, "You know, Um, and he told me, he said, "You know, you have some gift here or some you have some gift here or some you have some gift here or some talent. You should really explore it." talent. You should really explore it." talent. You should really explore it." I'm like, "Ah, I'm going to be a I'm like, "Ah, I'm going to be a I'm like, "Ah, I'm going to be a pharmacist." What are you talking about? pharmacist." What are you talking about? pharmacist." What are you talking about? Said, "No, I'm going to set you up with Said, "No, I'm going to set you up with Said, "No, I'm going to set you up with my PhD adviser," which happened to be my PhD adviser," which happened to be my PhD adviser," which happened to be the guy who tasted the stuff I talked the guy who tasted the stuff I talked the guy who tasted the stuff I talked about earlier, um, down at the about earlier, um, down at the about earlier, um, down at the University of Georgia for the summer. University of Georgia for the summer. University of Georgia for the summer. And so I went down and did a summer And so I went down and did a summer And so I went down and did a summer intensive research program um in intensive research program um in intensive research program um in medicinal chemistry at the College of medicinal chemistry at the College of medicinal chemistry at the College of Pharmacy at the University of Georgia. Pharmacy at the University of Georgia. Pharmacy at the University of Georgia. And um left there, went back to Ohio And um left there, went back to Ohio And um left there, went back to Ohio Northern University where I did my Northern University where I did my Northern University where I did my pharmacy degree. Finished out all my pharmacy degree. Finished out all my pharmacy degree. Finished out all my clinical rotations. I was getting ready clinical rotations. I was getting ready clinical rotations. I was getting ready to graduate and take my boards and to graduate and take my boards and to graduate and take my boards and become a pharmacist. And the phone rang. become a pharmacist. And the phone rang. become a pharmacist. And the phone rang. This was back before cell phones. Uh, so This was back before cell phones. Uh, so This was back before cell phones. Uh, so I'm dating myself obviously, but phone I'm dating myself obviously, but phone I'm dating myself obviously, but phone rang at home and I happened to be home rang at home and I happened to be home rang at home and I happened to be home because I was doing a local rotation because I was doing a local rotation because I was doing a local rotation near home so I could save money. Um, and near home so I could save money. Um, and near home so I could save money. Um, and it was the department chair of medicinal it was the department chair of medicinal it was the department chair of medicinal chemistry from the University of Georgia chemistry from the University of Georgia chemistry from the University of Georgia and says, "We don't have your and says, "We don't have your and says, "We don't have your application for graduate school. What's application for graduate school. What's application for graduate school. What's going on?" And I said, "I'm not going to going on?" And I said, "I'm not going to going on?" And I said, "I'm not going to graduate school. I'm about to finish graduate school. I'm about to finish graduate school. I'm about to finish school." And 15 minutes later, he was a school." And 15 minutes later, he was a school." And 15 minutes later, he was a great salesman. he had me going to great salesman. he had me going to great salesman. he had me going to graduate school. And so, um, that really graduate school. And so, um, that really graduate school. And so, um, that really changed the course of my life. And, and changed the course of my life. And, and changed the course of my life. And, and I ended up going to Georgia, um, sitting I ended up going to Georgia, um, sitting I ended up going to Georgia, um, sitting for my pharmacy boards in Georgia, for my pharmacy boards in Georgia, for my pharmacy boards in Georgia, becoming a licensed pharmacist in becoming a licensed pharmacist in becoming a licensed pharmacist in Georgia, practice pharmacy while I was Georgia, practice pharmacy while I was Georgia, practice pharmacy while I was in graduate school, which today is in graduate school, which today is in graduate school, which today is almost a no. Um, but I worked five days almost a no. Um, but I worked five days almost a no. Um, but I worked five days a week in the lab and every Saturday and a week in the lab and every Saturday and a week in the lab and every Saturday and Sunday in the pharmacy. Um, which made Sunday in the pharmacy. Um, which made Sunday in the pharmacy. Um, which made me the party guy because I was making me the party guy because I was making me the party guy because I was making money and all the other grad students money and all the other grad students money and all the other grad students were making their stipen that were making their stipen that were making their stipen that &gt;&gt; we all know what graduate school stipens &gt;&gt; we all know what graduate school stipens &gt;&gt; we all know what graduate school stipens were like. Um, but we, you know, I would were like. Um, but we, you know, I would were like. Um, but we, you know, I would be the ones that treated us every so be the ones that treated us every so be the ones that treated us every so often to nice dinners and things like often to nice dinners and things like often to nice dinners and things like that since I had a little extra to share that since I had a little extra to share that since I had a little extra to share with my friends. But you know got with my friends. But you know got with my friends. But you know got done um with a PhD and uh was working as done um with a PhD and uh was working as done um with a PhD and uh was working as a pharmacist during that time and I a pharmacist during that time and I a pharmacist during that time and I realized that I had a passion for realized that I had a passion for realized that I had a passion for education and I had a passion for education and I had a passion for education and I had a passion for the chemistry and the pharmarmacology the chemistry and the pharmarmacology the chemistry and the pharmarmacology and talking to customers or patients and talking to customers or patients and talking to customers or patients um when they would come in. I worked in um when they would come in. I worked in um when they would come in. I worked in a grocery store a grocery store a grocery store uh pharmacy and they would come in and I uh pharmacy and they would come in and I uh pharmacy and they would come in and I would tell them, "Oh, you're on this new would tell them, "Oh, you're on this new would tell them, "Oh, you're on this new drug that's brand new to the market. It drug that's brand new to the market. It drug that's brand new to the market. It interacts with this protein and it does interacts with this protein and it does interacts with this protein and it does this and it does all these great things this and it does all these great things this and it does all these great things and you're so lucky to be trying this." and you're so lucky to be trying this." and you're so lucky to be trying this." Um, and I I'll be anxious to hear if it, Um, and I I'll be anxious to hear if it, Um, and I I'll be anxious to hear if it, you know, how it works for you and you know, how it works for you and you know, how it works for you and they would just look at me and say, "Do they would just look at me and say, "Do they would just look at me and say, "Do I take it with food or not?" I take it with food or not?" I take it with food or not?" Right? And that was the it's like I Right? And that was the it's like I Right? And that was the it's like I realized I was standing in the wrong realized I was standing in the wrong realized I was standing in the wrong place to impact the public. Right. And I place to impact the public. Right. And I place to impact the public. Right. And I and it came to me that if I'm going to and it came to me that if I'm going to and it came to me that if I'm going to do something with my PhD, of course I do something with my PhD, of course I do something with my PhD, of course I fell in love with the research along the fell in love with the research along the fell in love with the research along the way, but I realized that impacting way, but I realized that impacting way, but I realized that impacting pharmacists to then impact to then impact to then impact their patients was going to be a much their patients was going to be a much their patients was going to be a much more effective way for me to use my more effective way for me to use my more effective way for me to use my talents and skills in the classroom and talents and skills in the classroom and talents and skills in the classroom and education wise. And then obviously doing education wise. And then obviously doing education wise. And then obviously doing the research and the following that the research and the following that the research and the following that passion. Um I was lucky. I mean my passion. Um I was lucky. I mean my passion. Um I was lucky. I mean my PhD was around synthesis of analoges PhD was around synthesis of analoges PhD was around synthesis of analoges of a natural product called loelene of a natural product called loelene of a natural product called loelene which came from Indian tobacco native which came from Indian tobacco native which came from Indian tobacco native American Indian tobacco not cigarette American Indian tobacco not cigarette American Indian tobacco not cigarette tobacco. Um that was used actually as a tobacco. Um that was used actually as a tobacco. Um that was used actually as a respiratory stimulant. respiratory stimulant. respiratory stimulant. &gt;&gt; So this hape &gt;&gt; So this hape &gt;&gt; So this hape &gt;&gt; no this was lolla inflatada was the &gt;&gt; no this was lolla inflatada was the &gt;&gt; no this was lolla inflatada was the plant. Okay. And so lobalene was the plant. Okay. And so lobalene was the plant. Okay. And so lobalene was the compound that we worked on and made compound that we worked on and made compound that we worked on and made analoges of. Um we were looking at it analoges of. Um we were looking at it analoges of. Um we were looking at it interestingly enough coming back to the interestingly enough coming back to the interestingly enough coming back to the conuric nervous system we were looking conuric nervous system we were looking conuric nervous system we were looking at it as a potential treatment for at it as a potential treatment for at it as a potential treatment for Alzheimer's disease because at that time Alzheimer's disease because at that time Alzheimer's disease because at that time um a paper came out in science noting um a paper came out in science noting um a paper came out in science noting that smokers did not tend to develop that smokers did not tend to develop that smokers did not tend to develop dementia and Alzheimer's disease. And so dementia and Alzheimer's disease. And so dementia and Alzheimer's disease. And so it also left the caveat of do they it also left the caveat of do they it also left the caveat of do they actually live long enough to develop actually live long enough to develop actually live long enough to develop &gt;&gt; dementia and we don't know. However, &gt;&gt; dementia and we don't know. However, &gt;&gt; dementia and we don't know. However, &gt;&gt; since that time in the in the '9s, the &gt;&gt; since that time in the in the '9s, the &gt;&gt; since that time in the in the '9s, the whole coneric hypothesis of Alzheimer's whole coneric hypothesis of Alzheimer's whole coneric hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease evolved and those are the major disease evolved and those are the major disease evolved and those are the major treatments we have for dementia through treatments we have for dementia through treatments we have for dementia through the FDA approved process. No, the FDA approved process. No, the FDA approved process. No, &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you mentioned it. I've &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you mentioned it. I've &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you mentioned it. I've gotten myself into real trouble gotten myself into real trouble gotten myself into real trouble &gt;&gt; covering nicotine &gt;&gt; covering nicotine &gt;&gt; covering nicotine &gt;&gt; with uh where I put the caveats after &gt;&gt; with uh where I put the caveats after &gt;&gt; with uh where I put the caveats after the statement about nicotine being uh the statement about nicotine being uh the statement about nicotine being uh potentially neuroprotective in potentially neuroprotective in potentially neuroprotective in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. People take Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. People take Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. People take that, cut that, run with it, come back that, cut that, run with it, come back that, cut that, run with it, come back later and say, "I'm addicted to nicotine later and say, "I'm addicted to nicotine later and say, "I'm addicted to nicotine pouches." I always uh follow that pouches." I always uh follow that pouches." I always uh follow that statement with it raises blood pressure. statement with it raises blood pressure. statement with it raises blood pressure. It's highly habit forming/addictive It's highly habit forming/addictive It's highly habit forming/addictive and um has a bunch of other issues that and um has a bunch of other issues that and um has a bunch of other issues that might make most people want to avoid it. might make most people want to avoid it. might make most people want to avoid it. But nonetheless, nicotine, which But nonetheless, nicotine, which But nonetheless, nicotine, which stimulates the conergic pathway, as you stimulates the conergic pathway, as you stimulates the conergic pathway, as you point out, point out, point out, &gt;&gt; does seem to be protective against loss &gt;&gt; does seem to be protective against loss &gt;&gt; does seem to be protective against loss of cognitive function at least somewhat, of cognitive function at least somewhat, of cognitive function at least somewhat, and loss of neurons, dopamine andurgic and loss of neurons, dopamine andurgic and loss of neurons, dopamine andurgic neurons. So, neurons. So, neurons. So, &gt;&gt; uh that's right. And that's where &gt;&gt; uh that's right. And that's where &gt;&gt; uh that's right. And that's where &gt;&gt; I don't get paid by big nicotine. &gt;&gt; I don't get paid by big nicotine. &gt;&gt; I don't get paid by big nicotine. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I and that's what drove a lot &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I and that's what drove a lot &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I and that's what drove a lot of research back in those days to really of research back in those days to really of research back in those days to really see could we could we find something the see could we could we find something the see could we could we find something the idea was the hypothesis really the idea was the hypothesis really the idea was the hypothesis really was could we find a nicotine that one was could we find a nicotine that one was could we find a nicotine that one wasn't addictive two didn't interact wasn't addictive two didn't interact wasn't addictive two didn't interact with the cardiovascular system and three with the cardiovascular system and three with the cardiovascular system and three ideally that we could put in a vitamin ideally that we could put in a vitamin ideally that we could put in a vitamin every day that people could take to every day that people could take to every day that people could take to ward off ward off ward off nerve degeneration nerve degeneration nerve degeneration &gt;&gt; and &gt;&gt; and &gt;&gt; and &gt;&gt; no darn &gt;&gt; no darn &gt;&gt; no darn &gt;&gt; darn otherwise I don't think I'd be &gt;&gt; darn otherwise I don't think I'd be &gt;&gt; darn otherwise I don't think I'd be sitting here talking to No, no. You'd be sitting here talking to No, no. You'd be sitting here talking to No, no. You'd be on a yacht someplace. Actually, I take on a yacht someplace. Actually, I take on a yacht someplace. Actually, I take that back. You'd probably be on a yacht that back. You'd probably be on a yacht that back. You'd probably be on a yacht someplace that has a small chemistry lab someplace that has a small chemistry lab someplace that has a small chemistry lab and you'd be probably uh you'd be and you'd be probably uh you'd be and you'd be probably uh you'd be probably running mass spec probably running mass spec probably running mass spec &gt;&gt; marine natural products. Yeah. But I &gt;&gt; marine natural products. Yeah. But I &gt;&gt; marine natural products. Yeah. But I think you know that led to me going think you know that led to me going think you know that led to me going to a posttock at the University of to a posttock at the University of to a posttock at the University of Minnesota and working for opioid Minnesota and working for opioid Minnesota and working for opioid chemists that really defined chemically chemists that really defined chemically chemists that really defined chemically the opioid receptors through analoges of the opioid receptors through analoges of the opioid receptors through analoges of naturally occurring opioids like of naturally occurring opioids like of naturally occurring opioids like morphine. Um and then um it kind of morphine. Um and then um it kind of morphine. Um and then um it kind of launched me into my own career of saying launched me into my own career of saying launched me into my own career of saying hey I've worked now on natural products hey I've worked now on natural products hey I've worked now on natural products even though I didn't work directly with even though I didn't work directly with even though I didn't work directly with those natural products I've always felt those natural products I've always felt those natural products I've always felt what I said earlier about this sort of what I said earlier about this sort of what I said earlier about this sort of balance in nature and I wanted to pursue balance in nature and I wanted to pursue balance in nature and I wanted to pursue natural products and so when I got to natural products and so when I got to natural products and so when I got to the University of Mississippi which the University of Mississippi which the University of Mississippi which happens to be a natural products mecca happens to be a natural products mecca happens to be a natural products mecca uh for pharmaceutical natural uh for pharmaceutical natural uh for pharmaceutical natural products research there's the national products research there's the national products research there's the national center for natural products research center for natural products research center for natural products research there. There's the National Institute on there. There's the National Institute on there. There's the National Institute on Drug Abus's uh federal marijuana farm is Drug Abus's uh federal marijuana farm is Drug Abus's uh federal marijuana farm is there. It was the only legal federal there. It was the only legal federal there. It was the only legal federal marijuana farm for decades. Um and it marijuana farm for decades. Um and it marijuana farm for decades. Um and it was like landing in the perfect place to was like landing in the perfect place to was like landing in the perfect place to do what I wanted to do. And so that's do what I wanted to do. And so that's do what I wanted to do. And so that's where I started working on Salvia where I started working on Salvia where I started working on Salvia Divinorum. And Salvia Divinorum Divinorum. And Salvia Divinorum Divinorum. And Salvia Divinorum generated a compound called Salvonorin generated a compound called Salvonorin generated a compound called Salvonorin which is to this day thought to be one which is to this day thought to be one which is to this day thought to be one of the most potent hallucinogens. of the most potent hallucinogens. of the most potent hallucinogens. Um non- nitrogen containing durpine. We Um non- nitrogen containing durpine. We Um non- nitrogen containing durpine. We talked about tarpen very similar not talked about tarpen very similar not talked about tarpen very similar not very similar structurally to canabonoids very similar structurally to canabonoids very similar structurally to canabonoids but in composition just carbon hydrogen but in composition just carbon hydrogen but in composition just carbon hydrogen oxygen. it interacted it interacted it interacted uh with cappa opioid receptors and cappa uh with cappa opioid receptors and cappa uh with cappa opioid receptors and cappa opioid receptors there's a huge opioid receptors there's a huge opioid receptors there's a huge difference between muopioid receptors difference between muopioid receptors difference between muopioid receptors cappa opioid receptors and delta opioid cappa opioid receptors and delta opioid cappa opioid receptors and delta opioid receptors those are the three sort of receptors those are the three sort of receptors those are the three sort of traditionally accepted um opioid family traditionally accepted um opioid family traditionally accepted um opioid family receptors mu is actually the Greek receptors mu is actually the Greek receptors mu is actually the Greek letter and was defined by Morpheus the letter and was defined by Morpheus the letter and was defined by Morpheus the god of dreams which is morphine got its god of dreams which is morphine got its god of dreams which is morphine got its name and that's where the mu receptor name and that's where the mu receptor name and that's where the mu receptor sort of nomenclature came from And since sort of nomenclature came from And since sort of nomenclature came from And since it was related back to Greek mythology, it was related back to Greek mythology, it was related back to Greek mythology, they gave it the Greek symbol mu. And they gave it the Greek symbol mu. And they gave it the Greek symbol mu. And then when they found these other then when they found these other then when they found these other receptors kappa and delta, they just receptors kappa and delta, they just receptors kappa and delta, they just maintained that Greek sort of maintained that Greek sort of maintained that Greek sort of nomenclature. We all know that mu is the nomenclature. We all know that mu is the nomenclature. We all know that mu is the primary target for clinically used primary target for clinically used primary target for clinically used analesics. It also causes the euphoria. analesics. It also causes the euphoria. analesics. It also causes the euphoria. Kappa opioid receptors also have Kappa opioid receptors also have Kappa opioid receptors also have analesic effects. And it was for a long analesic effects. And it was for a long analesic effects. And it was for a long time thought that targeting cappa opioid time thought that targeting cappa opioid time thought that targeting cappa opioid receptors was the holy grail of receptors was the holy grail of receptors was the holy grail of painkillers because you got the same painkillers because you got the same painkillers because you got the same pain relief as you would get with pain relief as you would get with pain relief as you would get with something like morphine or even more something like morphine or even more something like morphine or even more potent opioids but the animals didn't potent opioids but the animals didn't potent opioids but the animals didn't want to abuse it. So they moved into want to abuse it. So they moved into want to abuse it. So they moved into human clinical trials and we learned human clinical trials and we learned human clinical trials and we learned something in psychiatry at the moment something in psychiatry at the moment something in psychiatry at the moment that kappa opioid receptors cause that kappa opioid receptors cause that kappa opioid receptors cause dysphoria instead of euphoria. dysphoria instead of euphoria. dysphoria instead of euphoria. &gt;&gt; So people don't like the effect. So &gt;&gt; So people don't like the effect. So &gt;&gt; So people don't like the effect. So people don't like the effect. However, people don't like the effect. However, people don't like the effect. However, there's a group of people out there there's a group of people out there there's a group of people out there that's tend to like whatever that is that's tend to like whatever that is that's tend to like whatever that is &gt;&gt; being miserable &gt;&gt; being miserable &gt;&gt; being miserable &gt;&gt; or that makes them feel better. Maybe &gt;&gt; or that makes them feel better. Maybe &gt;&gt; or that makes them feel better. Maybe they're miserable by nature and that they're miserable by nature and that they're miserable by nature and that makes them feel. I don't know what is makes them feel. I don't know what is makes them feel. I don't know what is there. But there was a whole group of there. But there was a whole group of there. But there was a whole group of people using Salvia Divinorum um plant. people using Salvia Divinorum um plant. people using Salvia Divinorum um plant. It's called Divor sage. It's a mint from It's called Divor sage. It's a mint from It's called Divor sage. It's a mint from Waka, Mexico that was used by shaman Waka, Mexico that was used by shaman Waka, Mexico that was used by shaman there to diagnose people. When they there to diagnose people. When they there to diagnose people. When they couldn't figure things out, they would couldn't figure things out, they would couldn't figure things out, they would give it to the subject and then that give it to the subject and then that give it to the subject and then that would open up their mind and hopefully would open up their mind and hopefully would open up their mind and hopefully tell them what was wrong with them. And tell them what was wrong with them. And tell them what was wrong with them. And then if the patient couldn't tell the then if the patient couldn't tell the then if the patient couldn't tell the shaman what was wrong, the shaman would shaman what was wrong, the shaman would shaman what was wrong, the shaman would resort to taking it himself to go into resort to taking it himself to go into resort to taking it himself to go into the spiritual world to figure out what the spiritual world to figure out what the spiritual world to figure out what was wrong. Right? So this is a was wrong. Right? So this is a was wrong. Right? So this is a fascinating plant and that plant is the fascinating plant and that plant is the fascinating plant and that plant is the plant that led me to metroana speciosa plant that led me to metroana speciosa plant that led me to metroana speciosa and so I was funded by NAIDA National and so I was funded by NAIDA National and so I was funded by NAIDA National Institute on Drug Abuse to study Salvia Institute on Drug Abuse to study Salvia Institute on Drug Abuse to study Salvia Divinorum and my program officer who's Divinorum and my program officer who's Divinorum and my program officer who's the person that manages your grant from the person that manages your grant from the person that manages your grant from the institute contacted me and said hey the institute contacted me and said hey the institute contacted me and said hey uh I'd like to invite you to this uh I'd like to invite you to this uh I'd like to invite you to this neuroscience meeting and give a talk on neuroscience meeting and give a talk on neuroscience meeting and give a talk on naturally occurring pain medications. naturally occurring pain medications. naturally occurring pain medications. or substances. And so I said, "That or substances. And so I said, "That or substances. And so I said, "That sounds cool. That should be easy. sounds cool. That should be easy. sounds cool. That should be easy. There's aspirin, there's morphine, There's aspirin, there's morphine, There's aspirin, there's morphine, there's this." And so I dove into the there's this." And so I dove into the there's this." And so I dove into the literature and started looking for um literature and started looking for um literature and started looking for um all these different sources of naturally all these different sources of naturally all these different sources of naturally occurring pain medications. And lo and occurring pain medications. And lo and occurring pain medications. And lo and behold, there was metroana speciosa behold, there was metroana speciosa behold, there was metroana speciosa with an incredible track record of study with an incredible track record of study with an incredible track record of study by Smith Klein and French which was now by Smith Klein and French which was now by Smith Klein and French which was now Glacos Smith Klein back in the 60s. They Glacos Smith Klein back in the 60s. They Glacos Smith Klein back in the 60s. They isolated metroinan out of the plant. isolated metroinan out of the plant. isolated metroinan out of the plant. They did as much and to this day it's They did as much and to this day it's They did as much and to this day it's still the most complete study in the still the most complete study in the still the most complete study in the literature. So 19 I think it's a 1972 literature. So 19 I think it's a 1972 literature. So 19 I think it's a 1972 paper by Mako um at all uh I can't paper by Mako um at all uh I can't paper by Mako um at all uh I can't remember the journal but it detailed all remember the journal but it detailed all remember the journal but it detailed all the clinical development of Mitrogan the clinical development of Mitrogan the clinical development of Mitrogan and at the end of the day they decided and at the end of the day they decided and at the end of the day they decided to not pull the trigger on full to not pull the trigger on full to not pull the trigger on full development because it was no better development because it was no better development because it was no better than coding as an analesic and at that than coding as an analesic and at that than coding as an analesic and at that time was the emergence of a new class of time was the emergence of a new class of time was the emergence of a new class of drugs called the non-steroidal drugs called the non-steroidal drugs called the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs which had no anti-inflammatory drugs which had no anti-inflammatory drugs which had no opioid activity which were much safer, opioid activity which were much safer, opioid activity which were much safer, no habit forming properties. You know, no habit forming properties. You know, no habit forming properties. You know, we've come to learn there's problems we've come to learn there's problems we've come to learn there's problems with NSAIDs as well like ibuprofen, with NSAIDs as well like ibuprofen, with NSAIDs as well like ibuprofen, &gt;&gt; liver issues, &gt;&gt; liver issues, &gt;&gt; liver issues, &gt;&gt; liver, kidney, um GI bleeding. &gt;&gt; liver, kidney, um GI bleeding. &gt;&gt; liver, kidney, um GI bleeding. &gt;&gt; Also, they're not that potent. &gt;&gt; Also, they're not that potent. &gt;&gt; Also, they're not that potent. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, they're for mild painild. And &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, they're for mild painild. And &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, they're for mild painild. And metroyin was even recognized back then metroyin was even recognized back then metroyin was even recognized back then as being very comparable to codin which as being very comparable to codin which as being very comparable to codin which is really for more moderate pain. It's is really for more moderate pain. It's is really for more moderate pain. It's it's not morphine. It's that's a whole it's not morphine. It's that's a whole it's not morphine. It's that's a whole another discussion. But it's much less another discussion. But it's much less another discussion. But it's much less potent than morphine. Codin is. Um it potent than morphine. Codin is. Um it potent than morphine. Codin is. Um it has great antit properties for cough and has great antit properties for cough and has great antit properties for cough and that's why they put it in cough syrups that's why they put it in cough syrups that's why they put it in cough syrups and it works better for that than it and it works better for that than it and it works better for that than it really does for pain control. Um but it really does for pain control. Um but it really does for pain control. Um but it was just equivalent to that and they was just equivalent to that and they was just equivalent to that and they said there's no point in trying to said there's no point in trying to said there's no point in trying to compete with this new class that's safe compete with this new class that's safe compete with this new class that's safe right or thought to be safer. So they right or thought to be safer. So they right or thought to be safer. So they shelved the project at Smith Klein and shelved the project at Smith Klein and shelved the project at Smith Klein and French. Thank god they did because that's what I Thank god they did because that's what I Thank god they did because that's what I found and that was when I realized found and that was when I realized found and that was when I realized nobody's touched this plant. nobody's touched this plant. nobody's touched this plant. &gt;&gt; Fantastic arc. &gt;&gt; Fantastic arc. &gt;&gt; Fantastic arc. &gt;&gt; Yeah. and um one that really reflects a &gt;&gt; Yeah. and um one that really reflects a &gt;&gt; Yeah. and um one that really reflects a constant curiosity and willingness a constant curiosity and willingness a constant curiosity and willingness to see when a when a door opens and go to see when a when a door opens and go to see when a when a door opens and go through it. So, uh it's really through it. So, uh it's really through it. So, uh it's really wonderful that you did. Clearly, that's wonderful that you did. Clearly, that's wonderful that you did. Clearly, that's in your nature and um I think one in your nature and um I think one in your nature and um I think one consistent theme throughout um there consistent theme throughout um there consistent theme throughout um there several u but what I heard were uh several u but what I heard were uh several u but what I heard were uh themes related to uh intense curiosity, themes related to uh intense curiosity, themes related to uh intense curiosity, a real practical grounding. You're a real practical grounding. You're a real practical grounding. You're a practical guy. It's clear you this practical guy. It's clear you this practical guy. It's clear you this comes from your pharmacist father comes from your pharmacist father comes from your pharmacist father and your mom who impressingly uh and your mom who impressingly uh and your mom who impressingly uh impress my wife may not agree with this impress my wife may not agree with this impress my wife may not agree with this but &gt;&gt; well and your and your mom who &gt;&gt; well and your and your mom who &gt;&gt; well and your and your mom who impressively is what I meant to say um impressively is what I meant to say um impressively is what I meant to say um went back and uh went back and uh went back and uh &gt;&gt; you know after raising you guys and &gt;&gt; you know after raising you guys and &gt;&gt; you know after raising you guys and um became a scientist in her own right um became a scientist in her own right um became a scientist in her own right um and teacher and then um and teacher and then um and teacher and then &gt;&gt; this element of public education &gt;&gt; this element of public education &gt;&gt; this element of public education teaching pharmacists teaching pharmacists teaching pharmacists teaching neuroscientists went I've long wanted to neuroscientists went I've long wanted to neuroscientists went I've long wanted to do an episode about do an episode about do an episode about &gt;&gt; yeah Um and uh for a variety of reasons &gt;&gt; yeah Um and uh for a variety of reasons &gt;&gt; yeah Um and uh for a variety of reasons uh the most important one being that uh the most important one being that uh the most important one being that many people ask about it and it's many people ask about it and it's many people ask about it and it's out there and it's having an impact and out there and it's having an impact and out there and it's having an impact and it's growing in usage. Um and that uh it's growing in usage. Um and that uh it's growing in usage. Um and that uh there's these very polarized views. You there's these very polarized views. You there's these very polarized views. You hear this is the greatest thing ever. hear this is the greatest thing ever. hear this is the greatest thing ever. help me or someone I know get off help me or someone I know get off help me or someone I know get off opioids and then you also hear this opioids and then you also hear this opioids and then you also hear this stuff is dreadfully bad and stuff is dreadfully bad and stuff is dreadfully bad and &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; in the course of you know researching &gt;&gt; in the course of you know researching &gt;&gt; in the course of you know researching it's not hard to find your name because it's not hard to find your name because it's not hard to find your name because you're responsible for publishing the you're responsible for publishing the you're responsible for publishing the you know an enormous percentage of you know an enormous percentage of you know an enormous percentage of the work on onratom but I would also the work on onratom but I would also the work on onratom but I would also hear things from people like got to get hear things from people like got to get hear things from people like got to get Chris Mccertie on he's the man I heard Chris Mccertie on he's the man I heard Chris Mccertie on he's the man I heard he's the man a lot um and so I just he's the man a lot um and so I just he's the man a lot um and so I just really want to thank you for coming here really want to thank you for coming here really want to thank you for coming here today with um with the intention to today with um with the intention to today with um with the intention to teach. I've clearly learned everyone's teach. I've clearly learned everyone's teach. I've clearly learned everyone's learned so much from this from hearing learned so much from this from hearing learned so much from this from hearing you uh today and your nuanced you uh today and your nuanced you uh today and your nuanced perspective that when someone says perspective that when someone says perspective that when someone says isratom good or bad, safe or not safe, isratom good or bad, safe or not safe, isratom good or bad, safe or not safe, you break it down. Look, here are you break it down. Look, here are you break it down. Look, here are the different things we're talking about the different things we're talking about the different things we're talking about when we're talking. And I list off some when we're talking. And I list off some when we're talking. And I list off some of the key takeaways earlier. Um serving of the key takeaways earlier. Um serving of the key takeaways earlier. Um serving size matters. Um derived products versus size matters. Um derived products versus size matters. Um derived products versus isolates. Um why are you using them? isolates. Um why are you using them? isolates. Um why are you using them? Maybe the f around and find out reason Maybe the f around and find out reason Maybe the f around and find out reason is not a good reason, you know, but is not a good reason, you know, but is not a good reason, you know, but is it pain relief? Is it to avoid or trying it pain relief? Is it to avoid or trying it pain relief? Is it to avoid or trying to alleviate a much more serious um to alleviate a much more serious um to alleviate a much more serious um condition or uh addiction um in some condition or uh addiction um in some condition or uh addiction um in some cases? Um drug interactions. There's cases? Um drug interactions. There's cases? Um drug interactions. There's your pharmacist side. The inter this your pharmacist side. The inter this your pharmacist side. The inter this &gt;&gt; case example of a of a seizure and on &gt;&gt; case example of a of a seizure and on &gt;&gt; case example of a of a seizure and on and on. I mean, you've just done a and on. I mean, you've just done a and on. I mean, you've just done a spectacular job uh of explaining the spectacular job uh of explaining the spectacular job uh of explaining the nuance um that one has to address that nuance um that one has to address that nuance um that one has to address that question with. I must also highlight question with. I must also highlight question with. I must also highlight that as somebody who's very interested that as somebody who's very interested that as somebody who's very interested in science and public health, but also in science and public health, but also in science and public health, but also the natural world, um, you've done such the natural world, um, you've done such the natural world, um, you've done such a spectacular job of explaining how a spectacular job of explaining how a spectacular job of explaining how plants contain these incredible compounds contain these incredible compounds contain these incredible compounds interact with the animal world and with interact with the animal world and with interact with the animal world and with the human world and medicine uh, for the human world and medicine uh, for the human world and medicine uh, for better or worse, right? better or worse, right? better or worse, right? &gt;&gt; And, uh, and that's a beautiful dance &gt;&gt; And, uh, and that's a beautiful dance &gt;&gt; And, uh, and that's a beautiful dance and um, and you're clearly encyclopedic and um, and you're clearly encyclopedic and um, and you're clearly encyclopedic about all of it. So, about all of it. So, about all of it. So, &gt;&gt; thank you. &gt;&gt; thank you. &gt;&gt; thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for coming here, for &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for coming here, for &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for coming here, for sharing all this knowledge. So clearly sharing all this knowledge. So clearly sharing all this knowledge. So clearly people are going to be safer and are people are going to be safer and are people are going to be safer and are going to make excellent use of this going to make excellent use of this going to make excellent use of this knowledge I'm sure and as things evolve knowledge I'm sure and as things evolve knowledge I'm sure and as things evolve in the world ofratom and uh coca leaf in the world ofratom and uh coca leaf in the world ofratom and uh coca leaf and cacao and uh please come back and cacao and uh please come back and cacao and uh please come back and share with us what you discover. and share with us what you discover. and share with us what you discover. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Thank you so much for having &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Thank you so much for having &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Thank you so much for having me. Thank you for giving me your me. Thank you for giving me your me. Thank you for giving me your platform as well to get this platform as well to get this platform as well to get this education out there. It it needs to be education out there. It it needs to be education out there. It it needs to be out there and people need to understand out there and people need to understand out there and people need to understand that there may be benefits indeed, that there may be benefits indeed, that there may be benefits indeed, but there's risks and but there's risks and but there's risks and there's potentially harm and we've there's potentially harm and we've there's potentially harm and we've got to figure out where each of those got to figure out where each of those got to figure out where each of those lie. &gt;&gt; Well, it's been a pleasure. &gt;&gt; Well, it's been a pleasure. &gt;&gt; Well, it's been a pleasure. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Chris today's discussion with Dr. Chris today's discussion with Dr. Chris McCertie. To learn more about his work, McCertie. To learn more about his work, McCertie. To learn more about his work, please see the links in the show not please see the links in the show not please see the links in the show not captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools. Some of which and science related tools. Some of which and science related tools. Some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Chris today's discussion with Dr. Chris today's discussion with Dr. Chris McCertie. And last, but certainly not McCertie. And last, but certainly not McCertie. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]