Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my conversation with Dr. Duncan French. conversation with Dr. Duncan French. conversation with Dr. Duncan French. Duncan French, great to see you again. Duncan French, great to see you again. Duncan French, great to see you again. Likewise. Thank you. We don't Likewise. Thank you. We don't Likewise. Thank you. We don't often have many Stanford professors in often have many Stanford professors in often have many Stanford professors in the Performance Institute, so I'm the Performance Institute, so I'm the Performance Institute, so I'm really excited. I'm really excited. I'm really excited. &gt;&gt; Well, this place is amazing and you have &gt;&gt; Well, this place is amazing and you have &gt;&gt; Well, this place is amazing and you have a huge role in making it what it is. I a huge role in making it what it is. I a huge role in making it what it is. I found dozens of papers on how weight found dozens of papers on how weight found dozens of papers on how weight training impacts hormones training impacts hormones training impacts hormones and your name is on all of them. What is and your name is on all of them. What is and your name is on all of them. What is it about engaging motor neurons under it about engaging motor neurons under it about engaging motor neurons under heavy loads sends a signal to the heavy loads sends a signal to the heavy loads sends a signal to the endocrine system, "Hey, release endocrine system, "Hey, release endocrine system, "Hey, release testosterone." I've never actually been testosterone." I've never actually been testosterone." I've never actually been able to find that in a textbook. Yeah, I able to find that in a textbook. Yeah, I able to find that in a textbook. Yeah, I mean, I think it's the stress response, mean, I think it's the stress response, mean, I think it's the stress response, right? It's mechanical stress and it's right? It's mechanical stress and it's right? It's mechanical stress and it's metabolic stress. And these, you know, metabolic stress. And these, you know, metabolic stress. And these, you know, the downstream regulation of the downstream regulation of the downstream regulation of testosterone release at the gonads comes testosterone release at the gonads comes testosterone release at the gonads comes from many different areas. from many different areas. from many different areas. You know, the You know, the You know, the my work primarily looked at, my work primarily looked at, my work primarily looked at, you know, catecholamines and you know, catecholamines and you know, catecholamines and sympathetic arousal. So, things like sympathetic arousal. So, things like sympathetic arousal. So, things like epinephrine adrenaline. epinephrine adrenaline. epinephrine adrenaline. &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah, epinephrine adrenaline, &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah, epinephrine adrenaline, &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah, epinephrine adrenaline, you know, and noradrenaline. you know, and noradrenaline. you know, and noradrenaline. How how they were signaling that How how they were signaling that How how they were signaling that signaling cascade using, you know, the signaling cascade using, you know, the signaling cascade using, you know, the HPA axis releasing HPA axis releasing HPA axis releasing cortisol and then, you know, looking at cortisol and then, you know, looking at cortisol and then, you know, looking at how that also influenced the adrenal how that also influenced the adrenal how that also influenced the adrenal medulla to release, medulla to release, medulla to release, you know, androgens and then signaling you know, androgens and then signaling you know, androgens and then signaling that at the gonads. There is an that at the gonads. There is an that at the gonads. There is an interesting question. So, in interesting question. So, in interesting question. So, in presumably weight training in women, presumably weight training in women, presumably weight training in women, people who don't have testes, also it increases who don't have testes, also it increases who don't have testes, also it increases testosterone. And is that purely through testosterone. And is that purely through testosterone. And is that purely through the adrenals? When women lift weights, the adrenals? When women lift weights, the adrenals? When women lift weights, their adrenal glands release their adrenal glands release their adrenal glands release testosterone. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I mean, that is the only &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I mean, that is the only &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I mean, that is the only area of testosterone release for area of testosterone release for area of testosterone release for females. And yes, it's the same females. And yes, it's the same females. And yes, it's the same downstream cascade. Obviously, the downstream cascade. Obviously, the downstream cascade. Obviously, the extent to which it happens is extent to which it happens is extent to which it happens is significantly less in females, but significantly less in females, but significantly less in females, but that's how you there's good data that's how you there's good data that's how you there's good data out there that shows, you know, females out there that shows, you know, females out there that shows, you know, females can increase their anabolic environment, can increase their anabolic environment, can increase their anabolic environment, their internal anabolic milieu their internal anabolic milieu their internal anabolic milieu using resistance training as a stressor, using resistance training as a stressor, using resistance training as a stressor, and then they get the consequent muscle and then they get the consequent muscle and then they get the consequent muscle tissue growth, tissue growth, tissue growth, you know, whether it's tendon, ligament you know, whether it's tendon, ligament you know, whether it's tendon, ligament adaptations, you know, the adaptations, you know, the adaptations, you know, the beneficial consequences of resistance beneficial consequences of resistance beneficial consequences of resistance training, which is driven by anabolic training, which is driven by anabolic training, which is driven by anabolic stimuli. Yeah, I have two questions stimuli. Yeah, I have two questions stimuli. Yeah, I have two questions about that. The first one is something about that. The first one is something about that. The first one is something that you mentioned, which is that the that you mentioned, which is that the that you mentioned, which is that the androgens, the testosterone comes the androgens, the testosterone comes the androgens, the testosterone comes from the adrenals under resistance loads from the adrenals under resistance loads from the adrenals under resistance loads in women. Is the same true in men? I in women. Is the same true in men? I in women. Is the same true in men? I mean, we hear that the testes produce mean, we hear that the testes produce mean, we hear that the testes produce testosterone when we weight train, but testosterone when we weight train, but testosterone when we weight train, but do we know whether or not it's the do we know whether or not it's the do we know whether or not it's the adrenals or the testes in men that are adrenals or the testes in men that are adrenals or the testes in men that are increasing testosterone or both, a increasing testosterone or both, a increasing testosterone or both, a little bit from each? The field is little bit from each? The field is little bit from each? The field is divided presently in as much as divided presently in as much as divided presently in as much as understanding the acute understanding the acute understanding the acute the acute the acute the acute adrenergic response in terms of, you adrenergic response in terms of, you adrenergic response in terms of, you know, anabolic response to exercise in know, anabolic response to exercise in know, anabolic response to exercise in an acute phase and the exposure to an acute phase and the exposure to an acute phase and the exposure to you know, a stimulus that is you know, a stimulus that is you know, a stimulus that is stress-driven, which might be partly stress-driven, which might be partly stress-driven, which might be partly from the adrenal glands, partly from the from the adrenal glands, partly from the from the adrenal glands, partly from the gonads versus a longitudinal exposure gonads versus a longitudinal exposure gonads versus a longitudinal exposure to anabolic environments, which is to anabolic environments, which is to anabolic environments, which is primarily driven by obviously the gonads primarily driven by obviously the gonads primarily driven by obviously the gonads and the release of the endocrine and the release of the endocrine and the release of the endocrine environment from testosterone environment from testosterone environment from testosterone release at the gonads. So, this the release at the gonads. So, this the release at the gonads. So, this the field is split in terms of how exercise field is split in terms of how exercise field is split in terms of how exercise is promoting hypertrophy, you know, is promoting hypertrophy, you know, is promoting hypertrophy, you know, muscle tissue growth, and whether that muscle tissue growth, and whether that muscle tissue growth, and whether that is very much is very much is very much an adrenal an adrenal an adrenal stimuli or if that's significant enough stimuli or if that's significant enough stimuli or if that's significant enough in these acute responses versus the in these acute responses versus the in these acute responses versus the longitudinal exposure just elevated longitudinal exposure just elevated longitudinal exposure just elevated basal levels of anabolic testosterone basal levels of anabolic testosterone basal levels of anabolic testosterone habitual levels. And then you mentioned habitual levels. And then you mentioned habitual levels. And then you mentioned that testosterone can have enhancing that testosterone can have enhancing that testosterone can have enhancing effects or growth effects on tendon and effects or growth effects on tendon and effects or growth effects on tendon and ligament also. That you don't often hear ligament also. That you don't often hear ligament also. That you don't often hear about that. People always think, you about that. People always think, you about that. People always think, you know, testosterone muscle, but know, testosterone muscle, but know, testosterone muscle, but testosterone has a lot of effects on testosterone has a lot of effects on testosterone has a lot of effects on other tissues that are important for other tissues that are important for other tissues that are important for performance, it sounds like. And what's performance, it sounds like. And what's performance, it sounds like. And what's the story there? the story there? the story there? &gt;&gt; I mean, the testosterone hormone is &gt;&gt; I mean, the testosterone hormone is &gt;&gt; I mean, the testosterone hormone is it I mean, listen, there's androgen it I mean, listen, there's androgen it I mean, listen, there's androgen receptors on neural tissue, on neural receptors on neural tissue, on neural receptors on neural tissue, on neural axons. It's pretty much everywhere. axons. It's pretty much everywhere. axons. It's pretty much everywhere. &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, you know, it the &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, you know, it the &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, you know, it the binding capacity of testosterone and binding capacity of testosterone and binding capacity of testosterone and influence in different tissues within influence in different tissues within influence in different tissues within the body. I touched on, you know, muscle the body. I touched on, you know, muscle the body. I touched on, you know, muscle tissue, but, you know, the tissue, but, you know, the tissue, but, you know, the ligaments, the tendons, and even bone to ligaments, the tendons, and even bone to ligaments, the tendons, and even bone to some extent, you know, testosterone to some extent, you know, testosterone to some extent, you know, testosterone is potential to influence that is potential to influence that is potential to influence that in terms of removing muscle in terms of removing muscle in terms of removing muscle osteopenic characteristics, etc. So, osteopenic characteristics, etc. So, osteopenic characteristics, etc. So, yeah, it's a it's a magic a magic yeah, it's a it's a magic a magic yeah, it's a it's a magic a magic hormone, let's say, with many hormone, let's say, with many hormone, let's say, with many ends and impacts in terms of many ends and impacts in terms of many ends and impacts in terms of adaptation. Could you say that there's a adaptation. Could you say that there's a adaptation. Could you say that there's a there are some general principles of there are some general principles of there are some general principles of training that favor testosterone training that favor testosterone training that favor testosterone production in terms of that the that production in terms of that the that production in terms of that the that somebody who's not an elite athlete somebody who's not an elite athlete somebody who's not an elite athlete could use, who's trying to use weight could use, who's trying to use weight could use, who's trying to use weight training to build or maintain muscle, training to build or maintain muscle, training to build or maintain muscle, Yeah. lose body fat, so body Yeah. lose body fat, so body Yeah. lose body fat, so body recomposition, and or stay strong and recomposition, and or stay strong and recomposition, and or stay strong and healthy for sport of a different kind? healthy for sport of a different kind? healthy for sport of a different kind? Testosterone is really stimulated by an Testosterone is really stimulated by an Testosterone is really stimulated by an intensity factor, and also a volume intensity factor, and also a volume intensity factor, and also a volume factor. Now, growth hormone is a little factor. Now, growth hormone is a little factor. Now, growth hormone is a little bit different. That's largely driven by bit different. That's largely driven by bit different. That's largely driven by an intensity factor alone. If you look an intensity factor alone. If you look an intensity factor alone. If you look at many of the exercise interventions at many of the exercise interventions at many of the exercise interventions that we use to try and investigate and that we use to try and investigate and that we use to try and investigate and interrogate testosterone, interrogate testosterone, interrogate testosterone, it was it was usually, you know, a 6 by it was it was usually, you know, a 6 by it was it was usually, you know, a 6 by 10 protocol. So, six sets of 10 protocol. So, six sets of 10 protocol. So, six sets of 10 repetitions, which is, you know, it's repetitions, which is, you know, it's repetitions, which is, you know, it's quite a large, you know, 60 repetitions quite a large, you know, 60 repetitions quite a large, you know, 60 repetitions is quite a large volume for a single is quite a large volume for a single is quite a large volume for a single exercise, and that was usually pitched exercise, and that was usually pitched exercise, and that was usually pitched at about 80% intense of a one repetition at about 80% intense of a one repetition at about 80% intense of a one repetition max intensity. Okay, so 80% of the one max intensity. Okay, so 80% of the one max intensity. Okay, so 80% of the one rep max, six sets of 10 reps rep max, six sets of 10 reps rep max, six sets of 10 reps separated by rest of separated by rest of separated by rest of &gt;&gt; 2 minutes. 2 minutes, which is actually &gt;&gt; 2 minutes. 2 minutes, which is actually &gt;&gt; 2 minutes. 2 minutes, which is actually pretty fast, at least to me. And every pretty fast, at least to me. And every pretty fast, at least to me. And every time you see these 2 to 3 minutes, when time you see these 2 to 3 minutes, when time you see these 2 to 3 minutes, when you're actually watching the clock, you're actually watching the clock, you're actually watching the clock, those 2-minute rest periods go by pretty those 2-minute rest periods go by pretty those 2-minute rest periods go by pretty fast. &gt;&gt; By the third, fourth set, you're &gt;&gt; By the third, fourth set, you're &gt;&gt; By the third, fourth set, you're dying for more, yeah. Yeah. We dying for more, yeah. Yeah. We dying for more, yeah. Yeah. We formulated that kind of exercise formulated that kind of exercise formulated that kind of exercise protocol to really target, you know, the protocol to really target, you know, the protocol to really target, you know, the release of testosterone and try and the release of testosterone and try and the release of testosterone and try and drive up these anabolic environments to drive up these anabolic environments to drive up these anabolic environments to study that, you know, the endocrine, study that, you know, the endocrine, study that, you know, the endocrine, um, you know, consequences. But, I think um, you know, consequences. But, I think um, you know, consequences. But, I think that's the type of that's the type of that's the type of protocol that is mo- most advantageous protocol that is mo- most advantageous protocol that is mo- most advantageous for driving anabolic environments. for driving anabolic environments. for driving anabolic environments. &gt;&gt; And that was it for the workout? Yeah, I &gt;&gt; And that was it for the workout? Yeah, I &gt;&gt; And that was it for the workout? Yeah, I mean, we would do that in a back mean, we would do that in a back mean, we would do that in a back squat. So, you know, multi-joint, squat. So, you know, multi-joint, squat. So, you know, multi-joint, um, you know, challenging exercise, um, you know, challenging exercise, um, you know, challenging exercise, multi-muscle, multi-joint, 80% loads of multi-muscle, multi-joint, 80% loads of multi-muscle, multi-joint, 80% loads of your one repetition max, and then 6 of your one repetition max, and then 6 of your one repetition max, and then 6 by 10. We did play around with, you by 10. We did play around with, you by 10. We did play around with, you know, your classic German volume type 10 know, your classic German volume type 10 know, your classic German volume type 10 by 10, um, kind of protocols. Um, but by 10, um, kind of protocols. Um, but by 10, um, kind of protocols. Um, but they were just unsustainable at that they were just unsustainable at that they were just unsustainable at that 80%. The key to what we also did was 80%. The key to what we also did was 80%. The key to what we also did was we always adjusted, um, the loads to we always adjusted, um, the loads to we always adjusted, um, the loads to make sure that it was 10 repetitions make sure that it was 10 repetitions make sure that it was 10 repetitions that were sustained. So, if the load was that were sustained. So, if the load was that were sustained. So, if the load was too high and an athlete or a too high and an athlete or a too high and an athlete or a participant had to, uh, drop the weight participant had to, uh, drop the weight participant had to, uh, drop the weight on the sixth repetition, we would on the sixth repetition, we would on the sixth repetition, we would unload the bar and make sure they unload the bar and make sure they unload the bar and make sure they completed the 10 repetitions. completed the 10 repetitions. completed the 10 repetitions. &gt;&gt; I see. Bringing me back to the point of &gt;&gt; I see. Bringing me back to the point of &gt;&gt; I see. Bringing me back to the point of it's an intensity and a volume it's an intensity and a volume it's an intensity and a volume derivative that is going to be most derivative that is going to be most derivative that is going to be most advantageous for testosterone release. advantageous for testosterone release. advantageous for testosterone release. So, that sort of hints at the So, that sort of hints at the So, that sort of hints at the possibility that the thresholds for possibility that the thresholds for possibility that the thresholds for going from a workout that increases going from a workout that increases going from a workout that increases testosterone to a workout that testosterone to a workout that testosterone to a workout that diminishes testosterone is actually a diminishes testosterone is actually a diminishes testosterone is actually a pretty narrow margin. Yeah, and I think pretty narrow margin. Yeah, and I think pretty narrow margin. Yeah, and I think it comes back to that intensity factor it comes back to that intensity factor it comes back to that intensity factor then. You know, what we saw with then. You know, what we saw with then. You know, what we saw with the that 10 by 10 protocol really sees the that 10 by 10 protocol really sees the that 10 by 10 protocol really sees pretty significant drop-offs in the pretty significant drop-offs in the pretty significant drop-offs in the load. Um, and again, we're trying to stimulate Um, and again, we're trying to stimulate Um, and again, we're trying to stimulate with intensity, with mechanical strain with intensity, with mechanical strain with intensity, with mechanical strain through intensity, as well as metabolic through intensity, as well as metabolic through intensity, as well as metabolic strain through volume. And I think strain through volume. And I think strain through volume. And I think that's the paradigm that you've that's the paradigm that you've that's the paradigm that you've got to look at is that the mechanical got to look at is that the mechanical got to look at is that the mechanical load has to come from, you know, the load has to come from, you know, the load has to come from, you know, the vo- the actual weight on the bar, and vo- the actual weight on the bar, and vo- the actual weight on the bar, and the volume, um, is the metabolic the volume, um, is the metabolic the volume, um, is the metabolic stimulus. How much are we driving stimulus. How much are we driving stimulus. How much are we driving lactate? How much are we driving, you lactate? How much are we driving, you lactate? How much are we driving, you know, glycogenolysis in terms of know, glycogenolysis in terms of know, glycogenolysis in terms of that type of energy system for, um, you that type of energy system for, um, you that type of energy system for, um, you know, executing a 10 by 10 protocol. And executing a 10 by 10 protocol. And executing a 10 by 10 protocol. And what we often saw was just a significant what we often saw was just a significant what we often saw was just a significant reduction in the intensity capabilities reduction in the intensity capabilities reduction in the intensity capabilities of a of an athlete to sustain that. So, of a of an athlete to sustain that. So, of a of an athlete to sustain that. So, we shortened the volume um to try and we shortened the volume um to try and we shortened the volume um to try and maintain the intensity. Is there any maintain the intensity. Is there any maintain the intensity. Is there any evidence that training slowly can offset evidence that training slowly can offset evidence that training slowly can offset some of the negative effects of doing a some of the negative effects of doing a some of the negative effects of doing a lot of volume? The rest is often the lot of volume? The rest is often the lot of volume? The rest is often the consideration that's overlooked um out consideration that's overlooked um out consideration that's overlooked um out there in general population and in many there in general population and in many there in general population and in many sports and environments. You know, that sports and environments. You know, that sports and environments. You know, that the rest is as important a the rest is as important a the rest is as important a programming variable as the load and the programming variable as the load and the programming variable as the load and the intense the intensity the load the intense the intensity the load the intense the intensity the load the volume, etc. If you extend the volume, etc. If you extend the volume, etc. If you extend the duration of your rest periods, what duration of your rest periods, what duration of your rest periods, what you're ultimately doing is influencing you're ultimately doing is influencing you're ultimately doing is influencing that metabolic stimulus again. You're that metabolic stimulus again. You're that metabolic stimulus again. You're allowing the flushing of the body, the allowing the flushing of the body, the allowing the flushing of the body, the removal of waste products, you know, removal of waste products, you know, removal of waste products, you know, lactate to be, you know, removed via lactate to be, you know, removed via lactate to be, you know, removed via from the body and then the from the body and then the from the body and then the metabolic environment is reduced. So, if metabolic environment is reduced. So, if metabolic environment is reduced. So, if I if I understand correctly, you want to I if I understand correctly, you want to I if I understand correctly, you want to create a metabolic stress. create a metabolic stress. create a metabolic stress. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So, I could I could in &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So, I could I could in &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So, I could I could in theory do a 45- or 60-minute session theory do a 45- or 60-minute session theory do a 45- or 60-minute session where I pack in more work per unit where I pack in more work per unit where I pack in more work per unit time. I'm not going to be able to time. I'm not going to be able to time. I'm not going to be able to quote-unquote perform as well. I won't quote-unquote perform as well. I won't quote-unquote perform as well. I won't be able to lift as much. I'm going to be able to lift as much. I'm going to be able to lift as much. I'm going to have to you know, unweight the bar have to you know, unweight the bar have to you know, unweight the bar between sets or maybe even during sets between sets or maybe even during sets between sets or maybe even during sets if I have someone who could do that. if I have someone who could do that. if I have someone who could do that. But, it sounds like that's the way to But, it sounds like that's the way to But, it sounds like that's the way to go. So, it's got to be So, this the old go. So, it's got to be So, this the old go. So, it's got to be So, this the old adage of high intensity short duration adage of high intensity short duration adage of high intensity short duration is probably the way to go. Correct. And is probably the way to go. Correct. And is probably the way to go. Correct. And and you know, in layman's and you know, in layman's and you know, in layman's terms, if the same objective, the same terms, if the same objective, the same terms, if the same objective, the same training goal is just muscle tissue training goal is just muscle tissue training goal is just muscle tissue growth, and we're not talking about growth, and we're not talking about growth, and we're not talking about maximal strength or any of those type of maximal strength or any of those type of maximal strength or any of those type of parameters if you're just talking about parameters if you're just talking about parameters if you're just talking about growing muscle, if there's an athlete A growing muscle, if there's an athlete A growing muscle, if there's an athlete A and they do six sets of 10 with 2 and they do six sets of 10 with 2 and they do six sets of 10 with 2 minutes rest, and there's athlete B that minutes rest, and there's athlete B that minutes rest, and there's athlete B that does six sets of 10 with 3 minutes left does six sets of 10 with 3 minutes left does six sets of 10 with 3 minutes left rest, athlete A will likely see the rest, athlete A will likely see the rest, athlete A will likely see the highest muscle gains because of the highest muscle gains because of the highest muscle gains because of the metabolic stimulus that they're driving metabolic stimulus that they're driving metabolic stimulus that they're driving with the shorter rest periods. What with the shorter rest periods. What with the shorter rest periods. What about day-to-day recovery? I mean, can about day-to-day recovery? I mean, can about day-to-day recovery? I mean, can Work out that you described as intense Work out that you described as intense Work out that you described as intense but short. How many days a week can the but short. How many days a week can the but short. How many days a week can the typical person do that and sustain typical person do that and sustain typical person do that and sustain progress? Yeah, I mean, I think that progress? Yeah, I mean, I think that progress? Yeah, I mean, I think that comes back to your training and your comes back to your training and your comes back to your training and your training history. Obviously, there's a training history. Obviously, there's a training history. Obviously, there's a resilience and a robustness with an resilience and a robustness with an resilience and a robustness with an incremental training age. So, a protocol incremental training age. So, a protocol incremental training age. So, a protocol like that, we would look at two like that, we would look at two like that, we would look at two times, you know, a week, something times, you know, a week, something times, you know, a week, something that's pretty intensive like that's pretty intensive like that's pretty intensive like that. Because again, it comes back to that. Because again, it comes back to that. Because again, it comes back to the point you make is that you really the point you make is that you really the point you make is that you really need to be need to be need to be for want of a better term, suffering a for want of a better term, suffering a for want of a better term, suffering a little bit through that type of little bit through that type of little bit through that type of protocol, both in terms of the protocol, both in terms of the protocol, both in terms of the challenge of the load, but also being challenge of the load, but also being challenge of the load, but also being able to tolerate the metabolic able to tolerate the metabolic able to tolerate the metabolic stress that you're exposed to. It's it's stress that you're exposed to. It's it's stress that you're exposed to. It's it's a it's a you know, a bit of a sicko a it's a you know, a bit of a sicko a it's a you know, a bit of a sicko feeling, right? Because of the lactate feeling, right? Because of the lactate feeling, right? Because of the lactate that you're driving up. So, you know, I that you're driving up. So, you know, I that you're driving up. So, you know, I wouldn't promote as an athlete doing wouldn't promote as an athlete doing wouldn't promote as an athlete doing that type of modality, you know, that type of modality, you know, that type of modality, you know, multiple times unless you're multiple times unless you're multiple times unless you're from the realms of bodybuilding, and from the realms of bodybuilding, and from the realms of bodybuilding, and then you really that that's the sole then you really that that's the sole then you really that that's the sole purpose of what you're trying to purpose of what you're trying to purpose of what you're trying to achieve. If it's just somebody, um, you achieve. If it's just somebody, um, you achieve. If it's just somebody, um, you know, a weekend warrior that wants to know, a weekend warrior that wants to know, a weekend warrior that wants to keep in shape and look and look good, I keep in shape and look and look good, I keep in shape and look and look good, I would say, you know, two times a week would say, you know, two times a week would say, you know, two times a week for a really challenging workout like for a really challenging workout like for a really challenging workout like that, and then flex the other types of that, and then flex the other types of that, and then flex the other types of workouts within the week to have more of workouts within the week to have more of workouts within the week to have more of a volume emphasis, where you reduce the a volume emphasis, where you reduce the a volume emphasis, where you reduce the intensity, and you might just look at, intensity, and you might just look at, intensity, and you might just look at, you know, larger rep ranges from 12 to you know, larger rep ranges from 12 to you know, larger rep ranges from 12 to 15 to 20. Another workout where you're 15 to 20. Another workout where you're 15 to 20. Another workout where you're looking at, you know, reducing the looking at, you know, reducing the looking at, you know, reducing the volume, but increasing the intensity, volume, but increasing the intensity, volume, but increasing the intensity, and really trying to drive, you know, a and really trying to drive, you know, a and really trying to drive, you know, a different stimulus to different stimulus to different stimulus to give you more end points of to give you more end points of to give you more end points of success. Mhm. Last time I was uh here at success. Mhm. Last time I was uh here at success. Mhm. Last time I was uh here at the USC Performance Institute, we had a the USC Performance Institute, we had a the USC Performance Institute, we had a brief conversation, and I want to make brief conversation, and I want to make brief conversation, and I want to make sure I got the details right, that in sure I got the details right, that in sure I got the details right, that in the short term, and a big increase in the short term, and a big increase in the short term, and a big increase in stress hormone can lead to an increase stress hormone can lead to an increase stress hormone can lead to an increase in testosterone. Like a like a parachute in testosterone. Like a like a parachute in testosterone. Like a like a parachute jump. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Um, but uh so, stress can promote the &gt;&gt; Um, but uh so, stress can promote the &gt;&gt; Um, but uh so, stress can promote the release of testosterone. Yeah. That was release of testosterone. Yeah. That was release of testosterone. Yeah. That was news to me. Right. news to me. Right. news to me. Right. &gt;&gt; Um, we always hear about stress &gt;&gt; Um, we always hear about stress &gt;&gt; Um, we always hear about stress suppressing testosterone, stress suppressing testosterone, stress suppressing testosterone, stress suppressing the immune system, all these suppressing the immune system, all these suppressing the immune system, all these terrible things, but in the short term, terrible things, but in the short term, terrible things, but in the short term, you're saying it can actually increase you're saying it can actually increase you're saying it can actually increase the release of testosterone. Uh so, I the release of testosterone. Uh so, I the release of testosterone. Uh so, I have that right? Correct. have that right? Correct. have that right? Correct. &gt;&gt; Okay. And so, So the second question is &gt;&gt; Okay. And so, So the second question is &gt;&gt; Okay. And so, So the second question is does my cognitive does my cognitive does my cognitive interpretation of the stressor make a interpretation of the stressor make a interpretation of the stressor make a difference? In other words, if I difference? In other words, if I difference? In other words, if I voluntarily jump out of a plane with a voluntarily jump out of a plane with a voluntarily jump out of a plane with a parachute, does it have a different effect on my does it have a different effect on my does it have a different effect on my testosterone than if you shove me out of testosterone than if you shove me out of testosterone than if you shove me out of the plane against my will? Well, the plane against my will? Well, the plane against my will? Well, presumably with a parachute, too. I presumably with a parachute, too. I presumably with a parachute, too. I mean, so this was what all my PhD mean, so this was what all my PhD mean, so this was what all my PhD work was looking at was the work was looking at was the work was looking at was the you know, you know, you know, the pre the pre the pre the exposure to a stressor and the exposure to a stressor and the exposure to a stressor and the pre-arousal of how your body essentially pre-arousal of how your body essentially pre-arousal of how your body essentially prepares for that stressor and then how prepares for that stressor and then how prepares for that stressor and then how it manages it throughout the exposure to it manages it throughout the exposure to it manages it throughout the exposure to the stress. We used a resistance the stress. We used a resistance the stress. We used a resistance training protocol that these training protocol that these training protocol that these athletes knew was going to be very athletes knew was going to be very athletes knew was going to be very challenging. It's going to be there's challenging. It's going to be there's challenging. It's going to be there's going to have some anxiety to doing it. going to have some anxiety to doing it. going to have some anxiety to doing it. They knew there were going to be some They knew there were going to be some They knew there were going to be some physical distress from doing it. Um and physical distress from doing it. Um and physical distress from doing it. Um and therefore, you know, their mindset therefore, you know, their mindset therefore, you know, their mindset of how they were going to approach that of how they were going to approach that of how they were going to approach that was already set. So what we saw prior 15 was already set. So what we saw prior 15 was already set. So what we saw prior 15 minutes prior to the start of an minutes prior to the start of an minutes prior to the start of an ex-exposure to the workout, that the ex-exposure to the workout, that the ex-exposure to the workout, that the epinephrine, the noradrenaline, the epinephrine, the noradrenaline, the epinephrine, the noradrenaline, the adrenaline was already starting to adrenaline was already starting to adrenaline was already starting to prepare the body sympathetically prepare the body sympathetically prepare the body sympathetically to go into what it knew was going to be to go into what it knew was going to be to go into what it knew was going to be a very challenging workout. a very challenging workout. a very challenging workout. &gt;&gt; So what's the what was the takeaway &gt;&gt; So what's the what was the takeaway &gt;&gt; So what's the what was the takeaway there? Is it is the stress good for there? Is it is the stress good for there? Is it is the stress good for performance or is it harmful? performance or is it harmful? performance or is it harmful? &gt;&gt; That's a great question. From my data, &gt;&gt; That's a great question. From my data, &gt;&gt; That's a great question. From my data, certainly the greater arousal, the certainly the greater arousal, the certainly the greater arousal, the higher the performance was from a from a higher the performance was from a from a higher the performance was from a from a physical exertion perspective. There's physical exertion perspective. There's physical exertion perspective. There's definitely a bio-an individual definitely a bio-an individual definitely a bio-an individual biokinetics to some of these hormonal biokinetics to some of these hormonal biokinetics to some of these hormonal kind of releases and as much as those kind of releases and as much as those kind of releases and as much as those guys that had the highest guys that had the highest guys that had the highest you know, adrenergic response in terms you know, adrenergic response in terms you know, adrenergic response in terms of epinephrine release, norepinephrine of epinephrine release, norepinephrine of epinephrine release, norepinephrine release, also sustained force output release, also sustained force output release, also sustained force output through for a longer period of the through for a longer period of the through for a longer period of the workout than those that didn't. So the workout than those that didn't. So the workout than those that didn't. So the individuals that had a lower the individuals that had a lower the individuals that had a lower stimulus of the sympathetic arousal, stimulus of the sympathetic arousal, stimulus of the sympathetic arousal, let's say, certainly didn't perform as let's say, certainly didn't perform as let's say, certainly didn't perform as well throughout the workout. There's well throughout the workout. There's well throughout the workout. There's another side to this that I want to ask another side to this that I want to ask another side to this that I want to ask about which is about which is about which is the use of cold. In particular things the use of cold. In particular things the use of cold. In particular things like ice baths, cold showers. In theory like ice baths, cold showers. In theory like ice baths, cold showers. In theory that's stress also. It's epinephrine. that's stress also. It's epinephrine. that's stress also. It's epinephrine. And so um And so um And so um how should one think about the use of how should one think about the use of how should one think about the use of cold for recovery? You know, throwing cold for recovery? You know, throwing cold for recovery? You know, throwing your body into, you know, a cold tub, an your body into, you know, a cold tub, an your body into, you know, a cold tub, an ice bath, or whatever it may be, um ice bath, or whatever it may be, um ice bath, or whatever it may be, um certainly is going to have a certainly is going to have a certainly is going to have a physiological stress response. Now, physiological stress response. Now, physiological stress response. Now, people using that for different end people using that for different end people using that for different end goals. And again, I think that's where goals. And again, I think that's where goals. And again, I think that's where the narrative has to be explained. Um if the narrative has to be explained. Um if the narrative has to be explained. Um if you are using that stress specifically you are using that stress specifically you are using that stress specifically to manage the mindset, um to use it as a to manage the mindset, um to use it as a to manage the mindset, um to use it as a specific stress stimulus, that's the specific stress stimulus, that's the specific stress stimulus, that's the same as me doing 6 by 10 80%. You know, same as me doing 6 by 10 80%. You know, same as me doing 6 by 10 80%. You know, you you're just trying to find something you you're just trying to find something you you're just trying to find something to disrupt the system to do something to disrupt the system to do something to disrupt the system to do something that's very that's very that's very um if you want a better term, painful, um if you want a better term, painful, um if you want a better term, painful, discomfort, whatever. Um you're just discomfort, whatever. Um you're just discomfort, whatever. Um you're just finding a stressor and then being able finding a stressor and then being able finding a stressor and then being able to manage the mindset. But if you're to manage the mindset. But if you're to manage the mindset. But if you're using cold um specifically from a using cold um specifically from a using cold um specifically from a physiological perspective to promote um physiological perspective to promote um physiological perspective to promote um you know, you know, you know, redistribution of vascularity of blood redistribution of vascularity of blood redistribution of vascularity of blood flow, you know, to different vascular flow, you know, to different vascular flow, you know, to different vascular areas of muscle that you feel areas of muscle that you feel areas of muscle that you feel have gone through a workout, that are have gone through a workout, that are have gone through a workout, that are damaged, or whatever it may be. I think damaged, or whatever it may be. I think damaged, or whatever it may be. I think there's we we've got to understand what there's we we've got to understand what there's we we've got to understand what that stress mechanism is. that stress mechanism is. that stress mechanism is. Um and you know, the data, the Um and you know, the data, the Um and you know, the data, the literature is certainly still out there literature is certainly still out there literature is certainly still out there with respect to cryotherapy and cold with respect to cryotherapy and cold with respect to cryotherapy and cold baths and some of these baths and some of these baths and some of these um you know, high these cold um you know, high these cold um you know, high these cold exposures in terms of what they do at exposures in terms of what they do at exposures in terms of what they do at the at the level of the muscle tissue. the at the level of the muscle tissue. the at the level of the muscle tissue. If that's if that's the target, if If that's if that's the target, if If that's if that's the target, if you're trying to promote a flushing you're trying to promote a flushing you're trying to promote a flushing mechanism, or you're trying to promote mechanism, or you're trying to promote mechanism, or you're trying to promote redistribution of the blood flow, redistribution of the blood flow, redistribution of the blood flow, what you've got to understand is that what you've got to understand is that what you've got to understand is that cold is going to clamp down every part cold is going to clamp down every part cold is going to clamp down every part of the vascular system. Um and we've of the vascular system. Um and we've of the vascular system. Um and we've really got to understand how the muscle really got to understand how the muscle really got to understand how the muscle would be redistributed would be redistributed would be redistributed um to areas of interest. So, you know, I um to areas of interest. So, you know, I um to areas of interest. So, you know, I think the stress response is a think the stress response is a think the stress response is a real thing with respect to, you know, real thing with respect to, you know, real thing with respect to, you know, cold exposure. cold exposure. cold exposure. Um but I think the narrative around what Um but I think the narrative around what Um but I think the narrative around what are you using the cold for has to are you using the cold for has to are you using the cold for has to precede the conversation. precede the conversation. precede the conversation. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And cold, I've heard, can actually &gt;&gt; Mhm. And cold, I've heard, can actually &gt;&gt; Mhm. And cold, I've heard, can actually prevent some of the beneficial effects prevent some of the beneficial effects prevent some of the beneficial effects of training. That it can actually get in of training. That it can actually get in of training. That it can actually get in get in the way of muscle growth, etc. get in the way of muscle growth, etc. get in the way of muscle growth, etc. Yeah, there's some Yeah, there's some Yeah, there's some pretty robust data out there now showing pretty robust data out there now showing pretty robust data out there now showing that it definitely has an influence that it definitely has an influence that it definitely has an influence on performance variables like strength on performance variables like strength on performance variables like strength and power in particular. Um but and power in particular. Um but and power in particular. Um but absolutely in terms of muscle absolutely in terms of muscle absolutely in terms of muscle hypertrophy. And there's a big kind of hypertrophy. And there's a big kind of hypertrophy. And there's a big kind of theme in the world of athletic theme in the world of athletic theme in the world of athletic performance right now in terms of performance right now in terms of performance right now in terms of periodization of cold exposure as a recovery of cold exposure as a recovery of cold exposure as a recovery modality. You know, what when do you use modality. You know, what when do you use modality. You know, what when do you use cold? You know, should you be using cold cold? You know, should you be using cold cold? You know, should you be using cold for recovery in periods of high training for recovery in periods of high training for recovery in periods of high training load when you're actually pursuing, you load when you're actually pursuing, you load when you're actually pursuing, you know, maybe general prepa- preparatory know, maybe general prepa- preparatory know, maybe general prepa- preparatory work, or you're actually trying to work, or you're actually trying to work, or you're actually trying to pursue muscle growth. Well, that's pursue muscle growth. Well, that's pursue muscle growth. Well, that's usually where you get the most sore. usually where you get the most sore. usually where you get the most sore. It's usually where, you know, you It's usually where, you know, you It's usually where, you know, you feel the most fatigued, but it's feel the most fatigued, but it's feel the most fatigued, but it's probably not the most beneficial probably not the most beneficial probably not the most beneficial approach to use an ice bath in that in approach to use an ice bath in that in approach to use an ice bath in that in that scenario because you're dampening, that scenario because you're dampening, that scenario because you're dampening, you're dulling the you know, the mTOR you're dulling the you know, the mTOR you're dulling the you know, the mTOR pathway and the hyper- pathway and the hyper- pathway and the hyper- hypertrophic um signaling pathway. hypertrophic um signaling pathway. hypertrophic um signaling pathway. Whereas in a competition phase, where Whereas in a competition phase, where Whereas in a competition phase, where actually quality of exercise and quality actually quality of exercise and quality actually quality of exercise and quality of execution of skill and technical work of execution of skill and technical work of execution of skill and technical work has to be maintained, you want to throw has to be maintained, you want to throw has to be maintained, you want to throw the kitchen sink of recovery uh the kitchen sink of recovery uh the kitchen sink of recovery uh capabilities and recovery interventions capabilities and recovery interventions capabilities and recovery interventions in that scenario because you now you in that scenario because you now you in that scenario because you now you know, the muscle building activity know, the muscle building activity know, the muscle building activity should be in the bank. That should have should be in the bank. That should have should be in the bank. That should have been done in the in the general prepa- been done in the in the general prepa- been done in the in the general prepa- preparatory work and um now you're preparatory work and um now you're preparatory work and um now you're focusing on technical execution. So, focusing on technical execution. So, focusing on technical execution. So, you're absolutely right. No, it's you're absolutely right. No, it's you're absolutely right. No, it's interesting. So, if I if I understand interesting. So, if I if I understand interesting. So, if I if I understand correctly, uh if I want to maximize muscle uh if I want to maximize muscle uh if I want to maximize muscle growth or power it or, you know, growth or power it or, you know, growth or power it or, you know, improvements and adaptations, then the improvements and adaptations, then the improvements and adaptations, then the inflammation response to the late-onset inflammation response to the late-onset inflammation response to the late-onset muscle soreness, all this stuff that's muscle soreness, all this stuff that's muscle soreness, all this stuff that's uncomfortable and that we hear is so uncomfortable and that we hear is so uncomfortable and that we hear is so terrible is actually the stimulus for terrible is actually the stimulus for terrible is actually the stimulus for adaptation. And so, using cold in that adaptation. And so, using cold in that adaptation. And so, using cold in that situation might short circuit my situation might short circuit my situation might short circuit my progress. But, if I'm I, you know, I progress. But, if I'm I, you know, I progress. But, if I'm I, you know, I don't know that I'll ever do this, but don't know that I'll ever do this, but don't know that I'll ever do this, but if I were to do a an Ironman or if I were to do a an Ironman or if I were to do a an Ironman or something or run a marathon, under those something or run a marathon, under those something or run a marathon, under those conditions, I'm basically coming to the conditions, I'm basically coming to the conditions, I'm basically coming to the to the race, so to speak, with all the to the race, so to speak, with all the to the race, so to speak, with all the power and strength I'm going to have. power and strength I'm going to have. power and strength I'm going to have. And so, there reducing inflammation is And so, there reducing inflammation is And so, there reducing inflammation is good because it's going to allow me to good because it's going to allow me to good because it's going to allow me to perform more work, essentially. perform more work, essentially. perform more work, essentially. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yeah, you have to be &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yeah, you have to be &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yeah, you have to be strategic about when you use some of strategic about when you use some of strategic about when you use some of these interventions. And, you know, the these interventions. And, you know, the these interventions. And, you know, the time when you're preparing for a the time when you're preparing for a the time when you're preparing for a competition is the appropriate time when competition is the appropriate time when competition is the appropriate time when you want to drive recovery and make sure you want to drive recovery and make sure you want to drive recovery and make sure that your body is optimized. that your body is optimized. that your body is optimized. Um, you know, when you're far away from Um, you know, when you're far away from Um, you know, when you're far away from a competition, you know, date or, you competition, you know, date or, you competition, you know, date or, you know, out of season or whatever it may know, out of season or whatever it may know, out of season or whatever it may be, and you're really trying to just be, and you're really trying to just be, and you're really trying to just tear up the body a little bit to allow tear up the body a little bit to allow tear up the body a little bit to allow it to its natural, um, you know, it to its natural, um, you know, it to its natural, um, you know, healing and adaptation processes to take healing and adaptation processes to take healing and adaptation processes to take place, well, you don't want to negate place, well, you don't want to negate place, well, you don't want to negate that. You you know, you want the body to that. You you know, you want the body to that. You you know, you want the body to optimize its internal recovery, and optimize its internal recovery, and optimize its internal recovery, and that's how muscle growth is going to that's how muscle growth is going to that's how muscle growth is going to happen. So. So interesting. There happen. So. So interesting. There happen. So. So interesting. There there's a time kind of consideration there's a time kind of consideration there's a time kind of consideration that you need to make with these that you need to make with these that you need to make with these interventions, for sure. At the UFC interventions, for sure. At the UFC interventions, for sure. At the UFC Performance Center, are the are the Performance Center, are the are the Performance Center, are the are the fighters periodizing their cold exposure fighters periodizing their cold exposure fighters periodizing their cold exposure or are they just you doing cold at or are they just you doing cold at or are they just you doing cold at will? Well, it's not just the UFC, at will? Well, it's not just the UFC, at will? Well, it's not just the UFC, and again, I talk about my personal and again, I talk about my personal and again, I talk about my personal experiences with different sports. I experiences with different sports. I experiences with different sports. I think just education around where think just education around where think just education around where science is at and that our understanding science is at and that our understanding science is at and that our understanding of concepts like the use of cold of concepts like the use of cold of concepts like the use of cold exposure for recovery, ice bath, you exposure for recovery, ice bath, you exposure for recovery, ice bath, you know, everyone wants to jump in an ice know, everyone wants to jump in an ice know, everyone wants to jump in an ice bath. But, I think as we've as we've bath. But, I think as we've as we've bath. But, I think as we've as we've stepped back and scientists have started stepped back and scientists have started stepped back and scientists have started to say have started to figure out to say have started to figure out to say have started to figure out and look at some of the data, you know, and look at some of the data, you know, and look at some of the data, you know, we we're now more intuitive about, well, we we're now more intuitive about, well, we we're now more intuitive about, well, actually that might not be the best or actually that might not be the best or actually that might not be the best or the most optimal approach. And I think the most optimal approach. And I think the most optimal approach. And I think that's any given sport. So, yes, that's any given sport. So, yes, that's any given sport. So, yes, certainly here at the at the UFC, we're certainly here at the at the UFC, we're certainly here at the at the UFC, we're trying to educate our athletes around, trying to educate our athletes around, trying to educate our athletes around, you know, appropriate timing. And it's you know, appropriate timing. And it's you know, appropriate timing. And it's the same with nutrition, it's the same the same with nutrition, it's the same the same with nutrition, it's the same with an ice bath intervention, it's the with an ice bath intervention, it's the with an ice bath intervention, it's the same with lifting weights, it's the same with lifting weights, it's the same with lifting weights, it's the same with going for a run or working out on with going for a run or working out on with going for a run or working out on the bike, you know, the bike, you know, the bike, you know, the there's tactics to when you there's tactics to when you there's tactics to when you do things and when you don't do things. do things and when you don't do things. do things and when you don't do things. And I think, you know, stress and And I think, you know, stress and And I think, you know, stress and cold exposure, cold exposure, cold exposure, um we have to have a consideration um we have to have a consideration um we have to have a consideration around that as well, but it's not just, around that as well, but it's not just, around that as well, but it's not just, you know, MMA fighters, that's any you know, MMA fighters, that's any you know, MMA fighters, that's any athlete. And I think it's the best the athlete. And I think it's the best the athlete. And I think it's the best the best professionals, the most successful best professionals, the most successful best professionals, the most successful professionals, do that really well. They professionals, do that really well. They professionals, do that really well. They unders- they listen, number one, they unders- they listen, number one, they unders- they listen, number one, they educate themselves, and then they educate themselves, and then they educate themselves, and then they build structure. And I think, you know, build structure. And I think, you know, build structure. And I think, you know, at the most elite level, we always at the most elite level, we always at the most elite level, we always talk about it here at the UFC, but the talk about it here at the UFC, but the talk about it here at the UFC, but the most elite level, you're not necessarily most elite level, you're not necessarily most elite level, you're not necessarily training harder than anybody else. training harder than anybody else. training harder than anybody else. Everybody in the UFC trains hard. Like Everybody in the UFC trains hard. Like Everybody in the UFC trains hard. Like everyone is training super hard. But the everyone is training super hard. But the everyone is training super hard. But the best athletes, the true elite best athletes, the true elite best athletes, the true elite levels, are the ones that can do it levels, are the ones that can do it levels, are the ones that can do it again and again and again on a daily again and again and again on a daily again and again and again on a daily basis and sus- sustain a technical basis and sus- sustain a technical basis and sus- sustain a technical output for skill development. Therefore, output for skill development. Therefore, output for skill development. Therefore, their skills can improve or physical their skills can improve or physical their skills can improve or physical development, their physical attributes development, their physical attributes development, their physical attributes can improve. So, that ability to can improve. So, that ability to can improve. So, that ability to reproduce on a day-to-day basis falls reproduce on a day-to-day basis falls reproduce on a day-to-day basis falls into a recovery conversation. Now, when into a recovery conversation. Now, when into a recovery conversation. Now, when is the right time to use something like is the right time to use something like is the right time to use something like an ice bath and when isn't is part of an ice bath and when isn't is part of an ice bath and when isn't is part of the high-performance com- the high-performance com- the high-performance com- conversation, for sure. For somebody conversation, for sure. For somebody conversation, for sure. For somebody that wants to get better at sport, uh do that wants to get better at sport, uh do that wants to get better at sport, uh do you recommend a particularly, um you recommend a particularly, um you recommend a particularly, um long or short training session? Does long or short training session? Does long or short training session? Does intensity matter, or is it just reps? intensity matter, or is it just reps? intensity matter, or is it just reps? No, it's not a volume-driven No, it's not a volume-driven No, it's not a volume-driven exercise, it's a quality-driven exercise, it's a quality-driven exercise, it's a quality-driven exercise. It is about rehearsal of exercise. It is about rehearsal of exercise. It is about rehearsal of accurate movement, accurate movement accurate movement, accurate movement accurate movement, accurate movement mechanics. Um and the soon as soon as that becomes Um and the soon as soon as that becomes Um and the soon as soon as that becomes impacted by fatigue or inaccurate impacted by fatigue or inaccurate impacted by fatigue or inaccurate movement, you're now losing the movement, you're now losing the movement, you're now losing the motor learning. You're losing the motor learning. You're losing the motor learning. You're losing the accuracy of the skill that, you You can accuracy of the skill that, you You can accuracy of the skill that, you You can call it muscle memory or whatever they call it muscle memory or whatever they call it muscle memory or whatever they want, right? But essentially you're want, right? But essentially you're want, right? But essentially you're grooving neural axons to create grooving neural axons to create grooving neural axons to create movement patterns and they're movement patterns and they're movement patterns and they're situational throughout sport, right? You situational throughout sport, right? You situational throughout sport, right? You know, whether it's a Cruyff turn in know, whether it's a Cruyff turn in know, whether it's a Cruyff turn in soccer or a jump shot in basketball or a soccer or a jump shot in basketball or a soccer or a jump shot in basketball or a forehand down the line. forehand down the line. forehand down the line. You can carve out that particular You can carve out that particular You can carve out that particular posture and position and skill and you posture and position and skill and you posture and position and skill and you can isolate it and you can drill it can isolate it and you can drill it can isolate it and you can drill it again and again and again. Now, as soon again and again and again. Now, as soon again and again and again. Now, as soon as fatigue is influencing that as fatigue is influencing that as fatigue is influencing that repetition, it's time it's time to stop. repetition, it's time it's time to stop. repetition, it's time it's time to stop. And the best coaches understand that. And the best coaches understand that. And the best coaches understand that. It's shorter sessions that are very high It's shorter sessions that are very high It's shorter sessions that are very high quality and I think the best athletes in quality and I think the best athletes in quality and I think the best athletes in my experience are the ones that my experience are the ones that my experience are the ones that consciously and cognitively consciously and cognitively consciously and cognitively are aware of it at every moment of the are aware of it at every moment of the are aware of it at every moment of the training session. A 3-hour session training session. A 3-hour session training session. A 3-hour session versus a 90-minute session, versus a 90-minute session, versus a 90-minute session, you know, we'll take the 90-minute you know, we'll take the 90-minute you know, we'll take the 90-minute session any day when it comes to skill session any day when it comes to skill session any day when it comes to skill acquisition because that's going to be acquisition because that's going to be acquisition because that's going to be driven by quality over quantity. Yeah, driven by quality over quantity. Yeah, driven by quality over quantity. Yeah, training and skill learning is training and skill learning is training and skill learning is incredibly mentally fatiguing. You hit a incredibly mentally fatiguing. You hit a incredibly mentally fatiguing. You hit a really hard workout or run early in the really hard workout or run early in the really hard workout or run early in the day. What leads to the mental fatigue after What leads to the mental fatigue after What leads to the mental fatigue after physical performance? If you have an physical performance? If you have an physical performance? If you have an amazing coach who is setting up training amazing coach who is setting up training amazing coach who is setting up training in a particular way, it's challenging. in a particular way, it's challenging. in a particular way, it's challenging. It there's a strain related to it and It there's a strain related to it and It there's a strain related to it and I'm not talking physical strain, I'm not talking physical strain, I'm not talking physical strain, I'm talking figuring things out, you know, talking figuring things out, you know, talking figuring things out, you know, figuring out the skill and I think that figuring out the skill and I think that figuring out the skill and I think that can be stressful. Like, you know, if can be stressful. Like, you know, if can be stressful. Like, you know, if they if they hit the right technique, they if they hit the right technique, they if they hit the right technique, you know, that reward center in the you know, that reward center in the you know, that reward center in the brain, that dopamine shot is going to brain, that dopamine shot is going to brain, that dopamine shot is going to fly up there and there's only so many fly up there and there's only so many fly up there and there's only so many times that we can get that before that times that we can get that before that times that we can get that before that becomes dampened. And I think there's an becomes dampened. And I think there's an becomes dampened. And I think there's an energetic piece to it, you know, there's energetic piece to it, you know, there's energetic piece to it, you know, there's the fueling of the brain. There's the fueling of the brain. There's the fueling of the brain. There's the there's the carbohydrate fueling there's the carbohydrate fueling there's the carbohydrate fueling exercise that actually the strategy exercise that actually the strategy exercise that actually the strategy around how you fuel for learning and around how you fuel for learning and around how you fuel for learning and fuel for physical training is fuel for physical training is fuel for physical training is actually pretty similar. actually pretty similar. actually pretty similar. Yeah, it's glucose. It's sugar at Yeah, it's glucose. It's sugar at Yeah, it's glucose. It's sugar at the end of the day, right? Do you think the end of the day, right? Do you think the end of the day, right? Do you think that um that um that um nutrition that doesn't include a lot of nutrition that doesn't include a lot of nutrition that doesn't include a lot of glucose, doesn't include a lot of glucose, doesn't include a lot of glucose, doesn't include a lot of carbohydrates, um is a problem. Yeah, again, um is a problem. Yeah, again, um is a problem. Yeah, again, disclaimer, I'm not a dietitian. Um but disclaimer, I'm not a dietitian. Um but disclaimer, I'm not a dietitian. Um but I think for it's it comes down I think for it's it comes down I think for it's it comes down to metabolic efficiency. You know, we to metabolic efficiency. You know, we to metabolic efficiency. You know, we rarely advocate a high-performance rarely advocate a high-performance rarely advocate a high-performance athlete in a in a high-intensity athlete in a in a high-intensity athlete in a in a high-intensity intermittent sport like MMA being intermittent sport like MMA being intermittent sport like MMA being totally ketogenic. Because at the end of totally ketogenic. Because at the end of totally ketogenic. Because at the end of the day, some of those high-intensity the day, some of those high-intensity the day, some of those high-intensity efforts um efforts um efforts um usually require, you know, carbohydrate usually require, you know, carbohydrate usually require, you know, carbohydrate fueling um for the high and at the fueling um for the high and at the fueling um for the high and at the energy um energy um energy um the energy produced at those high the energy produced at those high the energy produced at those high intensities. &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you real quick? What &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you real quick? What &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you real quick? What about ketones for people that are about ketones for people that are about ketones for people that are ingesting carbohydrates? This is an ingesting carbohydrates? This is an ingesting carbohydrates? This is an interesting area because people always interesting area because people always interesting area because people always hear ketones and they think, "Oh, I have hear ketones and they think, "Oh, I have hear ketones and they think, "Oh, I have to be ketogenic to benefit from taking to be ketogenic to benefit from taking to be ketogenic to benefit from taking ketones." Right. ketones." Right. ketones." Right. &gt;&gt; But there are a number of athletes and &gt;&gt; But there are a number of athletes and &gt;&gt; But there are a number of athletes and um recreational athletes now as well um recreational athletes now as well um recreational athletes now as well taking liquid or powder-based ketones on taking liquid or powder-based ketones on taking liquid or powder-based ketones on even though they do eat rice and oatmeal even though they do eat rice and oatmeal even though they do eat rice and oatmeal and bread and other things. As So, w- and bread and other things. As So, w- and bread and other things. As So, w- are there any um known benefits of are there any um known benefits of are there any um known benefits of ketones even if one is not in a state of ketones even if one is not in a state of ketones even if one is not in a state of ketosis? The use of ketones that I'm ketosis? The use of ketones that I'm ketosis? The use of ketones that I'm primarily aware of is um in our sport primarily aware of is um in our sport primarily aware of is um in our sport is after the event, you know, in terms is after the event, you know, in terms is after the event, you know, in terms of the brain health with athletes of the brain health with athletes of the brain health with athletes that take, you know, potentially taking that take, you know, potentially taking that take, you know, potentially taking trauma to the brain, etc. and looking to trauma to the brain, etc. and looking to trauma to the brain, etc. and looking to maintain the fueling and the maintain the fueling and the maintain the fueling and the energy supply to the brain. But yes, energy supply to the brain. But yes, energy supply to the brain. But yes, it's probably a little bit out of my it's probably a little bit out of my it's probably a little bit out of my remit. So, I don't want to talk on remit. So, I don't want to talk on remit. So, I don't want to talk on that because I'm not I'm not fully that because I'm not I'm not fully that because I'm not I'm not fully familiar with that. Um to come back to familiar with that. Um to come back to familiar with that. Um to come back to your original question, if it's a you your original question, if it's a you your original question, if it's a you know, general population, then yes, I know, general population, then yes, I know, general population, then yes, I think there's a place to argue think there's a place to argue think there's a place to argue that actually being on a ketogenic diet that actually being on a ketogenic diet that actually being on a ketogenic diet at times and maybe that's to cycling at times and maybe that's to cycling at times and maybe that's to cycling exercise, maybe not, I don't mean exercise, maybe not, I don't mean exercise, maybe not, I don't mean cycling a bike, I mean cycling um cycling a bike, I mean cycling um cycling a bike, I mean cycling um ketosis um is beneficial because I think ketosis um is beneficial because I think ketosis um is beneficial because I think it's going to lead to better metabolic it's going to lead to better metabolic it's going to lead to better metabolic management and better metabolic management and better metabolic management and better metabolic efficiency at those lower intensities efficiency at those lower intensities efficiency at those lower intensities where we should be fueling our where we should be fueling our where we should be fueling our metabolism with lipids and fats. Um metabolism with lipids and fats. Um metabolism with lipids and fats. Um clearly the Western diet and you clearly the Western diet and you clearly the Western diet and you know, the modern day diet is heavily know, the modern day diet is heavily know, the modern day diet is heavily driven by processed food and driven by processed food and driven by processed food and carbohydrates that, you know, people carbohydrates that, you know, people carbohydrates that, you know, people become predisposed to utilization of become predisposed to utilization of become predisposed to utilization of that fuel source that fuel source that fuel source above lipid use, fat use at intensities above lipid use, fat use at intensities above lipid use, fat use at intensities that are very low. So, you know, some of that are very low. So, you know, some of that are very low. So, you know, some of our data with the fighters shows that as our data with the fighters shows that as our data with the fighters shows that as well. But, I think the challenge for us is But, I think the challenge for us is But, I think the challenge for us is that we're working with a clientele that we're working with a clientele that we're working with a clientele that require high intensity bouts of effort. require high intensity bouts of effort. require high intensity bouts of effort. So, you know, fueling appropriately So, you know, fueling appropriately So, you know, fueling appropriately is very important for that. Now, we use is very important for that. Now, we use is very important for that. Now, we use we use tactics here where we essentially we use tactics here where we essentially we use tactics here where we essentially have athletes on what you would say kind have athletes on what you would say kind have athletes on what you would say kind of a is it a largely a ketogenic diet, of a is it a largely a ketogenic diet, of a is it a largely a ketogenic diet, but then we will fuel carbohydrates but then we will fuel carbohydrates but then we will fuel carbohydrates around training sessions. So, we'll do around training sessions. So, we'll do around training sessions. So, we'll do very timed exposure to carbohydrates. very timed exposure to carbohydrates. very timed exposure to carbohydrates. So, it's not post training, post So, it's not post training, post So, it's not post training, post training, immediately pre training, immediately pre training, immediately pre during and then immediately post. And during and then immediately post. And during and then immediately post. And then the rest of their diets, you know, then the rest of their diets, you know, then the rest of their diets, you know, breakfast, lunch, and dinner breakfast, lunch, and dinner breakfast, lunch, and dinner what would look like ketogenic type what would look like ketogenic type what would look like ketogenic type approaches. So, we're trying to be very approaches. So, we're trying to be very approaches. So, we're trying to be very tactical in the exposure to maximize the tactical in the exposure to maximize the tactical in the exposure to maximize the intensity for the training intensity for the training intensity for the training and then return to a metabolically and then return to a metabolically and then return to a metabolically efficient diet which is efficient diet which is efficient diet which is heavily reduced in carbohydrate because heavily reduced in carbohydrate because heavily reduced in carbohydrate because we've fueled the sessions that needed we've fueled the sessions that needed we've fueled the sessions that needed it. The way I understand metabolic it. The way I understand metabolic it. The way I understand metabolic efficiency is that you teach the efficiency is that you teach the efficiency is that you teach the body to use fats by maybe doing long body to use fats by maybe doing long body to use fats by maybe doing long bouts of cardio, maybe lowering long bouts of cardio, maybe lowering long bouts of cardio, maybe lowering carbohydrates a bit, so teaching the carbohydrates a bit, so teaching the carbohydrates a bit, so teaching the body to tap into its fat stores for body to tap into its fat stores for body to tap into its fat stores for certain periods of training. certain periods of training. certain periods of training. And then you also teach the body to And then you also teach the body to And then you also teach the body to utilize carbohydrates by supplying utilize carbohydrates by supplying utilize carbohydrates by supplying carbohydrates immediately after training carbohydrates immediately after training carbohydrates immediately after training and before training. You teach the body and before training. You teach the body and before training. You teach the body to use ketones and then you use them at to use ketones and then you use them at to use ketones and then you use them at the appropriate time as opposed to just the appropriate time as opposed to just the appropriate time as opposed to just deciding that one of these fuel sources deciding that one of these fuel sources deciding that one of these fuel sources is good and all the others are bad or is good and all the others are bad or is good and all the others are bad or dispensable. Do I have that correct? dispensable. Do I have that correct? dispensable. Do I have that correct? &gt;&gt; Yes, you're absolutely right. I mean, at &gt;&gt; Yes, you're absolutely right. I mean, at &gt;&gt; Yes, you're absolutely right. I mean, at low intensities of exercise or just low intensities of exercise or just low intensities of exercise or just day-to-day living, we shouldn't be day-to-day living, we shouldn't be day-to-day living, we shouldn't be tapping into our tapping into our tapping into our carbohydrate fuel sources extensively. carbohydrate fuel sources extensively. carbohydrate fuel sources extensively. That that's for higher intensity That that's for higher intensity That that's for higher intensity work or, you know, the fight or flight work or, you know, the fight or flight work or, you know, the fight or flight needs of stress, you know? Um needs of stress, you know? Um needs of stress, you know? Um if, you know, athletes or any individual if, you know, athletes or any individual if, you know, athletes or any individual has a, you know, a high carbohydrate has a, you know, a high carbohydrate has a, you know, a high carbohydrate diet, they're going to start to become diet, they're going to start to become diet, they're going to start to become predisposed to utilizing that fuel predisposed to utilizing that fuel predisposed to utilizing that fuel source preferentially. Now, at low source preferentially. Now, at low source preferentially. Now, at low intensity, that can be problematic, intensity, that can be problematic, intensity, that can be problematic, certainly for an athlete because if they certainly for an athlete because if they certainly for an athlete because if they preferentially use carbohydrate at lower preferentially use carbohydrate at lower preferentially use carbohydrate at lower intensities, when the when the exercise intensities, when the when the exercise intensities, when the when the exercise demand goes to a higher intensity, demand goes to a higher intensity, demand goes to a higher intensity, they've already exhausted their fuel they've already exhausted their fuel they've already exhausted their fuel stores, you know? They can't draw upon stores, you know? They can't draw upon stores, you know? They can't draw upon fat because the oxidation of that fat because the oxidation of that fat because the oxidation of that fat is just too slow. So, they're fat is just too slow. So, they're fat is just too slow. So, they're essentially now become fatigued essentially now become fatigued essentially now become fatigued um because of they've already utilized um because of they've already utilized um because of they've already utilized the carbohydrate stores. So, what we try the carbohydrate stores. So, what we try the carbohydrate stores. So, what we try to do, yes, through diet manipulation to do, yes, through diet manipulation to do, yes, through diet manipulation and a little bit of exercise and a little bit of exercise and a little bit of exercise manipulation is, as you say, teach the manipulation is, as you say, teach the manipulation is, as you say, teach the body or train the body to preferentially body or train the body to preferentially body or train the body to preferentially use a specific fuel source, fat use a specific fuel source, fat use a specific fuel source, fat obviously at lower intensities and obviously at lower intensities and obviously at lower intensities and carbohydrate at high intensities. And we carbohydrate at high intensities. And we carbohydrate at high intensities. And we look at specifically the crossover point look at specifically the crossover point look at specifically the crossover point between the two tells a lot in terms of between the two tells a lot in terms of between the two tells a lot in terms of how an athlete is ultimately um yeah, how an athlete is ultimately um yeah, how an athlete is ultimately um yeah, how their metabolism is working. I think how their metabolism is working. I think how their metabolism is working. I think most people are looking for that one most people are looking for that one most people are looking for that one pattern of eating, that one pattern of pattern of eating, that one pattern of pattern of eating, that one pattern of exercising that's going to be best for exercising that's going to be best for exercising that's going to be best for them or sustain them, and they often them or sustain them, and they often them or sustain them, and they often look back to the time when they felt so look back to the time when they felt so look back to the time when they felt so much better switching from one thing to much better switching from one thing to much better switching from one thing to the next, but the adaptation process the next, but the adaptation process the next, but the adaptation process itself is also key, right? Teaching the itself is also key, right? Teaching the itself is also key, right? Teaching the body. And I um so, if we were to body. And I um so, if we were to body. And I um so, if we were to um just riff on this just a little bit um just riff on this just a little bit um just riff on this just a little bit further, if somebody is eating in a further, if somebody is eating in a further, if somebody is eating in a particular way and they want to try this particular way and they want to try this particular way and they want to try this kind of periodization of nutrition, um kind of periodization of nutrition, um kind of periodization of nutrition, um could one say, "Okay, for a few weeks could one say, "Okay, for a few weeks could one say, "Okay, for a few weeks I'm going to do more high-intensity I'm going to do more high-intensity I'm going to do more high-intensity interval training and weight training, interval training and weight training, interval training and weight training, and I'm going to eat a bit more and I'm going to eat a bit more and I'm going to eat a bit more carbohydrate cuz I'm depleting more carbohydrate cuz I'm depleting more carbohydrate cuz I'm depleting more glycogen. Then if I switch to a glycogen. Then if I switch to a glycogen. Then if I switch to a uh phase of my training where I'm doing uh phase of my training where I'm doing uh phase of my training where I'm doing some longer runs, maybe I'm not maybe some longer runs, maybe I'm not maybe some longer runs, maybe I'm not maybe I'm training less, maybe I'm just I'm training less, maybe I'm just I'm training less, maybe I'm just working at my desk a little bit more, working at my desk a little bit more, working at my desk a little bit more, then I might switch to a low lower then I might switch to a low lower then I might switch to a low lower carbohydrate diet. Do I have that right? carbohydrate diet. Do I have that right? carbohydrate diet. Do I have that right? And then if I'm going to enter a And then if I'm going to enter a And then if I'm going to enter a competition of some sort, certainly not UFC right? of some sort, certainly not UFC right? of some sort, certainly not UFC right? Or MMA of any kind to be clear. Or MMA of any kind to be clear. Or MMA of any kind to be clear. Not because it isn't a wonderful sport, Not because it isn't a wonderful sport, Not because it isn't a wonderful sport, but because it's that wouldn't be good but because it's that wouldn't be good but because it's that wouldn't be good for my other profession. But for my other profession. But for my other profession. But if I were going to do that, then I would if I were going to do that, then I would if I were going to do that, then I would think about stacking carbohydrates, think about stacking carbohydrates, think about stacking carbohydrates, ketones and fats. Is that do I have ketones and fats. Is that do I have ketones and fats. Is that do I have that more or less right? that more or less right? that more or less right? &gt;&gt; I think yeah, you just said it &gt;&gt; I think yeah, you just said it &gt;&gt; I think yeah, you just said it eloquently. At the end of the day, eloquently. At the end of the day, eloquently. At the end of the day, you're consciously understanding what you're consciously understanding what you're consciously understanding what the exposure to physical exertion is the exposure to physical exertion is the exposure to physical exertion is and you're flexing your diet and you're flexing your diet and you're flexing your diet accordingly. A couple more questions. I accordingly. A couple more questions. I accordingly. A couple more questions. I can't help myself. I know we talked I can't help myself. I know we talked I can't help myself. I know we talked about temperature earlier. I have to ask about temperature earlier. I have to ask about temperature earlier. I have to ask you about heat. One of the reasons to a you about heat. One of the reasons to a you about heat. One of the reasons to a deliberate expose oneself to heat is for deliberate expose oneself to heat is for deliberate expose oneself to heat is for things like growth hormone release, etc. things like growth hormone release, etc. things like growth hormone release, etc. We talk about this, but how does one get We talk about this, but how does one get We talk about this, but how does one get better at heat adaptation or at least better at heat adaptation or at least better at heat adaptation or at least what are you doing with the fighters to what are you doing with the fighters to what are you doing with the fighters to get them get them get them better at dealing with heat? Barring better at dealing with heat? Barring better at dealing with heat? Barring like hyperthermia and death. Like I mean like hyperthermia and death. Like I mean like hyperthermia and death. Like I mean obviously heat up the brain too much, obviously heat up the brain too much, obviously heat up the brain too much, people will have seizures and die. But people will have seizures and die. But people will have seizures and die. But you lose neurons. But what's the right you lose neurons. But what's the right you lose neurons. But what's the right way to acclimate heat? Yeah, so we way to acclimate heat? Yeah, so we way to acclimate heat? Yeah, so we normally start with about 15 minutes of normally start with about 15 minutes of normally start with about 15 minutes of exposure. Now if someone's really exposure. Now if someone's really exposure. Now if someone's really lacking acclimation to heat, you know, lacking acclimation to heat, you know, lacking acclimation to heat, you know, you can do that in three five minute you can do that in three five minute you can do that in three five minute efforts. Do you know what I mean? And efforts. Do you know what I mean? And efforts. Do you know what I mean? And actually take time. actually take time. actually take time. &gt;&gt; hot sauna. Yeah, hot sauna. Take time to &gt;&gt; hot sauna. Yeah, hot sauna. Take time to &gt;&gt; hot sauna. Yeah, hot sauna. Take time to step out. step out. step out. &gt;&gt; 200 degrees or something. &gt;&gt; 200 degrees or something. &gt;&gt; 200 degrees or something. &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah. 200 Fahrenheit, yes. And &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah. 200 Fahrenheit, yes. And &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah. 200 Fahrenheit, yes. And we try to work up to 30 to 40 we try to work up to 30 to 40 we try to work up to 30 to 40 minutes to 45 minutes in the sauna minutes to 45 minutes in the sauna minutes to 45 minutes in the sauna continuous. Now we have to continuous. Now we have to continuous. Now we have to understand, you know, what what's the understand, you know, what what's the understand, you know, what what's the advantage of heat acclimation for our advantage of heat acclimation for our advantage of heat acclimation for our athletes? Ultimately, their ability to athletes? Ultimately, their ability to athletes? Ultimately, their ability to sweat and to lose, you know, body fluids sweat and to lose, you know, body fluids sweat and to lose, you know, body fluids is going to be advantageous to their is going to be advantageous to their is going to be advantageous to their weight cut process. So their ability to weight cut process. So their ability to weight cut process. So their ability to make weight. It is a technique that make weight. It is a technique that make weight. It is a technique that these guys some of these guys adopt. So these guys some of these guys adopt. So these guys some of these guys adopt. So if you don't have, you know, a high if you don't have, you know, a high if you don't have, you know, a high sweat rate, it means you're going sweat rate, it means you're going sweat rate, it means you're going to sit in the sauna for longer and to sit in the sauna for longer and to sit in the sauna for longer and longer and longer to get the same delta longer and longer to get the same delta longer and longer to get the same delta in sweat release. Um so, the more in sweat release. Um so, the more in sweat release. Um so, the more acclimated you are, the more your body acclimated you are, the more your body acclimated you are, the more your body is thermogenically adapted, the more is thermogenically adapted, the more is thermogenically adapted, the more sweat glands you have. So, you know, we sweat glands you have. So, you know, we sweat glands you have. So, you know, we start with 15 minutes and then we just start with 15 minutes and then we just start with 15 minutes and then we just try to add on and add on across a time. try to add on and add on across a time. try to add on and add on across a time. And now for us we kind of found And now for us we kind of found And now for us we kind of found about 14 about 14 about 14 um sauna exposures starts to really then um sauna exposures starts to really then um sauna exposures starts to really then drive the adaptations that we're looking drive the adaptations that we're looking drive the adaptations that we're looking for. So, it's not a quick fix. You know, for. So, it's not a quick fix. You know, for. So, it's not a quick fix. You know, a heat acclimation strategy has to a heat acclimation strategy has to a heat acclimation strategy has to happen long before fight week or long happen long before fight week or long happen long before fight week or long before the fights. You know, this is a before the fights. You know, this is a before the fights. You know, this is a this is a process that has to begin, you this is a process that has to begin, you this is a process that has to begin, you know, 8 to 10 weeks before the fight so know, 8 to 10 weeks before the fight so know, 8 to 10 weeks before the fight so that we can actually get that adaptation that we can actually get that adaptation that we can actually get that adaptation and that tolerance to the stressor to and that tolerance to the stressor to and that tolerance to the stressor to the exposure of heat. That's the exposure of heat. That's the exposure of heat. That's interesting. I until today, when we interesting. I until today, when we interesting. I until today, when we talked about this earlier and again now, talked about this earlier and again now, talked about this earlier and again now, I didn't realize that um but it makes I didn't realize that um but it makes I didn't realize that um but it makes perfect sense now that I hear it that perfect sense now that I hear it that perfect sense now that I hear it that heat adaptation is possible. That you heat adaptation is possible. That you heat adaptation is possible. That you basically can train the body to become basically can train the body to become basically can train the body to become better at cooling itself, which is what better at cooling itself, which is what better at cooling itself, which is what sweating is. The body is a you what sweating is. The body is a you what sweating is. The body is a you know, as an organism, as an organic know, as an organism, as an organic know, as an organism, as an organic system, it's hugely adaptable. It's system, it's hugely adaptable. It's system, it's hugely adaptable. It's hugely plastic, but I think the skill is hugely plastic, but I think the skill is hugely plastic, but I think the skill is understanding the whens, the whys, and understanding the whens, the whys, and understanding the whens, the whys, and the whereofs in terms of changing the whereofs in terms of changing the whereofs in terms of changing the overload, changing the stimulus to drive overload, changing the stimulus to drive overload, changing the stimulus to drive specific adaptation. And philosophically specific adaptation. And philosophically specific adaptation. And philosophically that's how we go about our work that's how we go about our work that's how we go about our work here. We talk about adaptation-led here. We talk about adaptation-led here. We talk about adaptation-led programming. Now, adaptation-led programming. Now, adaptation-led programming. Now, adaptation-led programming fits into every single category, not fits into every single category, not fits into every single category, not just lifting weights or running track. just lifting weights or running track. just lifting weights or running track. It fits into nutrition. It fits into It fits into nutrition. It fits into It fits into nutrition. It fits into sitting in the sauna. It fits into being sitting in the sauna. It fits into being sitting in the sauna. It fits into being in a cold bath or not. It fits into so in a cold bath or not. It fits into so in a cold bath or not. It fits into so many different things because we're many different things because we're many different things because we're driven by scientific insights. And and driven by scientific insights. And and driven by scientific insights. And and that's how we really want to go about that's how we really want to go about that's how we really want to go about our business. If someone wanted to our business. If someone wanted to our business. If someone wanted to experiment with heat adaptation or experiment with heat adaptation or experiment with heat adaptation or experiment with cold adaptation or experiment with cold adaptation or experiment with cold adaptation or change up their training regimen or change up their training regimen or change up their training regimen or diet and look at metabolic efficiency, diet and look at metabolic efficiency, diet and look at metabolic efficiency, do you think do you think do you think 12 weeks is a good period of time to 12 weeks is a good period of time to 12 weeks is a good period of time to really give something a thorough go and really give something a thorough go and really give something a thorough go and get gain an understanding of how well or get gain an understanding of how well or get gain an understanding of how well or how poorly something works for oneself how poorly something works for oneself how poorly something works for oneself or would you say eight is enough for or would you say eight is enough for or would you say eight is enough for three? For 99% of things that change three? For 99% of things that change three? For 99% of things that change within the body that physiologically within the body that physiologically within the body that physiologically adapt to a training stimulus or an adapt to a training stimulus or an adapt to a training stimulus or an overload stimulus, you're going to start overload stimulus, you're going to start overload stimulus, you're going to start to see either regression or progression, to see either regression or progression, to see either regression or progression, you know, beneficial or detrimental you know, beneficial or detrimental you know, beneficial or detrimental effects within three months. Absolutely, effects within three months. Absolutely, effects within three months. Absolutely, I would say. And I think, you know, the I would say. And I think, you know, the I would say. And I think, you know, the individual interpretation is always has individual interpretation is always has individual interpretation is always has to be considered. And I think that's to be considered. And I think that's to be considered. And I think that's where it comes back to be a thinking where it comes back to be a thinking where it comes back to be a thinking man's athlete or be a thinking man's athlete or be a thinking man's athlete or be a thinking man's trainer. Like someone that's going trainer. Like someone that's going trainer. Like someone that's going through exercise. Don't through exercise. Don't through exercise. Don't you have to cogni- consciously you have to cogni- consciously you have to cogni- consciously understand where your body's at any understand where your body's at any understand where your body's at any moment in time. You know, you've got to moment in time. You know, you've got to moment in time. You know, you've got to be real with yourself. You create a be real with yourself. You create a be real with yourself. You create a journal, create a log of your training, journal, create a log of your training, journal, create a log of your training, create a log of your feelings, your create a log of your feelings, your create a log of your feelings, your subjective feedback of subjective feedback of subjective feedback of you know, how you felt, your mood, your you know, how you felt, your mood, your you know, how you felt, your mood, your sleep. &gt;&gt; athletes do that? &gt;&gt; athletes do that? &gt;&gt; athletes do that? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, we try to promote that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, we try to promote that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, we try to promote that because again, that's part of because again, that's part of because again, that's part of this process, you know. Um this process, you know. Um this process, you know. Um Maybe 12 weeks for you, but I might get Maybe 12 weeks for you, but I might get Maybe 12 weeks for you, but I might get the same responses in eight weeks, the same responses in eight weeks, the same responses in eight weeks, you know. We could put 15 guys on the you know. We could put 15 guys on the you know. We could put 15 guys on the mat and give them the same workout and mat and give them the same workout and mat and give them the same workout and there's going to be 15 different there's going to be 15 different there's going to be 15 different responses to that same workout because responses to that same workout because responses to that same workout because the human organism is so complex and the human organism is so complex and the human organism is so complex and innate that it's going to adapt innate that it's going to adapt innate that it's going to adapt differently. You know, some people will differently. You know, some people will differently. You know, some people will tolerate it, some people are going to be tolerate it, some people are going to be tolerate it, some people are going to be challenged by it. Some people have got a challenged by it. Some people have got a challenged by it. Some people have got a metabolic makeup that's going to promote metabolic makeup that's going to promote metabolic makeup that's going to promote it, some people are meta- metabolically it, some people are meta- metabolically it, some people are meta- metabolically challenged by it, you know, there's challenged by it, you know, there's challenged by it, you know, there's just so many different things there's just so many different things there's just so many different things that we have to consider and that's what that we have to consider and that's what that we have to consider and that's what we try to do here. It's the cross we try to do here. It's the cross we try to do here. It's the cross we bear is that we try to understand on an bear is that we try to understand on an bear is that we try to understand on an individual level how to optimize individual level how to optimize individual level how to optimize athletic performance. Duncan, when you athletic performance. Duncan, when you athletic performance. Duncan, when you speak, I learn so much. I I'm going to speak, I learn so much. I I'm going to speak, I learn so much. I I'm going to take the protocols that I've heard take the protocols that I've heard take the protocols that I've heard about today. I'm going to think about today. I'm going to think about today. I'm going to think about how I'm training and how I could train how I'm training and how I could train how I'm training and how I could train differently and better, how I'm eating, differently and better, how I'm eating, differently and better, how I'm eating, how I could eat different differently how I could eat different differently how I could eat different differently and better for sake of performance and better for sake of performance and better for sake of performance and just in general. just in general. just in general. Um Thank you so much for your time your Thank you so much for your time your Thank you so much for your time your scientific expertise the stuff you're scientific expertise the stuff you're scientific expertise the stuff you're doing in the practical realm it's doing in the practical realm it's doing in the practical realm it's immense so hopefully we can do it again. immense so hopefully we can do it again. immense so hopefully we can do it again. Yes thank you this has been a blast I Yes thank you this has been a blast I Yes thank you this has been a blast I appreciate it and yeah keep doing what appreciate it and yeah keep doing what appreciate it and yeah keep doing what you're doing cuz I know there's a lot of you're doing cuz I know there's a lot of you're doing cuz I know there's a lot of people out there that love the platform people out there that love the platform people out there that love the platform so thanks for the invite it's been so thanks for the invite it's been so thanks for the invite it's been awesome. Thank you thanks so much all awesome. Thank you thanks so much all awesome. Thank you thanks so much all right.