Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Melissa Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Melissa Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Melissa Ardo, professor of biomedical Ardo, professor of biomedical Ardo, professor of biomedical informatics at the University of Utah. informatics at the University of Utah. informatics at the University of Utah. Dr. Allardo is a world-renowned expert Dr. Allardo is a world-renowned expert Dr. Allardo is a world-renowned expert in human genetics and epigenetics. She in human genetics and epigenetics. She in human genetics and epigenetics. She conducts pioneering studies on how our conducts pioneering studies on how our conducts pioneering studies on how our behavior and the environment can modify behavior and the environment can modify behavior and the environment can modify our gene expression. Today marks the our gene expression. Today marks the our gene expression. Today marks the first time on the Hubberman Lab podcast first time on the Hubberman Lab podcast first time on the Hubberman Lab podcast that we really explore human genetics, that we really explore human genetics, that we really explore human genetics, epigenetics, and how behavior shapes epigenetics, and how behavior shapes epigenetics, and how behavior shapes gene expression across generations. We gene expression across generations. We gene expression across generations. We talk about the inheritance of physical talk about the inheritance of physical talk about the inheritance of physical traits like eye color. And we dive deep traits like eye color. And we dive deep traits like eye color. And we dive deep into fascinating mechanisms such as the into fascinating mechanisms such as the into fascinating mechanisms such as the mamalian dive reflex, a physiological mamalian dive reflex, a physiological mamalian dive reflex, a physiological reaction to breath holding in cold water reaction to breath holding in cold water reaction to breath holding in cold water that, as Dr. Ardo explains can that, as Dr. Ardo explains can that, as Dr. Ardo explains can dramatically alter the physiology of dramatically alter the physiology of dramatically alter the physiology of your spleen to allow significant your spleen to allow significant your spleen to allow significant increases in red blood cell count and increases in red blood cell count and increases in red blood cell count and oxygen availability to your brain and oxygen availability to your brain and oxygen availability to your brain and body. And by the way, the mamalian dive body. And by the way, the mamalian dive body. And by the way, the mamalian dive reflex can be activated outside of free reflex can be activated outside of free reflex can be activated outside of free diving and you can even do it at home. diving and you can even do it at home. diving and you can even do it at home. We also explore how mate preference and We also explore how mate preference and We also explore how mate preference and selection in humans relates to the selection in humans relates to the selection in humans relates to the immune system. That is if you were given immune system. That is if you were given immune system. That is if you were given a choice of many different mates as a choice of many different mates as a choice of many different mates as most people are. The mate you would most people are. The mate you would most people are. The mate you would select is the mate who has the immune select is the mate who has the immune select is the mate who has the immune system composition that is most system composition that is most system composition that is most different from yours. And you would know different from yours. And you would know different from yours. And you would know that on the basis of their smell and how that on the basis of their smell and how that on the basis of their smell and how attractive their smell is to you attractive their smell is to you attractive their smell is to you compared to the smell of other people. compared to the smell of other people. compared to the smell of other people. We also talk about how differences in We also talk about how differences in We also talk about how differences in external traits signal important external traits signal important external traits signal important variations in organ function, hormone variations in organ function, hormone variations in organ function, hormone levels, and even brain physiology. levels, and even brain physiology. levels, and even brain physiology. Toward the end of our conversation, we Toward the end of our conversation, we Toward the end of our conversation, we discuss the current state and ethical discuss the current state and ethical discuss the current state and ethical considerations of gene editing in considerations of gene editing in considerations of gene editing in humans, something that's apt to be an humans, something that's apt to be an humans, something that's apt to be an increasingly important topic in the increasingly important topic in the increasingly important topic in the years to come. Because gene editing in years to come. Because gene editing in years to come. Because gene editing in humans is now possible and is happening, humans is now possible and is happening, humans is now possible and is happening, as you'll soon learn, Dr. Aardo does as you'll soon learn, Dr. Aardo does as you'll soon learn, Dr. Aardo does incredible realworld experiments that incredible realworld experiments that incredible realworld experiments that reveal the remarkable interplay between reveal the remarkable interplay between reveal the remarkable interplay between genes and behavior. And she's an genes and behavior. And she's an genes and behavior. And she's an absolutely phenomenal teacher who makes absolutely phenomenal teacher who makes absolutely phenomenal teacher who makes complex genetic concepts accessible and complex genetic concepts accessible and complex genetic concepts accessible and practical. The conversation is sure to practical. The conversation is sure to practical. The conversation is sure to change the way that you think about mate change the way that you think about mate change the way that you think about mate selection, your parents, their parents, selection, your parents, their parents, selection, your parents, their parents, and what you can do to optimize your and what you can do to optimize your and what you can do to optimize your physiology and health through behavioral physiology and health through behavioral physiology and health through behavioral practices that influence gene practices that influence gene practices that influence gene expression. Before we begin, I'd like to expression. Before we begin, I'd like to expression. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost to desire and effort to bring zerocost to desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science related tools to the general science related tools to the general science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this public. In keeping with that theme, this public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now episode does include sponsors. And now episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. for Melissa for my discussion with Dr. for Melissa for my discussion with Dr. for Melissa Ardo. Dr. Melissa Eardo, welcome. Thank Ardo. Dr. Melissa Eardo, welcome. Thank Ardo. Dr. Melissa Eardo, welcome. Thank you. Nature versus nurture. Super big Nature versus nurture. Super big Nature versus nurture. Super big question that we all wonder about. You question that we all wonder about. You question that we all wonder about. You know, how much of our capabilities and know, how much of our capabilities and know, how much of our capabilities and potential and just general themes of life. and just general themes of life. and just general themes of life. Everything from how we look to what Everything from how we look to what Everything from how we look to what we're capable of doing or not doing in we're capable of doing or not doing in we're capable of doing or not doing in the moment or where we might be able to the moment or where we might be able to the moment or where we might be able to improve or not improve. We hear some of improve or not improve. We hear some of improve or not improve. We hear some of its nature, some of its nurture. So if its nature, some of its nurture. So if its nature, some of its nurture. So if we take a step back and we just ask a we take a step back and we just ask a we take a step back and we just ask a big question about human big question about human big question about human genetics, how much of our DNA is genetics, how much of our DNA is genetics, how much of our DNA is modifiable by our environment and what modifiable by our environment and what modifiable by our environment and what we do, what we choose to do in we do, what we choose to do in we do, what we choose to do in particular, because that's most of what particular, because that's most of what particular, because that's most of what we're going to emphasize today. I think we're going to emphasize today. I think we're going to emphasize today. I think that's something we're still that's something we're still that's something we're still understanding at this point. I mean, I understanding at this point. I mean, I understanding at this point. I mean, I think every day we're getting more and think every day we're getting more and think every day we're getting more and more information about the ways that we more information about the ways that we more information about the ways that we can actually modify gene expression and can actually modify gene expression and can actually modify gene expression and these things that we thought were these things that we thought were these things that we thought were totally predetermined in the past. Um, totally predetermined in the past. Um, totally predetermined in the past. Um, and so yeah, I think we're still and so yeah, I think we're still and so yeah, I think we're still learning with epigenetics and all of learning with epigenetics and all of learning with epigenetics and all of these new fields just how much we can these new fields just how much we can these new fields just how much we can actually change things. Um, there are of actually change things. Um, there are of actually change things. Um, there are of course things that are kind of written course things that are kind of written course things that are kind of written in our genes, but um, I think we're in our genes, but um, I think we're in our genes, but um, I think we're learning that there's a lot more that we learning that there's a lot more that we learning that there's a lot more that we can change. Most of us at some point in can change. Most of us at some point in can change. Most of us at some point in high school um, learn Mandelian high school um, learn Mandelian high school um, learn Mandelian genetics, right? Mendle the monk and his genetics, right? Mendle the monk and his genetics, right? Mendle the monk and his peas in his garden. Um, most people peas in his garden. Um, most people peas in his garden. Um, most people probably don't remember the details of probably don't remember the details of probably don't remember the details of that, but we also learn about eye color. that, but we also learn about eye color. that, but we also learn about eye color. You know, it it's uh, you know, common You know, it it's uh, you know, common You know, it it's uh, you know, common place for people to understand that if place for people to understand that if place for people to understand that if both your parents have dark eyes, with both your parents have dark eyes, with both your parents have dark eyes, with very rare exception, it's unlikely that very rare exception, it's unlikely that very rare exception, it's unlikely that you're going to get light eyes as a you're going to get light eyes as a you're going to get light eyes as a child, but it's possible. But if you child, but it's possible. But if you child, but it's possible. But if you have one lighteyed parent and one have one lighteyed parent and one have one lighteyed parent and one darkeyed parent, then you start to enter darkeyed parent, then you start to enter darkeyed parent, then you start to enter the probability game. And then at some the probability game. And then at some the probability game. And then at some point, your parents dictate a lot of point, your parents dictate a lot of point, your parents dictate a lot of your appearance, your phenotype. uh and your appearance, your phenotype. uh and your appearance, your phenotype. uh and yet that there are aspects of our yet that there are aspects of our yet that there are aspects of our parents that are not seen in us at all parents that are not seen in us at all parents that are not seen in us at all and vice versa. And so I think for most and vice versa. And so I think for most and vice versa. And so I think for most people when we think about genes, we people when we think about genes, we people when we think about genes, we think about heritability. But your work think about heritability. But your work think about heritability. But your work focuses a lot on the aspects of genetic focuses a lot on the aspects of genetic focuses a lot on the aspects of genetic expression that are subject to change expression that are subject to change expression that are subject to change based on what people choose to do or are based on what people choose to do or are based on what people choose to do or are forced to do in order to survive, forced to do in order to survive, forced to do in order to survive, something we call selection. So could something we call selection. So could something we call selection. So could you tell us about selection in terms of you tell us about selection in terms of you tell us about selection in terms of how quickly a given behavior, for how quickly a given behavior, for how quickly a given behavior, for example, can change our gene expression? example, can change our gene expression? example, can change our gene expression? I'm not aware of any way to change one's I'm not aware of any way to change one's I'm not aware of any way to change one's eye color without putting in like a eye color without putting in like a eye color without putting in like a colored contact lens. Now, there's some colored contact lens. Now, there's some colored contact lens. Now, there's some esoteric things showing up online about esoteric things showing up online about esoteric things showing up online about people using these bizarre treatments to people using these bizarre treatments to people using these bizarre treatments to change their eye color, but for the most change their eye color, but for the most change their eye color, but for the most part, people accept that you're not part, people accept that you're not part, people accept that you're not going to change your eye color by going to change your eye color by going to change your eye color by behaving differently. But what are some behaving differently. But what are some behaving differently. But what are some examples where we can change our gene examples where we can change our gene examples where we can change our gene expression quickly or relatively quickly expression quickly or relatively quickly expression quickly or relatively quickly by doing something differently? Yeah. by doing something differently? Yeah. by doing something differently? Yeah. Um, just going back to eye color because Um, just going back to eye color because Um, just going back to eye color because this is just one of my favorite genetics this is just one of my favorite genetics this is just one of my favorite genetics um, facts. So, everyone with blue eyes um, facts. So, everyone with blue eyes um, facts. So, everyone with blue eyes descends from the same person. Um, so at descends from the same person. Um, so at descends from the same person. Um, so at one point in human history, one person one point in human history, one person one point in human history, one person had a change in their eye color. And had a change in their eye color. And had a change in their eye color. And it's just like amazing to imagine this it's just like amazing to imagine this it's just like amazing to imagine this person who had blue eyes for the first person who had blue eyes for the first person who had blue eyes for the first time. um and then through many time. um and then through many time. um and then through many generations probably because that was a generations probably because that was a generations probably because that was a very attractive and interesting feature very attractive and interesting feature very attractive and interesting feature in that individual you know that spread in that individual you know that spread in that individual you know that spread throughout human populations as we know throughout human populations as we know throughout human populations as we know them. So I always just find that to be them. So I always just find that to be them. So I always just find that to be fun about blue eyes. So there was a fun about blue eyes. So there was a fun about blue eyes. So there was a blue-eyed F1 as we say the first um blue-eyed F1 as we say the first um blue-eyed F1 as we say the first um let's stay on eye color for a moment let's stay on eye color for a moment let's stay on eye color for a moment because I uh before we get into how because I uh before we get into how because I uh before we get into how genes can be modified by behavior. Um genes can be modified by behavior. Um genes can be modified by behavior. Um I've been told that the green eye I've been told that the green eye I've been told that the green eye phenotype is one of the more rare eye phenotype is one of the more rare eye phenotype is one of the more rare eye colors. Is that true? I think that's colors. Is that true? I think that's colors. Is that true? I think that's right. Yeah, I think it's the most rare. right. Yeah, I think it's the most rare. right. Yeah, I think it's the most rare. Okay. So, and can we assume that there Okay. So, and can we assume that there Okay. So, and can we assume that there was an original F1 browneyed person that was an original F1 browneyed person that was an original F1 browneyed person that gave rise to the entire lineage of brown gave rise to the entire lineage of brown gave rise to the entire lineage of brown eyes subsequently? Yeah, I think in the eyes subsequently? Yeah, I think in the eyes subsequently? Yeah, I think in the history of humans as a species, I think history of humans as a species, I think history of humans as a species, I think that was our original eye color. Um, and that was our original eye color. Um, and that was our original eye color. Um, and so then, yeah, having these other eye so then, yeah, having these other eye so then, yeah, having these other eye colors um arise in the population um colors um arise in the population um colors um arise in the population um created these events. I think green created these events. I think green created these events. I think green eyes, if I'm not mistaken, there were eyes, if I'm not mistaken, there were eyes, if I'm not mistaken, there were multiple people, you know, that comes multiple people, you know, that comes multiple people, you know, that comes from different genes from different from different genes from different from different genes from different individuals in the history of humans. individuals in the history of humans. individuals in the history of humans. Um, but yeah, blue eyes is just this one Um, but yeah, blue eyes is just this one Um, but yeah, blue eyes is just this one individual. I realize I'm slightly individual. I realize I'm slightly individual. I realize I'm slightly remiss on the statement about eye color remiss on the statement about eye color remiss on the statement about eye color not being subject to behavior. We know not being subject to behavior. We know not being subject to behavior. We know that as you get more sunlight exposure, that as you get more sunlight exposure, that as you get more sunlight exposure, in particular ultraviolet light in particular ultraviolet light in particular ultraviolet light exposure, that eyes will darken. Is that exposure, that eyes will darken. Is that exposure, that eyes will darken. Is that right? Regardless of where they start. right? Regardless of where they start. right? Regardless of where they start. Interesting. So like a blue-eyed baby Interesting. So like a blue-eyed baby Interesting. So like a blue-eyed baby will have much bluer eyes at birth than will have much bluer eyes at birth than will have much bluer eyes at birth than it will at age 15 at age 80 for it will at age 15 at age 80 for it will at age 15 at age 80 for instance. And we believe that's due to instance. And we believe that's due to instance. And we believe that's due to uh changes in pigmentation because of uh changes in pigmentation because of uh changes in pigmentation because of UV exposure. That's really interesting. UV exposure. That's really interesting. UV exposure. That's really interesting. I'd like to take a quick break and thank I'd like to take a quick break and thank I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor, JWVE. JWV makes medical our sponsor, JWVE. JWV makes medical our sponsor, JWVE. JWV makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if grade red light therapy devices. Now, if grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have there's one thing that I have there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light it is the incredible impact that light it is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in can have on our biology. Now, in can have on our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near addition to sunlight, red light and near addition to sunlight, red light and near infrared light sources have been shown infrared light sources have been shown infrared light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving to have positive effects on improving to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellar and organ numerous aspects of cellar and organ numerous aspects of cellar and organ health, including faster muscle health, including faster muscle health, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound recovery, improved skin health and wound recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced healing, improvements in acne, reduced healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even pain and inflammation, even pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving mitochondrial function, and improving mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. What sets tube lights vision itself. What sets tube lights vision itself. What sets tube lights apart and why they're my preferred red apart and why they're my preferred red apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use light therapy device is that they use light therapy device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and specific wavelengths of red light and specific wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to near infrared light in combination to near infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body panel about three to four times a week, panel about three to four times a week, panel about three to four times a week, and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to try JWV, you can go to JW spelled try JWV, you can go to JW spelled try JWV, you can go to JW spelled jv.com/huberman. JWV is offering an exclusive discount to JWV is offering an exclusive discount to JWV is offering an exclusive discount to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to $400 off JUFE products. Again, that's $400 off JUFE products. Again, that's $400 off JUFE products. Again, that's JWV spelled JV.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. JV.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. JV.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. 8LE makes smart mattress Eight Sleep. 8LE makes smart mattress Eight Sleep. 8LE makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and covers with cooling, heating, and covers with cooling, heating, and sleeptracking capacity. One of the best sleeptracking capacity. One of the best sleeptracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is ways to ensure a great night's sleep is ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of to make sure that the temperature of to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and And that's because in order to fall and And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body stay deeply asleep, your body stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an eightle mattress been sleeping on an eightle mattress been sleeping on an eightle mattress cover for over 4 years now, and it has cover for over 4 years now, and it has cover for over 4 years now, and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. Eightle has just quality of my sleep. Eightle has just quality of my sleep. Eightle has just launched their latest model, the Pod 5. launched their latest model, the Pod 5. launched their latest model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has several new important And the Pod 5 has several new important And the Pod 5 has several new important features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. The base shifts to optimize your sleep. The base shifts to optimize your sleep. The base on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated speaker that syncs to the Eight Sleep speaker that syncs to the Eight Sleep speaker that syncs to the Eight Sleep app and can play audio to support app and can play audio to support app and can play audio to support relaxation and recovery. The audio relaxation and recovery. The audio relaxation and recovery. The audio catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest scripts that I worked on with deep rest scripts that I worked on with deep rest scripts that I worked on with eight sleep to record. If you're not eight sleep to record. If you're not eight sleep to record. If you're not familiar, NSDR involves listening to an familiar, NSDR involves listening to an familiar, NSDR involves listening to an audio script that walks you through a audio script that walks you through a audio script that walks you through a deep body relaxation combined with some deep body relaxation combined with some deep body relaxation combined with some very simple breathing exercises. And very simple breathing exercises. And very simple breathing exercises. And that combination has been shown in that combination has been shown in that combination has been shown in peer-reviewed studies to restore your peer-reviewed studies to restore your peer-reviewed studies to restore your mental and physical vigor. And this is mental and physical vigor. And this is mental and physical vigor. And this is great because while we would all like to great because while we would all like to great because while we would all like to get to bed on time and get up after a get to bed on time and get up after a get to bed on time and get up after a perfect night's sleep, often times we perfect night's sleep, often times we perfect night's sleep, often times we get to bed a little late or later. get to bed a little late or later. get to bed a little late or later. Sometimes we have to get up early and Sometimes we have to get up early and Sometimes we have to get up early and charge into the day because we have our charge into the day because we have our charge into the day because we have our obligations. NSDR can help offset some obligations. NSDR can help offset some obligations. NSDR can help offset some of the negative effects of slight sleep of the negative effects of slight sleep of the negative effects of slight sleep deprivation. And NSDR gets you better at deprivation. And NSDR gets you better at deprivation. And NSDR gets you better at falling back asleep should you wake up falling back asleep should you wake up falling back asleep should you wake up in the middle of the night. It's an in the middle of the night. It's an in the middle of the night. It's an extremely powerful tool that anyone can extremely powerful tool that anyone can extremely powerful tool that anyone can benefit from the first time and every benefit from the first time and every benefit from the first time and every time. If you'd like to try eight, go to time. If you'd like to try eight, go to time. If you'd like to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico countries worldwide, including Mexico countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's and the UAE. Again, that's and the UAE. Again, that's eight.comhuberman to save up to eight.comhuberman to save up to eight.comhuberman to save up to $350. Thank you for that because I think $350. Thank you for that because I think $350. Thank you for that because I think that uh most everyone um is interested that uh most everyone um is interested that uh most everyone um is interested in eyes and eye color. Uh what are in eyes and eye color. Uh what are in eyes and eye color. Uh what are the um sort of examples that come to the um sort of examples that come to the um sort of examples that come to mind when you think of rapid changes in mind when you think of rapid changes in mind when you think of rapid changes in gene expression in any organ? Could be gene expression in any organ? Could be gene expression in any organ? Could be at the surface of the body or it could at the surface of the body or it could at the surface of the body or it could be internally uh that are governed by be internally uh that are governed by be internally uh that are governed by some change in behavior. Yeah. So I mean some change in behavior. Yeah. So I mean some change in behavior. Yeah. So I mean our genes are constantly changing our genes are constantly changing our genes are constantly changing how they're expressing based on um you how they're expressing based on um you how they're expressing based on um you know what environmental stimulus is know what environmental stimulus is know what environmental stimulus is coming in. Um so we have you know these coming in. Um so we have you know these coming in. Um so we have you know these changes that happen on the order of you changes that happen on the order of you changes that happen on the order of you know minutes or hours or things like know minutes or hours or things like know minutes or hours or things like that. Then there's also changes that that. Then there's also changes that that. Then there's also changes that we're finding out are happening kind of we're finding out are happening kind of we're finding out are happening kind of over generations. So we now know that um over generations. So we now know that um over generations. So we now know that um there can be epigenetic changes. So there can be epigenetic changes. So there can be epigenetic changes. So these are changes you know little these are changes you know little these are changes you know little modifications to the genome um that modifications to the genome um that modifications to the genome um that happen by things actually molecules happen by things actually molecules happen by things actually molecules actually attaching to the genome and actually attaching to the genome and actually attaching to the genome and changing how genes express um that can changing how genes express um that can changing how genes express um that can be passed down. So this is really be passed down. So this is really be passed down. So this is really interesting from a the perspective of interesting from a the perspective of interesting from a the perspective of things like trauma. Um you know we know things like trauma. Um you know we know things like trauma. Um you know we know that you know refugee populations that you know refugee populations that you know refugee populations actually have some of these changes that actually have some of these changes that actually have some of these changes that they've inherited from their parents they've inherited from their parents they've inherited from their parents even if they weren't you know victims of even if they weren't you know victims of even if they weren't you know victims of the of the event that caused them to be the of the event that caused them to be the of the event that caused them to be refugees. Excuse me for interrupting, refugees. Excuse me for interrupting, refugees. Excuse me for interrupting, but are those changes that are passed but are those changes that are passed but are those changes that are passed down, are they adaptive? Are they making down, are they adaptive? Are they making down, are they adaptive? Are they making subsequent populations more resilient or subsequent populations more resilient or subsequent populations more resilient or less resilient? Yeah, that's a very good less resilient? Yeah, that's a very good less resilient? Yeah, that's a very good question. Um, you know, in the case of question. Um, you know, in the case of question. Um, you know, in the case of trauma and refugees, I'm not sure. I of trauma and refugees, I'm not sure. I of trauma and refugees, I'm not sure. I do know in terms of starvation, that's do know in terms of starvation, that's do know in terms of starvation, that's been something that's been studied as been something that's been studied as been something that's been studied as well. So, there was a famine um that well. So, there was a famine um that well. So, there was a famine um that affected Dutch people several hundred affected Dutch people several hundred affected Dutch people several hundred years ago, I think. And uh and that was years ago, I think. And uh and that was years ago, I think. And uh and that was actually also kind of recorded in these actually also kind of recorded in these actually also kind of recorded in these in these epigenetic changes. And so in these epigenetic changes. And so in these epigenetic changes. And so presumably that's a change that is presumably that's a change that is presumably that's a change that is helping that population to better helping that population to better helping that population to better survive that famine. So in that way it's survive that famine. So in that way it's survive that famine. So in that way it's resilient. But then you know you think resilient. But then you know you think resilient. But then you know you think about in a contemporary situation where about in a contemporary situation where about in a contemporary situation where um you know food is abundant maybe that um you know food is abundant maybe that um you know food is abundant maybe that is no longer beneficial even though at is no longer beneficial even though at is no longer beneficial even though at one point it was. Um and so then we have one point it was. Um and so then we have one point it was. Um and so then we have this other kind of order of change which this other kind of order of change which this other kind of order of change which is um you know actual changes in the is um you know actual changes in the is um you know actual changes in the genes themselves that either arise from genes themselves that either arise from genes themselves that either arise from mutations in you know these single base mutations in you know these single base mutations in you know these single base pairs um or at many different sites or pairs um or at many different sites or pairs um or at many different sites or things like variation that's already things like variation that's already things like variation that's already present in the population at a certain present in the population at a certain present in the population at a certain amount that then you know increases in amount that then you know increases in amount that then you know increases in frequency throughout the population. And frequency throughout the population. And frequency throughout the population. And this is where a lot of my work has this is where a lot of my work has this is where a lot of my work has focused. Um, and these are changes that focused. Um, and these are changes that focused. Um, and these are changes that until recently we thought would take, until recently we thought would take, until recently we thought would take, you know, 5,000 years, 10,000 years, um, you know, 5,000 years, 10,000 years, um, you know, 5,000 years, 10,000 years, um, uh, at least. And now we're starting to uh, at least. And now we're starting to uh, at least. And now we're starting to understand that maybe that can happen in understand that maybe that can happen in understand that maybe that can happen in as short as a thousand years, 2,000 as short as a thousand years, 2,000 as short as a thousand years, 2,000 years. This might be slightly, uh, out years. This might be slightly, uh, out years. This might be slightly, uh, out of line with what we're talking about of line with what we're talking about of line with what we're talking about right now. But I really fascinated by right now. But I really fascinated by right now. But I really fascinated by this concept of hybrid vigor. Uh I was this concept of hybrid vigor. Uh I was this concept of hybrid vigor. Uh I was taught I don't know if the data still taught I don't know if the data still taught I don't know if the data still hold up that if you give mice a choice hold up that if you give mice a choice hold up that if you give mice a choice of other mice to mate with to produce of other mice to mate with to produce of other mice to mate with to produce off offspring with that they will select off offspring with that they will select off offspring with that they will select a mouse whose um major a mouse whose um major a mouse whose um major hystocompatibility complex which is a hystocompatibility complex which is a hystocompatibility complex which is a reflection of diversity of uh immune reflection of diversity of uh immune reflection of diversity of uh immune genes so to speak. They'll pick the genes so to speak. They'll pick the genes so to speak. They'll pick the mouse whose immune system is most mouse whose immune system is most mouse whose immune system is most different from theirs. Presumably the different from theirs. Presumably the different from theirs. Presumably the just so story because we're making stuff just so story because we're making stuff just so story because we're making stuff up about why they do this, right? Nobody up about why they do this, right? Nobody up about why they do this, right? Nobody really knows. The the just so story is really knows. The the just so story is really knows. The the just so story is that they do this in order to produce that they do this in order to produce that they do this in order to produce offspring that have a much broader array offspring that have a much broader array offspring that have a much broader array of immune genes to be able to combat a of immune genes to be able to combat a of immune genes to be able to combat a much broader array of potential much broader array of potential much broader array of potential pathogens. Is that true in mice still? pathogens. Is that true in mice still? pathogens. Is that true in mice still? And is it true in humans as well? Do And is it true in humans as well? Do And is it true in humans as well? Do people elect to produce offspring, if people elect to produce offspring, if people elect to produce offspring, if given a choice, produce offspring with given a choice, produce offspring with given a choice, produce offspring with people that are more different from them people that are more different from them people that are more different from them as opposed to similar to them? So they as opposed to similar to them? So they as opposed to similar to them? So they did a very similar study in humans and did a very similar study in humans and did a very similar study in humans and humans also are drawn to other humans also are drawn to other humans also are drawn to other humans that have these differences. So it's that have these differences. So it's that have these differences. So it's interesting um especially with the interesting um especially with the interesting um especially with the immune system. There was a study where I immune system. There was a study where I immune system. There was a study where I think they had people smell sweaty think they had people smell sweaty think they had people smell sweaty t-shirts of you know members of the t-shirts of you know members of the t-shirts of you know members of the opposite sex if they were heterosexual opposite sex if they were heterosexual opposite sex if they were heterosexual um to see if you know how attracted they um to see if you know how attracted they um to see if you know how attracted they felt to the person just based on the felt to the person just based on the felt to the person just based on the smell of their sweaty t-shirt. Um, and smell of their sweaty t-shirt. Um, and smell of their sweaty t-shirt. Um, and people were more drawn to people who had people were more drawn to people who had people were more drawn to people who had very different immune systems than their very different immune systems than their very different immune systems than their own. Um, so I think this is something, own. Um, so I think this is something, own. Um, so I think this is something, you know, we see it in mice and it's you know, we see it in mice and it's you know, we see it in mice and it's easy to say, "Oh, you know, it's they're easy to say, "Oh, you know, it's they're easy to say, "Oh, you know, it's they're animals. Of course, they do that." But animals. Of course, they do that." But animals. Of course, they do that." But we do it as humans, too. And it'd be we do it as humans, too. And it'd be we do it as humans, too. And it'd be interesting to know to what extent interesting to know to what extent interesting to know to what extent that's influencing our choice of mates that's influencing our choice of mates that's influencing our choice of mates and spouses. Super interesting. So, and spouses. Super interesting. So, and spouses. Super interesting. So, they're given a choice of sweaty they're given a choice of sweaty they're given a choice of sweaty clothing from the opposite sex potential clothing from the opposite sex potential clothing from the opposite sex potential partner. or I guess they're I don't know partner. or I guess they're I don't know partner. or I guess they're I don't know if they were, you know, sent out on if they were, you know, sent out on if they were, you know, sent out on dates after the uh the experiment, but dates after the uh the experiment, but dates after the uh the experiment, but they're and they're smelling let's say they're and they're smelling let's say they're and they're smelling let's say 10 different t-shirts that are sweaty 10 different t-shirts that are sweaty 10 different t-shirts that are sweaty and then they're saying and then they and then they're saying and then they and then they're saying and then they rank order them and the one they like rank order them and the one they like rank order them and the one they like the most. If you go and look at the most. If you go and look at the most. If you go and look at the genome of the person whose sweat was on genome of the person whose sweat was on genome of the person whose sweat was on that clothing and specifically the that clothing and specifically the that clothing and specifically the immune system that you're talking about, immune system that you're talking about, immune system that you're talking about, you know, the um what is it? Histo major you know, the um what is it? Histo major you know, the um what is it? Histo major compatibility complex. Yeah. The the compatibility complex. Yeah. The the compatibility complex. Yeah. The the more different they were in that um the more different they were in that um the more different they were in that um the more attracted they were to that smell. more attracted they were to that smell. more attracted they were to that smell. It's kind of amazing, right? Like that It's kind of amazing, right? Like that It's kind of amazing, right? Like that smell, which we just think of as I like smell, which we just think of as I like smell, which we just think of as I like this body odor. I don't like this body this body odor. I don't like this body this body odor. I don't like this body odor. I love this body odor is um kind odor. I love this body odor is um kind odor. I love this body odor is um kind of a proxy for gene expression related of a proxy for gene expression related of a proxy for gene expression related to the immune system of the offspring to the immune system of the offspring to the immune system of the offspring that you haven't even had yet with this that you haven't even had yet with this that you haven't even had yet with this smelly t-shirt owning person. It's kind smelly t-shirt owning person. It's kind smelly t-shirt owning person. It's kind of wild. So, I think it speaks to smell of wild. So, I think it speaks to smell of wild. So, I think it speaks to smell and these aren't really pheromone and these aren't really pheromone and these aren't really pheromone effects, but it speaks to smell as uh a effects, but it speaks to smell as uh a effects, but it speaks to smell as uh a pretty powerful driver of mate pretty powerful driver of mate pretty powerful driver of mate selection. Yeah. I mean it I think it selection. Yeah. I mean it I think it selection. Yeah. I mean it I think it could be um it's also interesting you could be um it's also interesting you could be um it's also interesting you know we have you know when you're know we have you know when you're know we have you know when you're talking about hybrid compatibility or talking about hybrid compatibility or talking about hybrid compatibility or hybrid I called it hybrid vigor based hybrid I called it hybrid vigor based hybrid I called it hybrid vigor based on no particular knowledge of the on no particular knowledge of the on no particular knowledge of the correct term that it's the term I use correct term that it's the term I use correct term that it's the term I use because it makes sense to me. Yeah yeah because it makes sense to me. Yeah yeah because it makes sense to me. Yeah yeah something like that uh you know we're something like that uh you know we're something like that uh you know we're having with having with having with globalization people um meeting each globalization people um meeting each globalization people um meeting each other you know across cultures across other you know across cultures across other you know across cultures across continents for the first time. So, we're continents for the first time. So, we're continents for the first time. So, we're getting genetic combinations that have getting genetic combinations that have getting genetic combinations that have never been possible in the history of never been possible in the history of never been possible in the history of humans. Um, and that's creating some humans. Um, and that's creating some humans. Um, and that's creating some interesting both kind of resilience and interesting both kind of resilience and interesting both kind of resilience and then also disease because you have, you then also disease because you have, you then also disease because you have, you know, combinations of genetic variants know, combinations of genetic variants know, combinations of genetic variants that have never been in the same that have never been in the same that have never been in the same individual before um that are now individual before um that are now individual before um that are now showing up together. I find this super showing up together. I find this super showing up together. I find this super interesting um for a couple of reasons. interesting um for a couple of reasons. interesting um for a couple of reasons. First of all, I I'll turn 50 in First of all, I I'll turn 50 in First of all, I I'll turn 50 in September, and I remember a time not September, and I remember a time not September, and I remember a time not that long ago where it was very unusual, that long ago where it was very unusual, that long ago where it was very unusual, for instance, to see an interracial for instance, to see an interracial for instance, to see an interracial couple in a television show when I was couple in a television show when I was couple in a television show when I was growing up. Now, that's changed, right? growing up. Now, that's changed, right? growing up. Now, that's changed, right? And I think that's reflective of a And I think that's reflective of a And I think that's reflective of a number of things. I mean, there's cause number of things. I mean, there's cause number of things. I mean, there's cause and effect directionality here that we and effect directionality here that we and effect directionality here that we could get into, but that's a different could get into, but that's a different could get into, but that's a different podcast. uh but that yes people are um podcast. uh but that yes people are um podcast. uh but that yes people are um intermaring andor producing children intermaring andor producing children intermaring andor producing children with people that whose backgrounds with people that whose backgrounds with people that whose backgrounds genetic backgrounds are very different genetic backgrounds are very different genetic backgrounds are very different than their own. Um and if we take the than their own. Um and if we take the than their own. Um and if we take the opposite extreme, it makes perfect sense as to extreme, it makes perfect sense as to extreme, it makes perfect sense as to why this hybrid vigor thing would exist. why this hybrid vigor thing would exist. why this hybrid vigor thing would exist. And and the opposite extreme is a very And and the opposite extreme is a very And and the opposite extreme is a very uncomfortable thing. But if you think uncomfortable thing. But if you think uncomfortable thing. But if you think about incest, incest has been about incest, incest has been about incest, incest has been discouraged in populations for a very discouraged in populations for a very discouraged in populations for a very long time without anyone understanding long time without anyone understanding long time without anyone understanding genetics like the mechanisms of genetics like the mechanisms of genetics like the mechanisms of genetics per se. It's been well genetics per se. It's been well genetics per se. It's been well understood that in small villages that understood that in small villages that understood that in small villages that people shouldn't mate with their people shouldn't mate with their people shouldn't mate with their siblings, shouldn't mate with their siblings, shouldn't mate with their siblings, shouldn't mate with their cousins, shouldn't mate, and ideally not cousins, shouldn't mate, and ideally not cousins, shouldn't mate, and ideally not even with second cousins because of the even with second cousins because of the even with second cousins because of the potential for disease. So I've always potential for disease. So I've always potential for disease. So I've always been fascinated by the idea that nature been fascinated by the idea that nature been fascinated by the idea that nature punishes reproducing with people that are too reproducing with people that are too reproducing with people that are too close to you, right? And then of course close to you, right? And then of course close to you, right? And then of course there's the moral and ethical and all there's the moral and ethical and all there's the moral and ethical and all that aspect. But but mother nature all that aspect. But but mother nature all that aspect. But but mother nature actually punishes individuals that do actually punishes individuals that do actually punishes individuals that do this through mutation. Yeah. When you this through mutation. Yeah. When you this through mutation. Yeah. When you have two individuals um who are closely have two individuals um who are closely have two individuals um who are closely related, you know, that dramatically related, you know, that dramatically related, you know, that dramatically increases the chance that they're both increases the chance that they're both increases the chance that they're both carrying um you know a variant that has carrying um you know a variant that has carrying um you know a variant that has a negative uh impact on the a negative uh impact on the a negative uh impact on the offspring. So, you know, when you have offspring. So, you know, when you have offspring. So, you know, when you have people kind of mixing more outside their people kind of mixing more outside their people kind of mixing more outside their families, then it's very likely that families, then it's very likely that families, then it's very likely that even if you're carrying this even if you're carrying this even if you're carrying this delletterious variation, um it's going delletterious variation, um it's going delletterious variation, um it's going to be kind of watered down by outside uh to be kind of watered down by outside uh to be kind of watered down by outside uh genetic material. But yeah, as soon as genetic material. But yeah, as soon as genetic material. But yeah, as soon as you have people too closely related to you have people too closely related to you have people too closely related to each other, you know, those things are each other, you know, those things are each other, you know, those things are ending up together um and creating ending up together um and creating ending up together um and creating disease. Yeah. So, it's definitely disease. Yeah. So, it's definitely disease. Yeah. So, it's definitely nature has a system built in that says nature has a system built in that says nature has a system built in that says don't do that. Yeah. I find it amazing don't do that. Yeah. I find it amazing don't do that. Yeah. I find it amazing that these things are operating below that these things are operating below that these things are operating below the level of conscious decision making the level of conscious decision making the level of conscious decision making to influence preference like this smell to influence preference like this smell to influence preference like this smell or that smell, right? And we've or that smell, right? And we've or that smell, right? And we've established you you've told us that established you you've told us that established you you've told us that the smells that reflect the most distant the smells that reflect the most distant the smells that reflect the most distant immune system are the most attractive immune system are the most attractive immune system are the most attractive smells which is really wild. Um, so is smells which is really wild. Um, so is smells which is really wild. Um, so is it fair to say that humans are it fair to say that humans are it fair to say that humans are continuing to evolve, uh, given that continuing to evolve, uh, given that continuing to evolve, uh, given that people are traveling further, meeting people are traveling further, meeting people are traveling further, meeting people from further away, having people from further away, having people from further away, having children with people from origin children with people from origin children with people from origin populations that presumably have never populations that presumably have never populations that presumably have never mixed before in the course of human mixed before in the course of human mixed before in the course of human evolution? Yeah, absolutely. I think evolution? Yeah, absolutely. I think evolution? Yeah, absolutely. I think sometimes people kind of, you know, sometimes people kind of, you know, sometimes people kind of, you know, think we're done. We've reached this, think we're done. We've reached this, think we're done. We've reached this, you know, ultimate uh, point of you know, ultimate uh, point of you know, ultimate uh, point of evolution. You know, it's we've finished evolution. You know, it's we've finished evolution. You know, it's we've finished evolving. Um, but as long as there are evolving. Um, but as long as there are evolving. Um, but as long as there are things that are affecting our ability to things that are affecting our ability to things that are affecting our ability to reproduce, we're going to continue to reproduce, we're going to continue to reproduce, we're going to continue to evolve. Um, and you know, especially evolve. Um, and you know, especially evolve. Um, and you know, especially once you have this introduction of new once you have this introduction of new once you have this introduction of new genetic variation, um, I mean, some of genetic variation, um, I mean, some of genetic variation, um, I mean, some of the greatest adaptations in the history the greatest adaptations in the history the greatest adaptations in the history of humans have come from the of humans have come from the of humans have come from the introduction of new genetic material. So introduction of new genetic material. So introduction of new genetic material. So like, um, the Tibetan high altitude like, um, the Tibetan high altitude like, um, the Tibetan high altitude adaptation is actually believed to have adaptation is actually believed to have adaptation is actually believed to have arisen from the crossing of humans with arisen from the crossing of humans with arisen from the crossing of humans with another, um, early homminid group called another, um, early homminid group called another, um, early homminid group called Denise. So we essentially stole the Denise. So we essentially stole the Denise. So we essentially stole the advantageous genes from this other advantageous genes from this other advantageous genes from this other group. And so maybe you'll start to see group. And so maybe you'll start to see group. And so maybe you'll start to see that happening again, you know, as you that happening again, you know, as you that happening again, you know, as you have a more globalized population where, have a more globalized population where, have a more globalized population where, you know, different groups of humans are you know, different groups of humans are you know, different groups of humans are creating these interesting are creating these interesting are creating these interesting phenotypes um through the mixing of phenotypes um through the mixing of phenotypes um through the mixing of their genes that maybe will lead us to their genes that maybe will lead us to their genes that maybe will lead us to be more resilient as our planet is be more resilient as our planet is be more resilient as our planet is changing around us. How long ago did the changing around us. How long ago did the changing around us. How long ago did the uh did this gene that affords uh better uh did this gene that affords uh better uh did this gene that affords uh better abilities at altitude or ability to abilities at altitude or ability to abilities at altitude or ability to survive at altitude enter the human survive at altitude enter the human survive at altitude enter the human population? You know, I'm going to get population? You know, I'm going to get population? You know, I'm going to get myself in trouble because I don't myself in trouble because I don't myself in trouble because I don't remember exactly how long,000 more than remember exactly how long,000 more than remember exactly how long,000 more than 10,000 years ago, but it only became 10,000 years ago, but it only became 10,000 years ago, but it only became advantageous when the ancestral advantageous when the ancestral advantageous when the ancestral population um of Tibetans moved into population um of Tibetans moved into population um of Tibetans moved into these extremely high altitudes. So they these extremely high altitudes. So they these extremely high altitudes. So they kind of, you know, was just sitting kind of, you know, was just sitting kind of, you know, was just sitting there waiting for a chance to be really there waiting for a chance to be really there waiting for a chance to be really advantageous. And then as soon as they advantageous. And then as soon as they advantageous. And then as soon as they went to these high altitudes, people went to these high altitudes, people went to these high altitudes, people carrying that genetic variation were at carrying that genetic variation were at carrying that genetic variation were at a huge advantage. Um, and so they, you a huge advantage. Um, and so they, you a huge advantage. Um, and so they, you know, pass that along to their to their know, pass that along to their to their know, pass that along to their to their children and their children's children and their children's children and their children's children and so on. Okay. So does that mean that and so on. Okay. So does that mean that and so on. Okay. So does that mean that at some point the species we know as at some point the species we know as at some point the species we know as homo sapiens was able to reproduce with a sapiens was able to reproduce with a sapiens was able to reproduce with a species that was not homo sapiens? they species that was not homo sapiens? they species that was not homo sapiens? they gave and that's how the gene entered the gave and that's how the gene entered the gave and that's how the gene entered the homo sapien population. That's exactly homo sapien population. That's exactly homo sapien population. That's exactly right. So yeah, it happened we see that right. So yeah, it happened we see that right. So yeah, it happened we see that happening with um Neanderthalss as well. happening with um Neanderthalss as well. happening with um Neanderthalss as well. Um but also these this other population Um but also these this other population Um but also these this other population of they call archaic hominids. Um Denise of they call archaic hominids. Um Denise of they call archaic hominids. Um Denise um so these are a population that were um so these are a population that were um so these are a population that were found uh in areas of Asia. Um and their found uh in areas of Asia. Um and their found uh in areas of Asia. Um and their genes were introed we say um so genes were introed we say um so genes were introed we say um so essentially you know inserted into the essentially you know inserted into the essentially you know inserted into the human genome. So individuals from that human genome. So individuals from that human genome. So individuals from that region tend to have a higher ancestry region tend to have a higher ancestry region tend to have a higher ancestry coming from that homminid group. But coming from that homminid group. But coming from that homminid group. But that meant that a homo sapien mated with that meant that a homo sapien mated with that meant that a homo sapien mated with this other species of primate. Yes. And this other species of primate. Yes. And this other species of primate. Yes. And the offspring had this gene incorporated the offspring had this gene incorporated the offspring had this gene incorporated into it. Right. Exactly. And then that into it. Right. Exactly. And then that into it. Right. Exactly. And then that offspring at some point mated with that offspring at some point mated with that offspring at some point mated with another homo sapiens and so on and so another homo sapiens and so on and so another homo sapiens and so on and so forth. Correct. Yes. Okay. Yeah. I'm not forth. Correct. Yes. Okay. Yeah. I'm not forth. Correct. Yes. Okay. Yeah. I'm not trying to paint more color on it so that trying to paint more color on it so that trying to paint more color on it so that people uh I'm not trying to be salacious people uh I'm not trying to be salacious people uh I'm not trying to be salacious here. I just I think that sometimes um here. I just I think that sometimes um here. I just I think that sometimes um we forget um that in the primate lineage we forget um that in the primate lineage we forget um that in the primate lineage that there were other primates that there were other primates that there were other primates with whom homo sapiens were capable of with whom homo sapiens were capable of with whom homo sapiens were capable of reproducing with. That's right. Yeah. reproducing with. That's right. Yeah. reproducing with. That's right. Yeah. And there's actually some extraordinary And there's actually some extraordinary And there's actually some extraordinary work from Fonte Pabo um who works a lot work from Fonte Pabo um who works a lot work from Fonte Pabo um who works a lot with ancient DNA where they found an with ancient DNA where they found an with ancient DNA where they found an individual who was a first generation individual who was a first generation individual who was a first generation mix. I think it might have been with mix. I think it might have been with mix. I think it might have been with Neanderl. Um I forget now at this point. Neanderl. Um I forget now at this point. Neanderl. Um I forget now at this point. But um it's so it was it was a first But um it's so it was it was a first But um it's so it was it was a first generation halfh human half whatever generation halfh human half whatever generation halfh human half whatever archaic comet it was. Um which shows you archaic comet it was. Um which shows you archaic comet it was. Um which shows you I mean if they found this the chances I mean if they found this the chances I mean if they found this the chances that they would find this one you know that they would find this one you know that they would find this one you know mixed individual um are so slim that it mixed individual um are so slim that it mixed individual um are so slim that it suggests that this was something that suggests that this was something that suggests that this was something that was actually happening a lot um for them was actually happening a lot um for them was actually happening a lot um for them to happen to find it. So in the diagram to happen to find it. So in the diagram to happen to find it. So in the diagram that everyone has seen of a of a that everyone has seen of a of a that everyone has seen of a of a quadriped animal like walking on all quadriped animal like walking on all quadriped animal like walking on all fours and then gradually evolving into fours and then gradually evolving into fours and then gradually evolving into the upright form that we know as homo the upright form that we know as homo the upright form that we know as homo sapiens which is the uh primate right sapiens which is the uh primate right sapiens which is the uh primate right before it with which by the way being before it with which by the way being before it with which by the way being slightly hunched forward in a slightly hunched forward in a slightly hunched forward in a slightly C-shaped position looks a lot more like C-shaped position looks a lot more like C-shaped position looks a lot more like homo sapiens nowadays who are on their homo sapiens nowadays who are on their homo sapiens nowadays who are on their phones all the time. That's a separate phones all the time. That's a separate phones all the time. That's a separate point. That's an editorial point. But point. That's an editorial point. But point. That's an editorial point. But was there a kind of final primate step was there a kind of final primate step was there a kind of final primate step before homo sapiens like one or was it a before homo sapiens like one or was it a before homo sapiens like one or was it a collection of a bunch of different collection of a bunch of different collection of a bunch of different primate species and then we got homo primate species and then we got homo primate species and then we got homo sapiens? Yeah. Um I mean it definitely sapiens? Yeah. Um I mean it definitely sapiens? Yeah. Um I mean it definitely you know we have an ancestor. I don't you know we have an ancestor. I don't you know we have an ancestor. I don't remember exactly the name off the top of remember exactly the name off the top of remember exactly the name off the top of my head but I have an issue with this my head but I have an issue with this my head but I have an issue with this diagram. Um because it's you know it's diagram. Um because it's you know it's diagram. Um because it's you know it's the classic depiction of evolution, the classic depiction of evolution, the classic depiction of evolution, right? But it really suggests kind of right? But it really suggests kind of right? But it really suggests kind of like I was saying before this trajectory like I was saying before this trajectory like I was saying before this trajectory um and we are the pinnacle of it. You um and we are the pinnacle of it. You um and we are the pinnacle of it. You know we've achieved this thing. And I know we've achieved this thing. And I know we've achieved this thing. And I think it also fits with this, you know, think it also fits with this, you know, think it also fits with this, you know, concept of survival of the fittest. Um, concept of survival of the fittest. Um, concept of survival of the fittest. Um, which I think is, you know, also a which I think is, you know, also a which I think is, you know, also a little bit misleading in that, you know, little bit misleading in that, you know, little bit misleading in that, you know, it's not about the most fit, it's about it's not about the most fit, it's about it's not about the most fit, it's about the best fit. So evolution doesn't care the best fit. So evolution doesn't care the best fit. So evolution doesn't care how fit you are in the way we think of how fit you are in the way we think of how fit you are in the way we think of fitness. It only cares how you fit with fitness. It only cares how you fit with fitness. It only cares how you fit with your environment. Um, so, you know, the your environment. Um, so, you know, the your environment. Um, so, you know, the idea that evolution is driving any idea that evolution is driving any idea that evolution is driving any species, but especially ours, towards species, but especially ours, towards species, but especially ours, towards some optimum, um, I think is inherently some optimum, um, I think is inherently some optimum, um, I think is inherently flawed. I had a colleague at Harvard, flawed. I had a colleague at Harvard, flawed. I had a colleague at Harvard, he's still there, although I think he he's still there, although I think he he's still there, although I think he closed his lab, who once closed his lab, who once closed his lab, who once said, "It takes a lot of generations of said, "It takes a lot of generations of said, "It takes a lot of generations of offspring to evolve a given trait, but offspring to evolve a given trait, but offspring to evolve a given trait, but it takes very few to devolve a trait." it takes very few to devolve a trait." it takes very few to devolve a trait." That's right. Like you can create That's right. Like you can create That's right. Like you can create immense problems in all sorts of things immense problems in all sorts of things immense problems in all sorts of things from, you know, pancreas function to uh from, you know, pancreas function to uh from, you know, pancreas function to uh mobility to vision with a delterious mobility to vision with a delterious mobility to vision with a delterious mutation. Mhm. But it takes a very long mutation. Mhm. But it takes a very long mutation. Mhm. But it takes a very long time to create an advantage for a given time to create an advantage for a given time to create an advantage for a given species through the accumulation of new species through the accumulation of new species through the accumulation of new uh combinations of genes. Is that true? uh combinations of genes. Is that true? uh combinations of genes. Is that true? Yeah. I mean it's um most Yeah. I mean it's um most Yeah. I mean it's um most mutations are delotterious. Most mutations are delotterious. Most mutations are delotterious. Most mutations cause problems. Um and so we mutations cause problems. Um and so we mutations cause problems. Um and so we actually don't even see most mutations actually don't even see most mutations actually don't even see most mutations because they kill essentially the because they kill essentially the because they kill essentially the offspring before, you know, it's even offspring before, you know, it's even offspring before, you know, it's even becomes a fetus. So most mutations are becomes a fetus. So most mutations are becomes a fetus. So most mutations are happening in a way where that we're not happening in a way where that we're not happening in a way where that we're not even seeing them. Um so to wait for even seeing them. Um so to wait for even seeing them. Um so to wait for something that comes up that's actually something that comes up that's actually something that comes up that's actually beneficial um can take forever um beneficial um can take forever um beneficial um can take forever um because you know you have to have because you know you have to have because you know you have to have exactly the right thing the genome's exactly the right thing the genome's exactly the right thing the genome's huge um so when those changes are huge um so when those changes are huge um so when those changes are happening for it to not only happen in happening for it to not only happen in happening for it to not only happen in the right place but to not cause the right place but to not cause the right place but to not cause problems takes a really long time. So problems takes a really long time. So problems takes a really long time. So some of the faster examples that we know some of the faster examples that we know some of the faster examples that we know of evolution, especially in humans, of evolution, especially in humans, of evolution, especially in humans, come from when there's variation that's come from when there's variation that's come from when there's variation that's just already there. And you know, it's just already there. And you know, it's just already there. And you know, it's not particularly advantageous um like I not particularly advantageous um like I not particularly advantageous um like I mentioned with uh Tibetans until you mentioned with uh Tibetans until you mentioned with uh Tibetans until you move into a particular environment or move into a particular environment or move into a particular environment or until you start practicing a certain until you start practicing a certain until you start practicing a certain activity like breathold diving. Um and activity like breathold diving. Um and activity like breathold diving. Um and so you know we have we call it standing so you know we have we call it standing so you know we have we call it standing variation just there's all these variation just there's all these variation just there's all these differences between all of us humans on differences between all of us humans on differences between all of us humans on Earth. And so when you have variation Earth. And so when you have variation Earth. And so when you have variation that's beneficial in the right that's beneficial in the right that's beneficial in the right environment, um, then evolution can environment, um, then evolution can environment, um, then evolution can happen a lot faster. Got it. Okay. So, happen a lot faster. Got it. Okay. So, happen a lot faster. Got it. Okay. So, I'm obsessed with the X-Men. Yes. I love I'm obsessed with the X-Men. Yes. I love I'm obsessed with the X-Men. Yes. I love that series. I've probably watched it that series. I've probably watched it that series. I've probably watched it five different times. I mean, for a five different times. I mean, for a five different times. I mean, for a biologist who's interested in all biologist who's interested in all biologist who's interested in all animals, but the human animal perhaps animals, but the human animal perhaps animals, but the human animal perhaps most, you know, it's uh it's like the most, you know, it's uh it's like the most, you know, it's uh it's like the perfect form of entertainment for me, perfect form of entertainment for me, perfect form of entertainment for me, right? uh different individuals who have right? uh different individuals who have right? uh different individuals who have mutations that afford them specific mutations that afford them specific mutations that afford them specific gifts or abilities, but it creates some gifts or abilities, but it creates some gifts or abilities, but it creates some uh let's just say some social tension uh let's just say some social tension uh let's just say some social tension between those that have and those that between those that have and those that between those that have and those that don't. And it's about learning these to don't. And it's about learning these to don't. And it's about learning these to use these mutations for good versus use these mutations for good versus use these mutations for good versus evil. And it gets into all sorts of evil. And it gets into all sorts of evil. And it gets into all sorts of interesting human psychology. interesting human psychology. interesting human psychology. you work on the actual uh real life you work on the actual uh real life you work on the actual uh real life version of what I think of X-Men and as version of what I think of X-Men and as version of what I think of X-Men and as you'll tell us today women as well which you'll tell us today women as well which you'll tell us today women as well which is as you just told us there's variation is as you just told us there's variation is as you just told us there's variation in all of our genomes and occasionally in all of our genomes and occasionally in all of our genomes and occasionally by virtue of the needs of a particular by virtue of the needs of a particular by virtue of the needs of a particular group or individual those mutations group or individual those mutations group or individual those mutations afford them an incredible ability to do afford them an incredible ability to do afford them an incredible ability to do incredible things. So, if you would incredible things. So, if you would incredible things. So, if you would could you tell us about uh these could you tell us about uh these could you tell us about uh these underwater free divers that you've underwater free divers that you've underwater free divers that you've studied? Uh this is a collection of studied? Uh this is a collection of studied? Uh this is a collection of studies, I realize, but maybe the first studies, I realize, but maybe the first studies, I realize, but maybe the first study uh because I find this to be one study uh because I find this to be one study uh because I find this to be one of the more incredible examples of the more incredible examples of the more incredible examples of behavior shaping what we think of are behavior shaping what we think of are behavior shaping what we think of are fixed properties of the human body. And fixed properties of the human body. And fixed properties of the human body. And um please just tell us about it. It's um please just tell us about it. It's um please just tell us about it. It's such a wonderful story. Yeah, such a wonderful story. Yeah, such a wonderful story. Yeah, absolutely. And I also love the X-Men. absolutely. And I also love the X-Men. absolutely. And I also love the X-Men. Although if you ever want to ruin a Although if you ever want to ruin a Although if you ever want to ruin a perfectly good sci-fi movie, watch it perfectly good sci-fi movie, watch it perfectly good sci-fi movie, watch it with an evolutionary biologist or Okay. with an evolutionary biologist or Okay. with an evolutionary biologist or Okay. Noted. No. Um uh yeah. So there are Noted. No. Um uh yeah. So there are Noted. No. Um uh yeah. So there are these incredible people um well these incredible people um well these incredible people um well really all around the world, but I really all around the world, but I really all around the world, but I started u my work in Indonesia um called started u my work in Indonesia um called started u my work in Indonesia um called the Bajjo. Um they are a group of what's the Bajjo. Um they are a group of what's the Bajjo. Um they are a group of what's called cenomads. Um so comads are called cenomads. Um so comads are called cenomads. Um so comads are they're these people who spend their they're these people who spend their they're these people who spend their whole lives essentially at sea whole lives essentially at sea whole lives essentially at sea traditionally. Um they live on traditionally. Um they live on traditionally. Um they live on houseboats. Um, and everything they need houseboats. Um, and everything they need houseboats. Um, and everything they need they get from the sea. And they do this they get from the sea. And they do this they get from the sea. And they do this through fishing, of course, and other through fishing, of course, and other through fishing, of course, and other things like that. Um, but also through things like that. Um, but also through things like that. Um, but also through an incredible amount of breathold an incredible amount of breathold an incredible amount of breathold diving. So, they're extremely good at diving. So, they're extremely good at diving. So, they're extremely good at this. They can hold their breath for this. They can hold their breath for this. They can hold their breath for many minutes at a time. They dive to many minutes at a time. They dive to many minutes at a time. They dive to incredible depths. Um, a lot of them incredible depths. Um, a lot of them incredible depths. Um, a lot of them wear these uh jewelry made of black wear these uh jewelry made of black wear these uh jewelry made of black coral. Black coral only starts growing coral. Black coral only starts growing coral. Black coral only starts growing at about 100 feet deep. So, that tells at about 100 feet deep. So, that tells at about 100 feet deep. So, that tells you how deep they're diving. So, those you how deep they're diving. So, those you how deep they're diving. So, those are trophies. They're actually meant for are trophies. They're actually meant for are trophies. They're actually meant for to protect them from uh evil spirits and to protect them from uh evil spirits and to protect them from uh evil spirits and things like that. How long are their things like that. How long are their things like that. How long are their breath holds on record? I've heard you breath holds on record? I've heard you breath holds on record? I've heard you talk about this before. It's a little talk about this before. It's a little talk about this before. It's a little debatable, but the number I heard from debatable, but the number I heard from debatable, but the number I heard from you in a lecture, I went, "Whoa." Yeah. you in a lecture, I went, "Whoa." Yeah. you in a lecture, I went, "Whoa." Yeah. So, I was told, and I always emphasize So, I was told, and I always emphasize So, I was told, and I always emphasize that I was told, I did not see this. I that I was told, I did not see this. I that I was told, I did not see this. I did not record it. I was told 13 did not record it. I was told 13 did not record it. I was told 13 minutes. Um, and this was by the father minutes. Um, and this was by the father minutes. Um, and this was by the father of a diver who I worked with in of a diver who I worked with in of a diver who I worked with in Indonesia. That's got to be in the Indonesia. That's got to be in the Indonesia. That's got to be in the neighborhood of world record stuff. It neighborhood of world record stuff. It neighborhood of world record stuff. It is. Yeah. I'm trying to remember what is. Yeah. I'm trying to remember what is. Yeah. I'm trying to remember what the current world record is, but it's the current world record is, but it's the current world record is, but it's also I mean, you have to think about if also I mean, you have to think about if also I mean, you have to think about if you see them diving, like it's you see them diving, like it's you see them diving, like it's incredibly active. Um, so a lot of the incredibly active. Um, so a lot of the incredibly active. Um, so a lot of the breathold records that we think of are breathold records that we think of are breathold records that we think of are people floating in a pool. They're not people floating in a pool. They're not people floating in a pool. They're not moving. Um, they're not expending any, moving. Um, they're not expending any, moving. Um, they're not expending any, you know, energy. They're not using up you know, energy. They're not using up you know, energy. They're not using up that oxygen as quickly. Um, and these that oxygen as quickly. Um, and these that oxygen as quickly. Um, and these cenomads are when they're these cenomads are when they're these cenomads are when they're underwater, they look like hunters on underwater, they look like hunters on underwater, they look like hunters on land. They go deep enough that they're land. They go deep enough that they're land. They go deep enough that they're not floating anymore. And so they're not floating anymore. And so they're not floating anymore. And so they're walking on the on the surface of, you walking on the on the surface of, you walking on the on the surface of, you know, the bottom of the ocean with know, the bottom of the ocean with know, the bottom of the ocean with their spear guns and they look like their spear guns and they look like their spear guns and they look like hunters. It's incredible to see. hunters. It's incredible to see. hunters. It's incredible to see. Amazing. So even if it's not 13 minutes, Amazing. So even if it's not 13 minutes, Amazing. So even if it's not 13 minutes, let's say it's half that, it's still let's say it's half that, it's still let's say it's half that, it's still super impressive. It's very impressive. super impressive. It's very impressive. super impressive. It's very impressive. Yeah. So do they grow up doing this? Yeah. So do they grow up doing this? Yeah. So do they grow up doing this? They do. Yeah. And they, in fact, they They do. Yeah. And they, in fact, they They do. Yeah. And they, in fact, they spend so much time traditionally on spend so much time traditionally on spend so much time traditionally on these houseboats and so little time on these houseboats and so little time on these houseboats and so little time on land that a lot of the children actually land that a lot of the children actually land that a lot of the children actually learn to swim before they learn how to learn to swim before they learn how to learn to swim before they learn how to walk. Um, so one of the divers, uh, when walk. Um, so one of the divers, uh, when walk. Um, so one of the divers, uh, when I was when I was out there, one of my I was when I was out there, one of my I was when I was out there, one of my colleagues noticed that one of the colleagues noticed that one of the colleagues noticed that one of the divers's feet was very soft. And we divers's feet was very soft. And we divers's feet was very soft. And we realized that it's because he's never realized that it's because he's never realized that it's because he's never really walking. He's just always in the really walking. He's just always in the really walking. He's just always in the water. So his feet don't develop the water. So his feet don't develop the water. So his feet don't develop the same kind of calluses that ours do same kind of calluses that ours do same kind of calluses that ours do because he's not using them like we do. because he's not using them like we do. because he's not using them like we do. Amazing. So h how did you find this Amazing. So h how did you find this Amazing. So h how did you find this population and what sorts of questions population and what sorts of questions population and what sorts of questions did you start to ask? Yeah. So, I was did you start to ask? Yeah. So, I was did you start to ask? Yeah. So, I was actually um diving as part of a coral actually um diving as part of a coral actually um diving as part of a coral genomics project in Thailand um escaping genomics project in Thailand um escaping genomics project in Thailand um escaping Danish winter uh because that's where I Danish winter uh because that's where I Danish winter uh because that's where I was doing my PhD. And I heard about a was doing my PhD. And I heard about a was doing my PhD. And I heard about a population called the Mochin. Um so population called the Mochin. Um so population called the Mochin. Um so that's another group of these cenomads that's another group of these cenomads that's another group of these cenomads and heard about you know their and heard about you know their and heard about you know their incredible underwater diving. Um started incredible underwater diving. Um started incredible underwater diving. Um started looking into it and saw um a study that looking into it and saw um a study that looking into it and saw um a study that I think you've seen that um that showed I think you've seen that um that showed I think you've seen that um that showed that children mochin children could that children mochin children could that children mochin children could actually see underwater better than uh actually see underwater better than uh actually see underwater better than uh European children. um and started European children. um and started European children. um and started thinking about, you know, I mean, free thinking about, you know, I mean, free thinking about, you know, I mean, free diving is really dangerous. Um and so I diving is really dangerous. Um and so I diving is really dangerous. Um and so I was thinking that this could actually be was thinking that this could actually be was thinking that this could actually be something that's driving selection in something that's driving selection in something that's driving selection in this population that's causing this population that's causing this population that's causing this population to evolve. In other words, population to evolve. In other words, population to evolve. In other words, just to put this in um everyday terms just to put this in um everyday terms just to put this in um everyday terms for people, if you don't get good at for people, if you don't get good at for people, if you don't get good at this, you die. Yeah. Exactly. If you die this, you die. Yeah. Exactly. If you die this, you die. Yeah. Exactly. If you die young enough, you don't reproduce. young enough, you don't reproduce. young enough, you don't reproduce. Exactly. If you get good enough at this, Exactly. If you get good enough at this, Exactly. If you get good enough at this, uh, you can live long enough to uh, you can live long enough to uh, you can live long enough to reproduce and your children will reproduce and your children will reproduce and your children will presumably inherit whatever mutation or presumably inherit whatever mutation or presumably inherit whatever mutation or genetic variants afford this ability. or genetic variants afford this ability. or genetic variants afford this ability. Exactly. Yeah. And, you know, I Exactly. Yeah. And, you know, I Exactly. Yeah. And, you know, I mean, we see with competitive breathold mean, we see with competitive breathold mean, we see with competitive breathold divers, um, you know, I I've never divers, um, you know, I I've never divers, um, you know, I I've never actually been to one of these actually been to one of these actually been to one of these competitions, but I've read about them. competitions, but I've read about them. competitions, but I've read about them. People pass out underwater all the time, People pass out underwater all the time, People pass out underwater all the time, um, and they're, you know, pulled to the um, and they're, you know, pulled to the um, and they're, you know, pulled to the surface and revived. But if you're a surface and revived. But if you're a surface and revived. But if you're a cenomad diving in the middle of the cenomad diving in the middle of the cenomad diving in the middle of the ocean with no one nearby, nobody's going ocean with no one nearby, nobody's going ocean with no one nearby, nobody's going to pull you out of that water. And so to pull you out of that water. And so to pull you out of that water. And so you've just removed yourself from the you've just removed yourself from the you've just removed yourself from the gene pool completely. Whereas someone gene pool completely. Whereas someone gene pool completely. Whereas someone who maybe has a variation or has genetic who maybe has a variation or has genetic who maybe has a variation or has genetic variation that's making them safer at variation that's making them safer at variation that's making them safer at diving um might survive that. And in diving um might survive that. And in diving um might survive that. And in this case, the safety at diving comes this case, the safety at diving comes this case, the safety at diving comes from being able to stay under longer. We from being able to stay under longer. We from being able to stay under longer. We can talk about that, but as long as can talk about that, but as long as can talk about that, but as long as we're on this point and because some we're on this point and because some we're on this point and because some people will be tempted to uh to go test people will be tempted to uh to go test people will be tempted to uh to go test their breath holding uh time, which their breath holding uh time, which their breath holding uh time, which please don't do it. Um just I'm just please don't do it. Um just I'm just please don't do it. Um just I'm just going to do it across the board. Just going to do it across the board. Just going to do it across the board. Just don't do it. But learn from an expert. don't do it. But learn from an expert. don't do it. But learn from an expert. If you're going to learn to free dive, If you're going to learn to free dive, If you're going to learn to free dive, learn from somebody who's truly expert learn from somebody who's truly expert learn from somebody who's truly expert under the right conditions. I'll put a under the right conditions. I'll put a under the right conditions. I'll put a link to a couple folks I know that I link to a couple folks I know that I link to a couple folks I know that I have no business relation to. Uh Mark have no business relation to. Uh Mark have no business relation to. Uh Mark Healey and some other people that teach Healey and some other people that teach Healey and some other people that teach this on land first. Actually, you know this on land first. Actually, you know this on land first. Actually, you know what? I'll just tell you. You know what what? I'll just tell you. You know what what? I'll just tell you. You know what they told me was the first step, right? they told me was the first step, right? they told me was the first step, right? In one of these uh free diving classes, In one of these uh free diving classes, In one of these uh free diving classes, I chose not to do it. Is to do not do I chose not to do it. Is to do not do I chose not to do it. Is to do not do this, but I was told here's the first this, but I was told here's the first this, but I was told here's the first step. You're going to hold your breath step. You're going to hold your breath step. You're going to hold your breath on land and force yourself to not on land and force yourself to not on land and force yourself to not breathe when the gas reflex hits until breathe when the gas reflex hits until breathe when the gas reflex hits until you pass out. Yes. And I was like, I you pass out. Yes. And I was like, I you pass out. Yes. And I was like, I you know what? I'm not going to take this know what? I'm not going to take this know what? I'm not going to take this course. Yeah. So, this is exactly what course. Yeah. So, this is exactly what course. Yeah. So, this is exactly what gets people in trouble because Yeah. gets people in trouble because Yeah. gets people in trouble because Yeah. Like, you know, we don't have a reliable Like, you know, we don't have a reliable Like, you know, we don't have a reliable sensor for when our oxygen is low. sensor for when our oxygen is low. sensor for when our oxygen is low. And so that happens to people underwater And so that happens to people underwater And so that happens to people underwater because that feeling that wanting to because that feeling that wanting to because that feeling that wanting to breathe is a buildup of carbon dioxide. breathe is a buildup of carbon dioxide. breathe is a buildup of carbon dioxide. Um, and so yeah, people teach themselves Um, and so yeah, people teach themselves Um, and so yeah, people teach themselves to overcome it like they're suggesting to overcome it like they're suggesting to overcome it like they're suggesting you do there. And then you know you're you do there. And then you know you're you do there. And then you know you're underwater and you pass out and that's underwater and you pass out and that's underwater and you pass out and that's it. I've been told that you go from it. I've been told that you go from it. I've been told that you go from feeling that gas reflex. You learn to feeling that gas reflex. You learn to feeling that gas reflex. You learn to ride that like a bump. Mhm. Um the same ride that like a bump. Mhm. Um the same ride that like a bump. Mhm. Um the same way you might stay in a cold plunge or way you might stay in a cold plunge or way you might stay in a cold plunge or something a little bit longer than your something a little bit longer than your something a little bit longer than your impulse would have you stay in. But in impulse would have you stay in. But in impulse would have you stay in. But in this case, you're underwater and then it this case, you're underwater and then it this case, you're underwater and then it passes and then you're swimming passes and then you're swimming passes and then you're swimming freely about and you're uh you feel freely about and you're uh you feel freely about and you're uh you feel good, you're relaxed, you're doing slow good, you're relaxed, you're doing slow good, you're relaxed, you're doing slow exhales to let off that carbon dioxide, exhales to let off that carbon dioxide, exhales to let off that carbon dioxide, whatever carbon dioxide is left, and whatever carbon dioxide is left, and whatever carbon dioxide is left, and then it's just lights out. That there's then it's just lights out. That there's then it's just lights out. That there's no there's no flickering. Uh, it just no there's no flickering. Uh, it just no there's no flickering. Uh, it just goes to complete blackout, right? Like goes to complete blackout, right? Like goes to complete blackout, right? Like curtains as they call it, and then curtains as they call it, and then curtains as they call it, and then you're dead. Yeah. Unless somebody pulls you're dead. Yeah. Unless somebody pulls you're dead. Yeah. Unless somebody pulls you up to the surface. Exactly. Yeah. you up to the surface. Exactly. Yeah. you up to the surface. Exactly. Yeah. So hopefully we sufficiently Yeah. So hopefully we sufficiently Yeah. So hopefully we sufficiently scared people into doing this. scared people into doing this. scared people into doing this. Okay. So this population presumably is Okay. So this population presumably is Okay. So this population presumably is not thinking about carbon dioxide not thinking about carbon dioxide not thinking about carbon dioxide thresholds for the gas reflex, areas of thresholds for the gas reflex, areas of thresholds for the gas reflex, areas of the brain stem that are measuring carbon the brain stem that are measuring carbon the brain stem that are measuring carbon dioxide. They presumably learn through dioxide. They presumably learn through dioxide. They presumably learn through experience that if you do the right experience that if you do the right experience that if you do the right things, you live and reproduce. Your things, you live and reproduce. Your things, you live and reproduce. Your family eats. You do the wrong things, family eats. You do the wrong things, family eats. You do the wrong things, you die. Right. Yeah. there's so much um you die. Right. Yeah. there's so much um you die. Right. Yeah. there's so much um cultural knowledge that's integrated cultural knowledge that's integrated cultural knowledge that's integrated into the practice and that's passed on into the practice and that's passed on into the practice and that's passed on from you know generation to generation from you know generation to generation from you know generation to generation because a lot of times they're doing because a lot of times they're doing because a lot of times they're doing this in family units. Um you know the this in family units. Um you know the this in family units. Um you know the one of the divers that I worked with his one of the divers that I worked with his one of the divers that I worked with his dad used to be the most famous diver in dad used to be the most famous diver in dad used to be the most famous diver in the village now he's the most famous the village now he's the most famous the village now he's the most famous diver in the village and so there's diver in the village and so there's diver in the village and so there's a lot of that tradition and that a lot of that tradition and that a lot of that tradition and that traditional knowledge that's passed on traditional knowledge that's passed on traditional knowledge that's passed on despite it maybe not looking like what despite it maybe not looking like what despite it maybe not looking like what we would read in a textbook. when you we would read in a textbook. when you we would read in a textbook. when you say the um one of the most revered or say the um one of the most revered or say the um one of the most revered or expert divers, I'm very curious as to uh expert divers, I'm very curious as to uh expert divers, I'm very curious as to uh how this weaves back to an earlier part how this weaves back to an earlier part how this weaves back to an earlier part of our conversation is prowess at diving of our conversation is prowess at diving of our conversation is prowess at diving based on how long someone can stay under based on how long someone can stay under based on how long someone can stay under and is prowess at diving because it and is prowess at diving because it and is prowess at diving because it correlates with the ability to secure correlates with the ability to secure correlates with the ability to secure resources is that um somehow correlated resources is that um somehow correlated resources is that um somehow correlated with des like desirable mate. Do these with des like desirable mate. Do these with des like desirable mate. Do these people tend to have more offspring than people tend to have more offspring than people tend to have more offspring than people that are not as good at diving? people that are not as good at diving? people that are not as good at diving? And of course there are confounds here And of course there are confounds here And of course there are confounds here like you can imagine differences in like you can imagine differences in like you can imagine differences in hormone levels to begin with. Uh eating hormone levels to begin with. Uh eating hormone levels to begin with. Uh eating more during uh puberty and growing you more during uh puberty and growing you more during uh puberty and growing you know stronger or whatever it is. Um or know stronger or whatever it is. Um or know stronger or whatever it is. Um or more or smarter and not just smarter but more or smarter and not just smarter but more or smarter and not just smarter but do you see this like are the people who do you see this like are the people who do you see this like are the people who are great divers in the village do they are great divers in the village do they are great divers in the village do they tend to be the ones with more um uh more tend to be the ones with more um uh more tend to be the ones with more um uh more children to be direct? You know it would children to be direct? You know it would children to be direct? You know it would be interesting to count that. I think be interesting to count that. I think be interesting to count that. I think now um you know things are changing for now um you know things are changing for now um you know things are changing for the for the Bajjo at least the community the for the Bajjo at least the community the for the Bajjo at least the community that I worked with where a lot of people that I worked with where a lot of people that I worked with where a lot of people are moving away from traditional diving are moving away from traditional diving are moving away from traditional diving and into other kinds of fishing and into other kinds of fishing and into other kinds of fishing practices. Um and so I think at this practices. Um and so I think at this practices. Um and so I think at this point you know this prowess this respect point you know this prowess this respect point you know this prowess this respect for these you know these divers is more for these you know these divers is more for these you know these divers is more respect for the fact that they're respect for the fact that they're respect for the fact that they're keeping the tradition alive and they're keeping the tradition alive and they're keeping the tradition alive and they're continuing this tradition even though continuing this tradition even though continuing this tradition even though it's a very hard thing to do. Um but it's a very hard thing to do. Um but it's a very hard thing to do. Um but yeah it would be really interesting. I yeah it would be really interesting. I yeah it would be really interesting. I know actually the one the one diver came know actually the one the one diver came know actually the one the one diver came from a very big family and that was from a very big family and that was from a very big family and that was something that the Bajjo actually asked something that the Bajjo actually asked something that the Bajjo actually asked me about was why do the Bajjo have me about was why do the Bajjo have me about was why do the Bajjo have so many children and so it would be so many children and so it would be so many children and so it would be interesting to see if yeah diving interesting to see if yeah diving interesting to see if yeah diving success correlates with reproductive success correlates with reproductive success correlates with reproductive success because you could imagine that success because you could imagine that success because you could imagine that it would I mean they're diving it would I mean they're diving it would I mean they're diving for things that they're eating so why for things that they're eating so why for things that they're eating so why wouldn't that um increase your success wouldn't that um increase your success wouldn't that um increase your success on that just out of curiosity um and uh on that just out of curiosity um and uh on that just out of curiosity um and uh because I like seafood um what are because I like seafood um what are because I like seafood um what are they fishing for they dive for it they fishing for they dive for it they fishing for they dive for it depends on where they are um they're depends on where they are um they're depends on where they are um they're spearing a lot of fish. Everything is spearing a lot of fish. Everything is spearing a lot of fish. Everything is delicious. Um they dive for shellfish. delicious. Um they dive for shellfish. delicious. Um they dive for shellfish. Um they also harvest seaweed sometimes. Um they also harvest seaweed sometimes. Um they also harvest seaweed sometimes. Um and they actually collect a lot Um and they actually collect a lot Um and they actually collect a lot of sea cucumbers which they dry out in of sea cucumbers which they dry out in of sea cucumbers which they dry out in the sun and then eat later. It's like the sun and then eat later. It's like the sun and then eat later. It's like pure protein. Yeah. Very pure protein. Yeah. Very pure protein. Yeah. Very interesting. So what did you study in interesting. So what did you study in interesting. So what did you study in the in this group? Yeah. So we started the in this group? Yeah. So we started the in this group? Yeah. So we started thinking about okay you know for natural thinking about okay you know for natural thinking about okay you know for natural selection to act in this population it selection to act in this population it selection to act in this population it needs some kind of physical trait to act needs some kind of physical trait to act needs some kind of physical trait to act on. um which got us looking at the you on. um which got us looking at the you on. um which got us looking at the you know the dive reflex or the mamalian know the dive reflex or the mamalian know the dive reflex or the mamalian dive reflex. So this is if anyone um and dive reflex. So this is if anyone um and dive reflex. So this is if anyone um and again I hesitate to tell people to do again I hesitate to tell people to do again I hesitate to tell people to do this but if you hold your breath and put this but if you hold your breath and put this but if you hold your breath and put your face in a bowl full of cold water your face in a bowl full of cold water your face in a bowl full of cold water your body responds as if you're diving your body responds as if you're diving your body responds as if you're diving um and what that means is that um and what that means is that um and what that means is that um your heart rate slows down um your heart rate slows down um your heart rate slows down um your blood vessels and your extremities blood vessels and your extremities blood vessels and your extremities constrict uh because you know your constrict uh because you know your constrict uh because you know your fingers will be okay with a little bit fingers will be okay with a little bit fingers will be okay with a little bit less oxygen but your brain really needs less oxygen but your brain really needs less oxygen but your brain really needs that oxygen. So, it's keeping the blood that oxygen. So, it's keeping the blood that oxygen. So, it's keeping the blood central where you need it the most. Um, central where you need it the most. Um, central where you need it the most. Um, and then your spleen contracts. And so, and then your spleen contracts. And so, and then your spleen contracts. And so, the spleen certainly wasn't the first the spleen certainly wasn't the first the spleen certainly wasn't the first organ that I thought about when thinking organ that I thought about when thinking organ that I thought about when thinking about diving. Um, but the spleen is a about diving. Um, but the spleen is a about diving. Um, but the spleen is a reservoir. I mean, it spleen does many reservoir. I mean, it spleen does many reservoir. I mean, it spleen does many things, but one of the things that it things, but one of the things that it things, but one of the things that it does is it's a reservoir for red blood does is it's a reservoir for red blood does is it's a reservoir for red blood cells that are carrying oxygen. And so, cells that are carrying oxygen. And so, cells that are carrying oxygen. And so, through that contraction, those oxygen through that contraction, those oxygen through that contraction, those oxygen rich red blood cells are now pushed into rich red blood cells are now pushed into rich red blood cells are now pushed into circulation, and you get an oxygen circulation, and you get an oxygen circulation, and you get an oxygen boost. How significant is that oxygen boost. How significant is that oxygen boost. How significant is that oxygen boost? It's about 10% in most of us. boost? It's about 10% in most of us. boost? It's about 10% in most of us. That's pretty impressive. Exactly. Yeah. That's pretty impressive. Exactly. Yeah. That's pretty impressive. Exactly. Yeah. It's I mean it's enough to make Yeah. It's I mean it's enough to make Yeah. It's I mean it's enough to make a difference. Yeah. By comparison, you a difference. Yeah. By comparison, you a difference. Yeah. By comparison, you know, there are um a lot of discussions know, there are um a lot of discussions know, there are um a lot of discussions online about you know if you finish your online about you know if you finish your online about you know if you finish your exercise, resistance training or exercise, resistance training or exercise, resistance training or cardiovascular exercise with a brief cardiovascular exercise with a brief cardiovascular exercise with a brief sauna session. So going slightly sauna session. So going slightly sauna session. So going slightly hypothermic, right? This you have to hypothermic, right? This you have to hypothermic, right? This you have to hydrate, etc. But it actually works even hydrate, etc. But it actually works even hydrate, etc. But it actually works even better as long as we're talking about better as long as we're talking about better as long as we're talking about dangerous practices. It works even dangerous practices. It works even dangerous practices. It works even better if you're slightly dehydrated. better if you're slightly dehydrated. better if you're slightly dehydrated. You get an overp production of red blood You get an overp production of red blood You get an overp production of red blood cells in the subsequent days. And this cells in the subsequent days. And this cells in the subsequent days. And this is used for a performance-enhancing is used for a performance-enhancing is used for a performance-enhancing effect in elite athletes mainly. Um you effect in elite athletes mainly. Um you effect in elite athletes mainly. Um you have to again avoid dehydration, death have to again avoid dehydration, death have to again avoid dehydration, death etc. But this is done and there someone etc. But this is done and there someone etc. But this is done and there someone will correct me but the shift in uh will correct me but the shift in uh will correct me but the shift in uh available oxygen is in the low available oxygen is in the low available oxygen is in the low percentages like one or two%. Okay. So percentages like one or two%. Okay. So percentages like one or two%. Okay. So this is what people are fighting for this is what people are fighting for this is what people are fighting for using these kind of uh baroque using these kind of uh baroque using these kind of uh baroque protocols. You're talking about a 10% protocols. You're talking about a 10% protocols. You're talking about a 10% increase in available oxygen through a increase in available oxygen through a increase in available oxygen through a contraction of the spleen. I didn't even contraction of the spleen. I didn't even contraction of the spleen. I didn't even know this the spleen could contract. know this the spleen could contract. know this the spleen could contract. Yeah, that's right. Um just when you put Yeah, that's right. Um just when you put Yeah, that's right. Um just when you put your face into colder than ambient your face into colder than ambient your face into colder than ambient temperature water. Uh yeah, usually in temperature water. Uh yeah, usually in temperature water. Uh yeah, usually in um like lab protocols, we do it at about um like lab protocols, we do it at about um like lab protocols, we do it at about 10° C or 50° Fahrenheit. So quite a bit 10° C or 50° Fahrenheit. So quite a bit 10° C or 50° Fahrenheit. So quite a bit colder. For how long? Um well, depends colder. For how long? Um well, depends colder. For how long? Um well, depends on how long you can hold your breath. on how long you can hold your breath. on how long you can hold your breath. Oh, right. Um yeah. So the but you know Oh, right. Um yeah. So the but you know Oh, right. Um yeah. So the but you know the extent to which like how long the extent to which like how long the extent to which like how long the contraction actually takes. I think we contraction actually takes. I think we contraction actually takes. I think we have room to learn more about that. have room to learn more about that. have room to learn more about that. Um but one thing that's slightly Um but one thing that's slightly Um but one thing that's slightly different from what you're talking about different from what you're talking about different from what you're talking about is that after you stop holding your is that after you stop holding your is that after you stop holding your breath your spleen takes that oxygen breath your spleen takes that oxygen breath your spleen takes that oxygen back um essentially. So that's it back um essentially. So that's it back um essentially. So that's it refills with red blood cells and that refills with red blood cells and that refills with red blood cells and that oxygen is no that extra boost is no oxygen is no that extra boost is no oxygen is no that extra boost is no longer in circulation. Ah so it's only longer in circulation. Ah so it's only longer in circulation. Ah so it's only during the breath hold. That's right. during the breath hold. That's right. during the breath hold. That's right. Only when you need it the most. Only when you need it the most. Only when you need it the most. Interesting. What an incredible Interesting. What an incredible Interesting. What an incredible adaptation of the human body. Yeah. What adaptation of the human body. Yeah. What adaptation of the human body. Yeah. What are some other functions of the of the are some other functions of the of the are some other functions of the of the spleen just for this is the first time spleen just for this is the first time spleen just for this is the first time the spleen has ever been discussed on the spleen has ever been discussed on the spleen has ever been discussed on this podcast I think. Um we don't think this podcast I think. Um we don't think this podcast I think. Um we don't think about spleens too often. Um well you can about spleens too often. Um well you can about spleens too often. Um well you can live without one so it seems like how live without one so it seems like how live without one so it seems like how important could it be but um well in important could it be but um well in important could it be but um well in this population it sounds like it might this population it sounds like it might this population it sounds like it might be critical. You you'll tell us. Yeah. be critical. You you'll tell us. Yeah. be critical. You you'll tell us. Yeah. What are some other things that it does? What are some other things that it does? What are some other things that it does? It's um it's involved in the immune It's um it's involved in the immune It's um it's involved in the immune response to certain bacteria. Um and uh response to certain bacteria. Um and uh response to certain bacteria. Um and uh actually I'm trying to think of what actually I'm trying to think of what actually I'm trying to think of what else it does, but that's you know the else it does, but that's you know the else it does, but that's you know the main role is immunological. main role is immunological. main role is immunological. One thing I in anticipation of this One thing I in anticipation of this One thing I in anticipation of this episode I did a little reading about it episode I did a little reading about it episode I did a little reading about it and it's it gets very heavy neural and it's it gets very heavy neural and it's it gets very heavy neural intervation which is interesting. We intervation which is interesting. We intervation which is interesting. We don't normally think about our don't normally think about our don't normally think about our peripheral organs besides our heart as peripheral organs besides our heart as peripheral organs besides our heart as getting a lot of neural intervation. Of getting a lot of neural intervation. Of getting a lot of neural intervation. Of course the gut has neural intervation course the gut has neural intervation course the gut has neural intervation etc. But the spleen gets very heavy etc. But the spleen gets very heavy etc. But the spleen gets very heavy neural intervation which makes me think neural intervation which makes me think neural intervation which makes me think that maybe there's the opportunity for that maybe there's the opportunity for that maybe there's the opportunity for more perhaps even conscious control of more perhaps even conscious control of more perhaps even conscious control of the spleen. Does this population um the spleen. Does this population um the spleen. Does this population um communicate about any sense that they communicate about any sense that they communicate about any sense that they can like switch this thing on or is they can like switch this thing on or is they can like switch this thing on or is this just all kind of um unconscious this just all kind of um unconscious this just all kind of um unconscious genius related to their behavior? genius related to their behavior? genius related to their behavior? Yeah, as far as I know, it's all Yeah, as far as I know, it's all Yeah, as far as I know, it's all unconscious. It's not something that unconscious. It's not something that unconscious. It's not something that they talk about. And you know, most of they talk about. And you know, most of they talk about. And you know, most of them, you know, when I was explaining them, you know, when I was explaining them, you know, when I was explaining what the spleen was, it wasn't something what the spleen was, it wasn't something what the spleen was, it wasn't something that they had ever thought about. Um, that they had ever thought about. Um, that they had ever thought about. Um, or, you know, experienced any kind of or, you know, experienced any kind of or, you know, experienced any kind of sensation in the area where the spleen sensation in the area where the spleen sensation in the area where the spleen is found. Um, yeah, but who knows? I is found. Um, yeah, but who knows? I is found. Um, yeah, but who knows? I mean, it's, uh, encapsulated in smooth mean, it's, uh, encapsulated in smooth mean, it's, uh, encapsulated in smooth muscle, I think, the spleen, and that's muscle, I think, the spleen, and that's muscle, I think, the spleen, and that's what controls that contraction. So, what controls that contraction. So, what controls that contraction. So, yeah, maybe there could be some way to, yeah, maybe there could be some way to, yeah, maybe there could be some way to, um, you know, to consciously contract um, you know, to consciously contract um, you know, to consciously contract your spleen. We also, our spleens your spleen. We also, our spleens your spleen. We also, our spleens contract when we exercise to a lesser contract when we exercise to a lesser contract when we exercise to a lesser extent. Um, and this is why like horses extent. Um, and this is why like horses extent. Um, and this is why like horses and apparently greyhounds, um, someone and apparently greyhounds, um, someone and apparently greyhounds, um, someone wrote to me after the study came out, wrote to me after the study came out, wrote to me after the study came out, have massive spleens. Um, as do seals have massive spleens. Um, as do seals have massive spleens. Um, as do seals who do a lot of deep diving, but that who do a lot of deep diving, but that who do a lot of deep diving, but that makes a little more sense. Interesting. makes a little more sense. Interesting. makes a little more sense. Interesting. Horses, I don't I don't think about Horses, I don't I don't think about Horses, I don't I don't think about horses being underwater very often or horses being underwater very often or horses being underwater very often or greyhounds for that matter. Yeah. But I greyhounds for that matter. Yeah. But I greyhounds for that matter. Yeah. But I wonder if they incorporate breath holds wonder if they incorporate breath holds wonder if they incorporate breath holds as a way to deploy red blood cells. as a way to deploy red blood cells. as a way to deploy red blood cells. Yeah, it could be that. Yeah, something Yeah, it could be that. Yeah, something Yeah, it could be that. Yeah, something in the kind of breath holding aspect of in the kind of breath holding aspect of in the kind of breath holding aspect of extreme bouts of exercise is also extreme bouts of exercise is also extreme bouts of exercise is also contributing to uh to that contraction. contributing to uh to that contraction. contributing to uh to that contraction. Like when uh when one becomes a bit Like when uh when one becomes a bit Like when uh when one becomes a bit hypoxic because you just can't keep up hypoxic because you just can't keep up hypoxic because you just can't keep up with whatever exertion like you just with whatever exertion like you just with whatever exertion like you just can't breathe in enough oxygen, dump can't breathe in enough oxygen, dump can't breathe in enough oxygen, dump enough carbon dioxide to keep up with enough carbon dioxide to keep up with enough carbon dioxide to keep up with your physical activity. Is there any your physical activity. Is there any your physical activity. Is there any that is that one of the conditions under that is that one of the conditions under that is that one of the conditions under which it sort of mimics a breathold or which it sort of mimics a breathold or which it sort of mimics a breathold or do you need this cold? do you need this cold? do you need this cold? There seems to be something about the There seems to be something about the There seems to be something about the face being cold. Yeah, there's um it's face being cold. Yeah, there's um it's face being cold. Yeah, there's um it's stimulation of the veagal nerve that is stimulation of the veagal nerve that is stimulation of the veagal nerve that is in part triggering this response which in part triggering this response which in part triggering this response which you know runs through your face. And so you know runs through your face. And so you know runs through your face. And so that's why the you know the facial that's why the you know the facial that's why the you know the facial immersion is crucial um to triggering immersion is crucial um to triggering immersion is crucial um to triggering the response. But there is I think a the response. But there is I think a the response. But there is I think a component of if you're just holding your component of if you're just holding your component of if you're just holding your breath where that also kind of triggers breath where that also kind of triggers breath where that also kind of triggers it. So um but yeah, it's really amazing it. So um but yeah, it's really amazing it. So um but yeah, it's really amazing to think that as mammals this evolved to think that as mammals this evolved to think that as mammals this evolved sometimes so long ago that it's in it's sometimes so long ago that it's in it's sometimes so long ago that it's in it's even in mice. They've done a study where even in mice. They've done a study where even in mice. They've done a study where they actually trained mice to dive and they actually trained mice to dive and they actually trained mice to dive and they could measure the mamalian dive they could measure the mamalian dive they could measure the mamalian dive reflex in mice. Wild. Yeah. So, you sort reflex in mice. Wild. Yeah. So, you sort reflex in mice. Wild. Yeah. So, you sort of answered my next question, which was of answered my next question, which was of answered my next question, which was uh why do we have a dive reflex? I mean, uh why do we have a dive reflex? I mean, uh why do we have a dive reflex? I mean, we're not a harp seal, right? And we're not a harp seal, right? And we're not a harp seal, right? And we're not a diving not a diving not a diving bird. Why do we why do we have this? bird. Why do we why do we have this? bird. Why do we why do we have this? Yeah. I mean, it's a great question and Yeah. I mean, it's a great question and Yeah. I mean, it's a great question and I don't think we really know. Um there's I don't think we really know. Um there's I don't think we really know. Um there's a some people talk about something a some people talk about something a some people talk about something called the aquatic ape hypothesis. um called the aquatic ape hypothesis. um called the aquatic ape hypothesis. um that says that one of our ancestors that says that one of our ancestors that says that one of our ancestors sorry I'm trying not to interrupt but I sorry I'm trying not to interrupt but I sorry I'm trying not to interrupt but I just someone I've heard of the stone just someone I've heard of the stone just someone I've heard of the stone date hypothesis you know all the date hypothesis you know all the date hypothesis you know all the psychonauts love the stone date psychonauts love the stone date psychonauts love the stone date hypothesis which is that psychedelics hypothesis which is that psychedelics hypothesis which is that psychedelics what are what led to new ideas and what are what led to new ideas and what are what led to new ideas and daytime dreams that led to our evolution daytime dreams that led to our evolution daytime dreams that led to our evolution and uh anyway forgive me for and uh anyway forgive me for and uh anyway forgive me for interrupting it was it was an interrupting it was it was an interrupting it was it was an interruption of the stone ape um interruption of the stone ape um interruption of the stone ape um so that the aquatic ape was right there so that the aquatic ape was right there so that the aquatic ape was right there alongside the stone ape but I think I alongside the stone ape but I think I alongside the stone ape but I think I think that you know given the fact that think that you know given the fact that think that you know given the fact that it's present throughout all mammals. I it's present throughout all mammals. I it's present throughout all mammals. I think it's much more likely that it was think it's much more likely that it was think it's much more likely that it was some very long ago ancestral, you know, some very long ago ancestral, you know, some very long ago ancestral, you know, protomamal that was doing some kind of protomamal that was doing some kind of protomamal that was doing some kind of diving. And because of that, this diving. And because of that, this diving. And because of that, this response is present to varying degrees response is present to varying degrees response is present to varying degrees in all modern mammals. in all modern mammals. in all modern mammals. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 daily for more than 13 years. AG1 daily for more than 13 years. AG1 daily for more than 13 years. However, I've now found an even better However, I've now found an even better However, I've now found an even better vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. That vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. That vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. That new and better drink is the new and new and better drink is the new and new and better drink is the new and improved AG1, which just launched this improved AG1, which just launched this improved AG1, which just launched this month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is a more advanced clinically backed a more advanced clinically backed a more advanced clinically backed version of the product that I've been version of the product that I've been version of the product that I've been taking daily for years. It includes new taking daily for years. It includes new taking daily for years. It includes new bioavailable nutrients and enhanced bioavailable nutrients and enhanced bioavailable nutrients and enhanced probiotics. The NextGen formula is based probiotics. The NextGen formula is based probiotics. The NextGen formula is based on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes several specific it now includes several specific it now includes several specific clinically studied probiotic strains clinically studied probiotic strains clinically studied probiotic strains that have been shown to support both that have been shown to support both that have been shown to support both digestive health and immune system digestive health and immune system digestive health and immune system health, as well as to improve bowel health, as well as to improve bowel health, as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. As regularity and to reduce bloating. As regularity and to reduce bloating. As someone who's been involved in research someone who's been involved in research someone who's been involved in research science for more than three decades and science for more than three decades and science for more than three decades and in health and fitness for equally as in health and fitness for equally as in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the long, I'm constantly looking for the long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental health, best tools to improve my mental health, best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and performance. I physical health, and performance. I physical health, and performance. I discovered and started taking AG1 way discovered and started taking AG1 way discovered and started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I ever had a back in 2012, long before I ever had a back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every podcast, and I've been taking it every podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. I find that it greatly day since. I find that it greatly day since. I find that it greatly improves all aspects of my health. I improves all aspects of my health. I improves all aspects of my health. I just feel so much better when I take it. just feel so much better when I take it. just feel so much better when I take it. With each passing year, and by the way, With each passing year, and by the way, With each passing year, and by the way, I'm turning 50 this September. I I'm turning 50 this September. I I'm turning 50 this September. I continue to feel better and better, and continue to feel better and better, and continue to feel better and better, and I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in uses the highest quality ingredients in uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're the right combinations, and they're the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. So, I'm without increasing the cost. So, I'm without increasing the cost. So, I'm honored to have them as a sponsor of honored to have them as a sponsor of honored to have them as a sponsor of this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you can go to you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an AG1 welcome kit with five free travel AG1 welcome kit with five free travel AG1 welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to K2. Again, go to K2. Again, go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the special welcome kit with five free special welcome kit with five free special welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of travel packs and a free bottle of travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Element. Element is an brought to us by Element. Element is an brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body is critical for optimal brain and body is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and dehydration can diminish cognitive and dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklemnt.com/huberman, to claim a free drinklemnt.com/huberman, to claim a free drinklemnt.com/huberman, to claim a free Element sample pack with a purchase of Element sample pack with a purchase of Element sample pack with a purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's any Element drink mix. Again, that's any Element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. I'm jumping around free sample pack. I'm jumping around free sample pack. I'm jumping around here, but I feel like these are the here, but I feel like these are the here, but I feel like these are the questions that are hopefully springing questions that are hopefully springing questions that are hopefully springing to people's minds here and there. Uh, to people's minds here and there. Uh, to people's minds here and there. Uh, I've seen these videos of babies being I've seen these videos of babies being I've seen these videos of babies being born into a swimming pool and they can born into a swimming pool and they can born into a swimming pool and they can and that you could on their belly. It and that you could on their belly. It and that you could on their belly. It looks like the nirvana cover and you looks like the nirvana cover and you looks like the nirvana cover and you know, they're they seem perfectly happy know, they're they seem perfectly happy know, they're they seem perfectly happy to be underwater shortly after birth, to be underwater shortly after birth, to be underwater shortly after birth, which makes intuitive sense. They were which makes intuitive sense. They were which makes intuitive sense. They were in the womb. they were floating in the in the womb. they were floating in the in the womb. they were floating in the amniotic sack and they're underwater, so amniotic sack and they're underwater, so amniotic sack and they're underwater, so to speak. Um, do we come into this world to speak. Um, do we come into this world to speak. Um, do we come into this world knowing how to dive and be underwater knowing how to dive and be underwater knowing how to dive and be underwater because of our experience during because of our experience during because of our experience during pregnancy? I mean, it seems like it. pregnancy? I mean, it seems like it. pregnancy? I mean, it seems like it. I mean, I've seen, you know, if you take I mean, I've seen, you know, if you take I mean, I've seen, you know, if you take babies, and I'm not recommending anyone babies, and I'm not recommending anyone babies, and I'm not recommending anyone do this, but like blowing their face, do this, but like blowing their face, do this, but like blowing their face, you know, they instinctively hold you know, they instinctively hold you know, they instinctively hold their breath and can be put underwater. their breath and can be put underwater. their breath and can be put underwater. And uh and actually bajou people told me And uh and actually bajou people told me And uh and actually bajou people told me and I don't know if this is something and I don't know if this is something and I don't know if this is something they actually do but that the test of a they actually do but that the test of a they actually do but that the test of a bajjo is as a baby they pass the baby bajjo is as a baby they pass the baby bajjo is as a baby they pass the baby under the canoe and if the baby comes under the canoe and if the baby comes under the canoe and if the baby comes out the other side then it's a bajjo out the other side then it's a bajjo out the other side then it's a bajjo because it has held its breath like it because it has held its breath like it because it has held its breath like it will for the rest of its life. What's will for the rest of its life. What's will for the rest of its life. What's the alternative? Yeah I don't that's why the alternative? Yeah I don't that's why the alternative? Yeah I don't that's why I said I don't know if they actually do I said I don't know if they actually do I said I don't know if they actually do this but um it was just something that this but um it was just something that this but um it was just something that they told me. Um but yeah I think there they told me. Um but yeah I think there they told me. Um but yeah I think there is some innate uh response where we know is some innate uh response where we know is some innate uh response where we know even as babies to hold our breath. even as babies to hold our breath. even as babies to hold our breath. That's fascinating. So what did you That's fascinating. So what did you That's fascinating. So what did you discover in this uh group of incredible discover in this uh group of incredible discover in this uh group of incredible divers? So we discovered that they have divers? So we discovered that they have divers? So we discovered that they have larger spleens. Um so you know I larger spleens. Um so you know I larger spleens. Um so you know I mentioned the spleen's role in diving. mentioned the spleen's role in diving. mentioned the spleen's role in diving. Um it's increasing your they Um it's increasing your they Um it's increasing your they sometimes people call it a biological sometimes people call it a biological sometimes people call it a biological scuba tank. You know it's increasing the scuba tank. You know it's increasing the scuba tank. You know it's increasing the amount of oxygen available to you. So amount of oxygen available to you. So amount of oxygen available to you. So you know our hypothesis was that they you know our hypothesis was that they you know our hypothesis was that they would have larger spleens because a would have larger spleens because a would have larger spleens because a larger spleen presumably means longer larger spleen presumably means longer larger spleen presumably means longer diving, safer diving. Um, and so we diving, safer diving. Um, and so we diving, safer diving. Um, and so we compared them to a nearby population compared them to a nearby population compared them to a nearby population living in a very similar environment but living in a very similar environment but living in a very similar environment but with a history of farming. So these are with a history of farming. So these are with a history of farming. So these are people who live right next to the ocean people who live right next to the ocean people who live right next to the ocean but aren't really interacting with it. but aren't really interacting with it. but aren't really interacting with it. So you know Bajjo children are in the So you know Bajjo children are in the So you know Bajjo children are in the water from the moment they're born water from the moment they're born water from the moment they're born almost. Um, and then children in this almost. Um, and then children in this almost. Um, and then children in this other village didn't know how to swim. other village didn't know how to swim. other village didn't know how to swim. Um, and so we found that compared to Um, and so we found that compared to Um, and so we found that compared to that village um, the Bajjo had that village um, the Bajjo had that village um, the Bajjo had significantly larger spleens. So their significantly larger spleens. So their significantly larger spleens. So their spleens were about 50% larger on spleens were about 50% larger on spleens were about 50% larger on average. Um, and this was true for average. Um, and this was true for average. Um, and this was true for divers and non-divers. So that showed us divers and non-divers. So that showed us divers and non-divers. So that showed us that it was very likely to be something that it was very likely to be something that it was very likely to be something genetic rather than, you know, the fact genetic rather than, you know, the fact genetic rather than, you know, the fact that you're diving increases the size of that you're diving increases the size of that you're diving increases the size of your spleen. But does diving increase your spleen. But does diving increase your spleen. But does diving increase the size of the spleen? This is a the size of the spleen? This is a the size of the spleen? This is a question that I think is still open question that I think is still open question that I think is still open because in both of the populations where because in both of the populations where because in both of the populations where I've measured this, divers and I've measured this, divers and I've measured this, divers and non-divers have the same size spleen. non-divers have the same size spleen. non-divers have the same size spleen. However, other people have shown that um However, other people have shown that um However, other people have shown that um you know, when you train if you train you know, when you train if you train you know, when you train if you train people, if you recruit people to a study people, if you recruit people to a study people, if you recruit people to a study and train them in breathold diving, and train them in breathold diving, and train them in breathold diving, their spleens increase in size. Um, so I their spleens increase in size. Um, so I their spleens increase in size. Um, so I don't know if it's just that the don't know if it's just that the don't know if it's just that the populations that I've worked with have populations that I've worked with have populations that I've worked with have some kind of genetic factors that some kind of genetic factors that some kind of genetic factors that override that change. Um, but yeah, open override that change. Um, but yeah, open override that change. Um, but yeah, open question I would say. I know you've done question I would say. I know you've done question I would say. I know you've done some work parsing which genes are some work parsing which genes are some work parsing which genes are different in this population and different in this population and different in this population and developing some animal models for that developing some animal models for that developing some animal models for that and that some of this converges on and that some of this converges on and that some of this converges on thyroid hormone. Um, could you tell us thyroid hormone. Um, could you tell us thyroid hormone. Um, could you tell us the relationship between thyroid hormone the relationship between thyroid hormone the relationship between thyroid hormone levels that people are fascinated by levels that people are fascinated by levels that people are fascinated by thyroid hormone? It seems everyone thyroid hormone? It seems everyone thyroid hormone? It seems everyone either thinks they have a thyroid either thinks they have a thyroid either thinks they have a thyroid deficiency or an overprouction of deficiency or an overprouction of deficiency or an overprouction of thyroid or they want to increase their thyroid or they want to increase their thyroid or they want to increase their thyroid. What is the relationship thyroid. What is the relationship thyroid. What is the relationship between thyroid hormone and spleen between thyroid hormone and spleen between thyroid hormone and spleen function as it relates to the production function as it relates to the production function as it relates to the production of these additional red blood cells? The of these additional red blood cells? The of these additional red blood cells? The gene that we found that was evolving in gene that we found that was evolving in gene that we found that was evolving in the population um correlates with higher the population um correlates with higher the population um correlates with higher than average thyroid hormone levels. Um than average thyroid hormone levels. Um than average thyroid hormone levels. Um so not you know like clinically so not you know like clinically so not you know like clinically hyperyroid but higher than average and hyperyroid but higher than average and hyperyroid but higher than average and this is actually also true for Europeans this is actually also true for Europeans this is actually also true for Europeans who are carrying the same genetic who are carrying the same genetic who are carrying the same genetic variant. um you know we showed in variant. um you know we showed in variant. um you know we showed in another group of individuals that if you another group of individuals that if you another group of individuals that if you have this gene variant um you have this gene variant um you have this gene variant um you have higher thyroid hormone levels and you higher thyroid hormone levels and you higher thyroid hormone levels and you have a larger spleen um so it's not just have a larger spleen um so it's not just have a larger spleen um so it's not just something that's true in the cenomads um something that's true in the cenomads um something that's true in the cenomads um and so what we think is going on and so what we think is going on and so what we think is going on potentially and this relates to the work potentially and this relates to the work potentially and this relates to the work that we did with mice as well is that um that we did with mice as well is that um that we did with mice as well is that um because of these higher I hesitate to because of these higher I hesitate to because of these higher I hesitate to say elevated because that's a clinical say elevated because that's a clinical say elevated because that's a clinical term higher than average thyroid hormone term higher than average thyroid hormone term higher than average thyroid hormone levels um people are prod or the you levels um people are prod or the you levels um people are prod or the you know the mice the humans whoever it is know the mice the humans whoever it is know the mice the humans whoever it is are producing more red blood cells Um are producing more red blood cells Um are producing more red blood cells Um and so now whether that's kind of and so now whether that's kind of and so now whether that's kind of stretching the spleen um you know stretching the spleen um you know stretching the spleen um you know because the spleens that we saw in the because the spleens that we saw in the because the spleens that we saw in the mice were larger but less dense um or mice were larger but less dense um or mice were larger but less dense um or you know if there's some other mechanism you know if there's some other mechanism you know if there's some other mechanism we're not completely sure yet but yeah we're not completely sure yet but yeah we're not completely sure yet but yeah it seems like these higher than average it seems like these higher than average it seems like these higher than average thyroid hormone levels at least when the thyroid hormone levels at least when the thyroid hormone levels at least when the genetic cause was um was what we saw in genetic cause was um was what we saw in genetic cause was um was what we saw in the cenomads increase the size of the cenomads increase the size of the cenomads increase the size of the spleen increase hemoglobin increase spleen increase hemoglobin increase spleen increase hemoglobin increase hematocrit um increase red blood cell hematocrit um increase red blood cell hematocrit um increase red blood cell count. I can think of two general count. I can think of two general count. I can think of two general scenarios where having a nice big spleen scenarios where having a nice big spleen scenarios where having a nice big spleen would be advantageous. One is in the would be advantageous. One is in the would be advantageous. One is in the performance enhancement context. Your performance enhancement context. Your performance enhancement context. Your runner, maybe there's a way, I'm not runner, maybe there's a way, I'm not runner, maybe there's a way, I'm not suggesting this as a protocol that you suggesting this as a protocol that you suggesting this as a protocol that you know like getting your face into some know like getting your face into some know like getting your face into some cold water, holding your breath could cold water, holding your breath could cold water, holding your breath could afford you a kind of a boost. So instead afford you a kind of a boost. So instead afford you a kind of a boost. So instead of the scuba tank boost underwater, of the scuba tank boost underwater, of the scuba tank boost underwater, you're getting the above ground boost in you're getting the above ground boost in you're getting the above ground boost in endurance or strength output. You said endurance or strength output. You said endurance or strength output. You said you have to be holding your breath at you have to be holding your breath at you have to be holding your breath at the at the same time in order to take the at the same time in order to take the at the same time in order to take advantage of that deployment of red advantage of that deployment of red advantage of that deployment of red blood cells, which is a little confusing blood cells, which is a little confusing blood cells, which is a little confusing to me because I imagine if this if the to me because I imagine if this if the to me because I imagine if this if the spleen contracts and the red blood cells spleen contracts and the red blood cells spleen contracts and the red blood cells are deployed into the body that those are deployed into the body that those are deployed into the body that those are available whether or not your mouth are available whether or not your mouth are available whether or not your mouth is open or not. Yeah. And we don't is open or not. Yeah. And we don't is open or not. Yeah. And we don't I don't think know how quickly the I don't think know how quickly the I don't think know how quickly the spleen reuptakes those red blood cells, spleen reuptakes those red blood cells, spleen reuptakes those red blood cells, but it does do that eventually. So maybe but it does do that eventually. So maybe but it does do that eventually. So maybe this is something that would be this is something that would be this is something that would be advantageous for a short burst or advantageous for a short burst or advantageous for a short burst or something like that. I mean, I think something like that. I mean, I think something like that. I mean, I think there's a lot that we don't know about there's a lot that we don't know about there's a lot that we don't know about the performance-enhancing aspect of the performance-enhancing aspect of the performance-enhancing aspect of this, but that's really interesting this, but that's really interesting this, but that's really interesting because um the work that we did in the because um the work that we did in the because um the work that we did in the mice where we replicated what we saw in mice where we replicated what we saw in mice where we replicated what we saw in these divers um they had larger spleens, these divers um they had larger spleens, these divers um they had larger spleens, they had higher red blood cell count, they had higher red blood cell count, they had higher red blood cell count, but they did not have any change in but they did not have any change in but they did not have any change in ariththropoin, which is how we normally ariththropoin, which is how we normally ariththropoin, which is how we normally think about um changes in red blood cell think about um changes in red blood cell think about um changes in red blood cell count. This is a drug that was really count. This is a drug that was really count. This is a drug that was really popular with cyclists for a while. um popular with cyclists for a while. um popular with cyclists for a while. um people would self-dose with people would self-dose with people would self-dose with ariththropotin and it would increase ariththropotin and it would increase ariththropotin and it would increase their red blood cell count dramatically their red blood cell count dramatically their red blood cell count dramatically to improve their performance. Um so this to improve their performance. Um so this to improve their performance. Um so this is like an ariththropotin independent is like an ariththropotin independent is like an ariththropotin independent mechanism of increasing your blood red mechanism of increasing your blood red mechanism of increasing your blood red blood cell count that could have an blood cell count that could have an blood cell count that could have an advantage in performance. I think advantage in performance. I think advantage in performance. I think fascinating and then the other scenario fascinating and then the other scenario fascinating and then the other scenario is for uh robustness of one's immune is for uh robustness of one's immune is for uh robustness of one's immune system. I for one don't like being sick. system. I for one don't like being sick. system. I for one don't like being sick. And if there's anything I can do to And if there's anything I can do to And if there's anything I can do to increase the function of my immune increase the function of my immune increase the function of my immune system, including sleep, exercise, system, including sleep, exercise, system, including sleep, exercise, sunlight, all those things, uh, but in sunlight, all those things, uh, but in sunlight, all those things, uh, but in particular, if I feel like I'm traveling particular, if I feel like I'm traveling particular, if I feel like I'm traveling in an additional amount or not sleeping in an additional amount or not sleeping in an additional amount or not sleeping as well, I'd be willing to do pretty as well, I'd be willing to do pretty as well, I'd be willing to do pretty much anything within the realm of reason much anything within the realm of reason much anything within the realm of reason to improve my immune system vigor, to improve my immune system vigor, to improve my immune system vigor, right? Yeah, absolutely. Uh, and if right? Yeah, absolutely. Uh, and if right? Yeah, absolutely. Uh, and if sticking my face in a bowl of cold sticking my face in a bowl of cold sticking my face in a bowl of cold water, 50° for I guess as long as I can water, 50° for I guess as long as I can water, 50° for I guess as long as I can hold my breath in the morning is going hold my breath in the morning is going hold my breath in the morning is going to potentially afford that advantage. to potentially afford that advantage. to potentially afford that advantage. I'm willing to be the idiot that uh I'm willing to be the idiot that uh I'm willing to be the idiot that uh is doing this thing without any specific is doing this thing without any specific is doing this thing without any specific clinical trial yet, but I'd love to see clinical trial yet, but I'd love to see clinical trial yet, but I'd love to see a clinical trial on this. Oh, a clinical trial on this. Oh, a clinical trial on this. Oh, absolutely. Has anything been done to absolutely. Has anything been done to absolutely. Has anything been done to explore how that particular behavior or explore how that particular behavior or explore how that particular behavior or that is uh generating the dive reflex that is uh generating the dive reflex that is uh generating the dive reflex can afford any uh enhancement in immune can afford any uh enhancement in immune can afford any uh enhancement in immune system function. I haven't seen any system function. I haven't seen any system function. I haven't seen any studies that look at that. But it would studies that look at that. But it would studies that look at that. But it would be really interesting um because yeah, I be really interesting um because yeah, I be really interesting um because yeah, I mean like you I also would do anything mean like you I also would do anything mean like you I also would do anything to not get sick and we do see in these to not get sick and we do see in these to not get sick and we do see in these populations um a lot of older people who populations um a lot of older people who populations um a lot of older people who are continuing to dive um and there are continuing to dive um and there are continuing to dive um and there is a seeming health and robustness that is a seeming health and robustness that is a seeming health and robustness that I wonder if it's related to the activity I wonder if it's related to the activity I wonder if it's related to the activity of diving itself. We have a family of diving itself. We have a family of diving itself. We have a family friend who's 94. My mom just told me 94 friend who's 94. My mom just told me 94 friend who's 94. My mom just told me 94 and my mom said over the phone, "She and my mom said over the phone, "She and my mom said over the phone, "She swims four miles a day." And I'm like, swims four miles a day." And I'm like, swims four miles a day." And I'm like, "There's no way." And she goes, "No, "There's no way." And she goes, "No, "There's no way." And she goes, "No, wait. She swims a mile a day, four days wait. She swims a mile a day, four days wait. She swims a mile a day, four days a week." Um, which is still pretty a week." Um, which is still pretty a week." Um, which is still pretty impressive. Yeah. Swimming a mile is uh impressive. Yeah. Swimming a mile is uh impressive. Yeah. Swimming a mile is uh Yeah, that's quite impressive. Four days Yeah, that's quite impressive. Four days Yeah, that's quite impressive. Four days a week at 94. Mhm. Presumably that's not a week at 94. Mhm. Presumably that's not a week at 94. Mhm. Presumably that's not backstroke. At least some of it's uh backstroke. At least some of it's uh backstroke. At least some of it's uh Yeah, I think that like is there Yeah, I think that like is there Yeah, I think that like is there something to being in water that just something to being in water that just something to being in water that just generally is good for us? I would generally is good for us? I would generally is good for us? I would imagine I shower, I bathe. But, you imagine I shower, I bathe. But, you imagine I shower, I bathe. But, you know, is there something good about know, is there something good about know, is there something good about swimming or floating or diving just for swimming or floating or diving just for swimming or floating or diving just for our general human physiology that we're our general human physiology that we're our general human physiology that we're aware of? Yeah. I mean, it's so low aware of? Yeah. I mean, it's so low aware of? Yeah. I mean, it's so low impact and such a natural way to, impact and such a natural way to, impact and such a natural way to, you know, to move to exercise that um you know, to move to exercise that um you know, to move to exercise that um I yeah, I think especially as we age, it I yeah, I think especially as we age, it I yeah, I think especially as we age, it would be a really wonderful way to would be a really wonderful way to would be a really wonderful way to stay fit and healthy. has the size of stay fit and healthy. has the size of stay fit and healthy. has the size of spleens, or rather the genes related to spleens, or rather the genes related to spleens, or rather the genes related to um what you're talking about, um has um what you're talking about, um has um what you're talking about, um has that been correlated with whether or not that been correlated with whether or not that been correlated with whether or not people evolved from coastal versus more people evolved from coastal versus more people evolved from coastal versus more um central regions of continents? um central regions of continents? um central regions of continents? That's a really good question. We That's a really good question. We That's a really good question. We haven't looked at that, but it would be haven't looked at that, but it would be haven't looked at that, but it would be really interesting to see because I really interesting to see because I really interesting to see because I mean, you know, the oceans are an mean, you know, the oceans are an mean, you know, the oceans are an incredible resource in terms of food incredible resource in terms of food incredible resource in terms of food availability, especially to early availability, especially to early availability, especially to early humans. Um, so you would imagine that humans. Um, so you would imagine that humans. Um, so you would imagine that anyone living near a coast anywhere anyone living near a coast anywhere anyone living near a coast anywhere would take advantage of this resource. would take advantage of this resource. would take advantage of this resource. Um, so it would be interesting to see if Um, so it would be interesting to see if Um, so it would be interesting to see if maybe coastal populations are more maybe coastal populations are more maybe coastal populations are more likely to carry the genetic variation um likely to carry the genetic variation um likely to carry the genetic variation um that enables this behavior. Although that enables this behavior. Although that enables this behavior. Although there are actually skeletons that have there are actually skeletons that have there are actually skeletons that have been found in various parts of the world been found in various parts of the world been found in various parts of the world near river systems that also suggest near river systems that also suggest near river systems that also suggest that those people have been diving. Um, that those people have been diving. Um, that those people have been diving. Um, so maybe it's just being near water so maybe it's just being near water so maybe it's just being near water anywhere in the world. I don't think of anywhere in the world. I don't think of anywhere in the world. I don't think of humans as an underwater species, but humans as an underwater species, but humans as an underwater species, but you're changing my view of this. I feel you're changing my view of this. I feel you're changing my view of this. I feel like we need to think about humans as like we need to think about humans as like we need to think about humans as some humans in the past and now some humans in the past and now some humans in the past and now spend a lot of time underwater. Yeah. spend a lot of time underwater. Yeah. spend a lot of time underwater. Yeah. Without a scuba tank. It seems to be Without a scuba tank. It seems to be Without a scuba tank. It seems to be that way. Yeah. All over the world. that way. Yeah. All over the world. that way. Yeah. All over the world. That's super interesting. That's super interesting. That's super interesting. So, this isn't the only population So, this isn't the only population So, this isn't the only population you've studied. um if you would could you've studied. um if you would could you've studied. um if you would could you tell us about the recent work um you tell us about the recent work um you tell us about the recent work um uh the women study on women partic in uh the women study on women partic in uh the women study on women partic in particular uh and I'm very interested in particular uh and I'm very interested in particular uh and I'm very interested in how this relates to cardiovascular how this relates to cardiovascular how this relates to cardiovascular health. Yeah. So, um, you know, speaking health. Yeah. So, um, you know, speaking health. Yeah. So, um, you know, speaking of older divers, um, there's a group in of older divers, um, there's a group in of older divers, um, there's a group in Korea on an island called Jju. Um, these Korea on an island called Jju. Um, these Korea on an island called Jju. Um, these are all female divers. Um, they're are all female divers. Um, they're are all female divers. Um, they're called the Henyo. Um, which just means called the Henyo. Um, which just means called the Henyo. Um, which just means sea women. And, uh, and I, the average sea women. And, uh, and I, the average sea women. And, uh, and I, the average age of the Henyo currently is around 70 age of the Henyo currently is around 70 age of the Henyo currently is around 70 years old. Um, so that's when I think of years old. Um, so that's when I think of years old. Um, so that's when I think of robustness with age, I think of the robustness with age, I think of the robustness with age, I think of the Henyo. Um, but this all female diving Henyo. Um, but this all female diving Henyo. Um, but this all female diving population has likely been diving in population has likely been diving in population has likely been diving in that region for thousands of years. Um, that region for thousands of years. Um, that region for thousands of years. Um, and what's really extraordinary about and what's really extraordinary about and what's really extraordinary about the Henyo, there's a few things. First the Henyo, there's a few things. First the Henyo, there's a few things. First of all, they're diving in extremely cold of all, they're diving in extremely cold of all, they're diving in extremely cold water, especially compared to the Bajjo water, especially compared to the Bajjo water, especially compared to the Bajjo in Indonesia. No wet suits. No wet suit. in Indonesia. No wet suits. No wet suit. in Indonesia. No wet suits. No wet suit. Well, now they wear wet suits. Up until Well, now they wear wet suits. Up until Well, now they wear wet suits. Up until the 80s, they were diving in these the 80s, they were diving in these the 80s, they were diving in these cotton bodysuits that you can see cotton bodysuits that you can see cotton bodysuits that you can see provide zero thermal protection. I mean, provide zero thermal protection. I mean, provide zero thermal protection. I mean, it's just cotton swimsuit it's just cotton swimsuit it's just cotton swimsuit essentially. Um, so you know, diving essentially. Um, so you know, diving essentially. Um, so you know, diving with no protection in extremely cold with no protection in extremely cold with no protection in extremely cold water. And um, and as women, they're water. And um, and as women, they're water. And um, and as women, they're diving throughout pregnancy. So, they're diving throughout pregnancy. So, they're diving throughout pregnancy. So, they're diving up until the day they give birth diving up until the day they give birth diving up until the day they give birth sometimes. Um, and then they're back sometimes. Um, and then they're back sometimes. Um, and then they're back in the water a few days later. So, this in the water a few days later. So, this in the water a few days later. So, this has really shaped this population in has really shaped this population in has really shaped this population in really interesting ways. I was wondering really interesting ways. I was wondering really interesting ways. I was wondering how deep do they dive? This is a really how deep do they dive? This is a really how deep do they dive? This is a really good question I get asked a lot. How good question I get asked a lot. How good question I get asked a lot. How deep do any of these populations dive? deep do any of these populations dive? deep do any of these populations dive? Um, and there's just like not really Um, and there's just like not really Um, and there's just like not really data. So, we don't really know. Um, you data. So, we don't really know. Um, you data. So, we don't really know. Um, you know, now we're starting to see, you know, now we're starting to see, you know, now we're starting to see, you know, we're looking at, um, the henoy. know, we're looking at, um, the henoy. know, we're looking at, um, the henoy. We actually tracked some of their diving We actually tracked some of their diving We actually tracked some of their diving and their dives tended to be much and their dives tended to be much and their dives tended to be much shallower. You know, not really going shallower. You know, not really going shallower. You know, not really going any deeper than 10 meters. um 30 feet, any deeper than 10 meters. um 30 feet, any deeper than 10 meters. um 30 feet, but um but they're also in their 70s, but um but they're also in their 70s, but um but they're also in their 70s, 80s even. You know, we had an 81y old 80s even. You know, we had an 81y old 80s even. You know, we had an 81y old diver in our study. 30 feet is not diver in our study. 30 feet is not diver in our study. 30 feet is not nothing. We had a 20 foot deep end nothing. We had a 20 foot deep end nothing. We had a 20 foot deep end in the pool I you know, recreational in the pool I you know, recreational in the pool I you know, recreational pool near my home growing up. And when pool near my home growing up. And when pool near my home growing up. And when you're down at the bottom, you feel you're down at the bottom, you feel you're down at the bottom, you feel significant pressure. You can let some significant pressure. You can let some significant pressure. You can let some air out to relieve some of that air out to relieve some of that air out to relieve some of that pressure. But you're I mean 20 feet is pressure. But you're I mean 20 feet is pressure. But you're I mean 20 feet is 20 feet 30 feet and it's not a 20 feet 30 feet and it's not a 20 feet 30 feet and it's not a linear experience, right? with every linear experience, right? with every linear experience, right? with every additional foot like the you're additional foot like the you're additional foot like the you're really experiencing more and more really experiencing more and more really experiencing more and more pressure. So yeah. Yeah. And I shouldn't pressure. So yeah. Yeah. And I shouldn't pressure. So yeah. Yeah. And I shouldn't say it like that. It's just that say it like that. It's just that say it like that. It's just that compared to you know the Bajjo have been compared to you know the Bajjo have been compared to you know the Bajjo have been documented to dive deeper than 200 feet documented to dive deeper than 200 feet documented to dive deeper than 200 feet deep. Oh I'm not countering I was just I deep. Oh I'm not countering I was just I deep. Oh I'm not countering I was just I was just I just for sake of people out was just I just for sake of people out was just I just for sake of people out there who perhaps haven't spent time at there who perhaps haven't spent time at there who perhaps haven't spent time at the bottom of a pool um a 20ft pool like the bottom of a pool um a 20ft pool like the bottom of a pool um a 20ft pool like 30 feet is still really impressive. 30 feet is still really impressive. 30 feet is still really impressive. It's very impressive. Yeah. and It's very impressive. Yeah. and It's very impressive. Yeah. and they're bringing a fetus down that low, they're bringing a fetus down that low, they're bringing a fetus down that low, right, when they're I mean, you know, right, when they're I mean, you know, right, when they're I mean, you know, again, there's no documentation of how again, there's no documentation of how again, there's no documentation of how these women have been diving throughout these women have been diving throughout these women have been diving throughout their pregnancy other than, you know, we their pregnancy other than, you know, we their pregnancy other than, you know, we know that they were diving throughout know that they were diving throughout know that they were diving throughout their pregnancy, but yeah, presumably in their pregnancy, but yeah, presumably in their pregnancy, but yeah, presumably in their youth, they were diving to these their youth, they were diving to these their youth, they were diving to these depths with their unborn child inside depths with their unborn child inside depths with their unborn child inside them. Um, so it's a really I mean them. Um, so it's a really I mean them. Um, so it's a really I mean when we think about natural selection when we think about natural selection when we think about natural selection and evolution, something that's able to and evolution, something that's able to and evolution, something that's able to act on a pregnant woman has the act on a pregnant woman has the act on a pregnant woman has the opportunity to take out two generations opportunity to take out two generations opportunity to take out two generations if there's not genetic variation there. if there's not genetic variation there. if there's not genetic variation there. Um, that's protective. So it's like if Um, that's protective. So it's like if Um, that's protective. So it's like if we want to talk about really fast we want to talk about really fast we want to talk about really fast examples of evolution, it's anything examples of evolution, it's anything examples of evolution, it's anything that's acting on pregnancy. Um, and that's acting on pregnancy. Um, and that's acting on pregnancy. Um, and that's what we think has been happening that's what we think has been happening that's what we think has been happening in this population. in this population. in this population. I have so many questions, some of which I have so many questions, some of which I have so many questions, some of which are cultural, some of which are cultural, some of which are cultural, some of which are biological. I'll start with the cultural biological. I'll start with the cultural biological. I'll start with the cultural questions. Uh why in this culture is it the women Uh why in this culture is it the women Uh why in this culture is it the women specifically that dive? Um are they specifically that dive? Um are they specifically that dive? Um are they revered? Um and are they diving for a revered? Um and are they diving for a revered? Um and are they diving for a particular resource that is well because particular resource that is well because particular resource that is well because it's underwater presumably is not it's underwater presumably is not it's underwater presumably is not available elsewhere. But what are they available elsewhere. But what are they available elsewhere. But what are they diving for? We don't totally know. I diving for? We don't totally know. I diving for? We don't totally know. I have my own personal theory um which have my own personal theory um which have my own personal theory um which actually relates to the fact that in a actually relates to the fact that in a actually relates to the fact that in a lot of places with cold water so in lot of places with cold water so in lot of places with cold water so in Korea in Patagonia in um Aboriginal Korea in Patagonia in um Aboriginal Korea in Patagonia in um Aboriginal Tasmania um it's all women diving. So I Tasmania um it's all women diving. So I Tasmania um it's all women diving. So I suspect that there's something unique suspect that there's something unique suspect that there's something unique about the physiology of women um that about the physiology of women um that about the physiology of women um that makes us better at diving in cold makes us better at diving in cold makes us better at diving in cold temperatures or the men are afraid of temperatures or the men are afraid of temperatures or the men are afraid of the cold. I hear about a lot of guys the cold. I hear about a lot of guys the cold. I hear about a lot of guys that will spend dozens of that will spend dozens of that will spend dozens of hours picking apart deliberate cold hours picking apart deliberate cold hours picking apart deliberate cold exposure uh when it would take them a exposure uh when it would take them a exposure uh when it would take them a fraction of the amount of the time to fraction of the amount of the time to fraction of the amount of the time to get into the water. In my experience, get into the water. In my experience, get into the water. In my experience, this is not a controlled studies. Uh this is not a controlled studies. Uh this is not a controlled studies. Uh women are more tolerant of the cold, at women are more tolerant of the cold, at women are more tolerant of the cold, at least in terms of being willing to least in terms of being willing to least in terms of being willing to embrace it the first time around. embrace it the first time around. embrace it the first time around. Interesting. I have stories of uh I Interesting. I have stories of uh I Interesting. I have stories of uh I won't say which country uh elite special won't say which country uh elite special won't say which country uh elite special forces it wasn't the US uh guys in that forces it wasn't the US uh guys in that forces it wasn't the US uh guys in that case it was guys being terrified of case it was guys being terrified of case it was guys being terrified of getting into cold water but otherwise getting into cold water but otherwise getting into cold water but otherwise being willing to do very being willing to do very being willing to do very challenging and indeed very dangerous challenging and indeed very dangerous challenging and indeed very dangerous things um I know a woman who first cold things um I know a woman who first cold things um I know a woman who first cold plunge 10 minutes she was just in there plunge 10 minutes she was just in there plunge 10 minutes she was just in there in my experience women are more willing in my experience women are more willing in my experience women are more willing to get into the cold the first time and to get into the cold the first time and to get into the cold the first time and then now there's a lot of debate online then now there's a lot of debate online then now there's a lot of debate online about cold tolerance in the in the about cold tolerance in the in the about cold tolerance in the in the two sexes but I don't the data aren't two sexes but I don't the data aren't two sexes but I don't the data aren't really solid there, right? Um so I maybe really solid there, right? Um so I maybe really solid there, right? Um so I maybe the men are just afraid of going the men are just afraid of going the men are just afraid of going underwater. It could be. These are some underwater. It could be. These are some underwater. It could be. These are some tough ladies. I will tell you that. Um tough ladies. I will tell you that. Um tough ladies. I will tell you that. Um even into old age. My my colleague um even into old age. My my colleague um even into old age. My my colleague um Jang Lee at Soul National University, Jang Lee at Soul National University, Jang Lee at Soul National University, she's been working with them for a very she's been working with them for a very she's been working with them for a very long time. And she did a study where she long time. And she did a study where she long time. And she did a study where she was trying to find retired heno and the was trying to find retired heno and the was trying to find retired heno and the only ones she could find were over a only ones she could find were over a only ones she could find were over a hundred years old because they basically hundred years old because they basically hundred years old because they basically don't retire. They just dive until they don't retire. They just dive until they don't retire. They just dive until they can't until they die essentially. So she can't until they die essentially. So she can't until they die essentially. So she had, you know, these two women who were had, you know, these two women who were had, you know, these two women who were about three feet tall who were retired about three feet tall who were retired about three feet tall who were retired henyo because those are the only ones henyo because those are the only ones henyo because those are the only ones she could 100 years old. As we have this she could 100 years old. As we have this she could 100 years old. As we have this conversation, I think it's very conversation, I think it's very conversation, I think it's very important to remind people that important to remind people that important to remind people that correlation is an causation with all the correlation is an causation with all the correlation is an causation with all the obsession with longevity and living obsession with longevity and living obsession with longevity and living longer. I'm not going to rule out the longer. I'm not going to rule out the longer. I'm not going to rule out the possibility that getting into cold water possibility that getting into cold water possibility that getting into cold water in particular diving or generating the in particular diving or generating the in particular diving or generating the dive reflex with cold water doesn't have dive reflex with cold water doesn't have dive reflex with cold water doesn't have a longevity effect, but I don't think a longevity effect, but I don't think a longevity effect, but I don't think there's any direct evidence that it there's any direct evidence that it there's any direct evidence that it does. No. And um yeah, I mean it does. No. And um yeah, I mean it does. No. And um yeah, I mean it would certainly be interesting to would certainly be interesting to would certainly be interesting to explore but I don't think there's any explore but I don't think there's any explore but I don't think there's any evidence so far other than anecdot that evidence so far other than anecdot that evidence so far other than anecdot that study. Yeah. The problem is that you study. Yeah. The problem is that you study. Yeah. The problem is that you need to do a very long study, right? And need to do a very long study, right? And need to do a very long study, right? And the other problem with longevity studies the other problem with longevity studies the other problem with longevity studies is you don't really have a good control is you don't really have a good control is you don't really have a good control group at least within subject because group at least within subject because group at least within subject because you don't know when you would have died, you don't know when you would have died, you don't know when you would have died, right? Exactly. Yeah. Okay. So these uh right? Exactly. Yeah. Okay. So these uh right? Exactly. Yeah. Okay. So these uh incredible women are diving up until incredible women are diving up until incredible women are diving up until their 70s 80s. 70s 80s um beyond I their 70s 80s. 70s 80s um beyond I their 70s 80s. 70s 80s um beyond I guess. Um, the oldest diver that I've guess. Um, the oldest diver that I've guess. Um, the oldest diver that I've personally worked with was over 80. Um, personally worked with was over 80. Um, personally worked with was over 80. Um, but yeah, they uh and they and they, you but yeah, they uh and they and they, you but yeah, they uh and they and they, you know, I mean, they're so athletic as know, I mean, they're so athletic as know, I mean, they're so athletic as they do it. Um, but yeah, in terms of they do it. Um, but yeah, in terms of they do it. Um, but yeah, in terms of are they revered? Um, I think now, yes, are they revered? Um, I think now, yes, are they revered? Um, I think now, yes, I think that wasn't always true. Um, one I think that wasn't always true. Um, one I think that wasn't always true. Um, one Heno told me that in her youth she was Heno told me that in her youth she was Heno told me that in her youth she was kind of embarrassed to be a Heno. Um, kind of embarrassed to be a Heno. Um, kind of embarrassed to be a Heno. Um, and a lot of it's because, you know, and a lot of it's because, you know, and a lot of it's because, you know, they're exposed to the sun, so they have they're exposed to the sun, so they have they're exposed to the sun, so they have darker skin than a lot of other women. darker skin than a lot of other women. darker skin than a lot of other women. um they're they tend to be very loud um they're they tend to be very loud um they're they tend to be very loud because a lot of times they rupture because a lot of times they rupture because a lot of times they rupture their eard drums um from diving. Um you their eard drums um from diving. Um you their eard drums um from diving. Um you know if they don't pressurize correctly, know if they don't pressurize correctly, know if they don't pressurize correctly, you know, they can they can have hearing you know, they can they can have hearing you know, they can they can have hearing damage. So they're very they're damage. So they're very they're damage. So they're very they're known for being very loud. Um and so you known for being very loud. Um and so you known for being very loud. Um and so you know I think there was kind of a know I think there was kind of a know I think there was kind of a marginalization early on, but now um marginalization early on, but now um marginalization early on, but now um they're recognized as a UNESCO World they're recognized as a UNESCO World they're recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage um like intangible site Heritage um like intangible site Heritage um like intangible site essentially. Um and there's just I think essentially. Um and there's just I think essentially. Um and there's just I think tremendous respect for the population tremendous respect for the population tremendous respect for the population now. Very cool. now. Very cool. now. Very cool. What are they gathering down there? They What are they gathering down there? They What are they gathering down there? They are diving for all kinds of things. Um are diving for all kinds of things. Um are diving for all kinds of things. Um they're diving for sea urchin, abalone. they're diving for sea urchin, abalone. they're diving for sea urchin, abalone. They also harvest seaweed. Um I've seen They also harvest seaweed. Um I've seen They also harvest seaweed. Um I've seen them pull up octopus. Uh they'll sphere them pull up octopus. Uh they'll sphere them pull up octopus. Uh they'll sphere an octopus. Um and they and they do it an octopus. Um and they and they do it an octopus. Um and they and they do it in a very interesting kind of controlled in a very interesting kind of controlled in a very interesting kind of controlled way. Like they're really guardians of way. Like they're really guardians of way. Like they're really guardians of their marine environment. Um where they their marine environment. Um where they their marine environment. Um where they don't they make sure that they don't they make sure that they don't they make sure that they don't overfish things. So the sea urchin overfish things. So the sea urchin overfish things. So the sea urchin season is very short because you know if season is very short because you know if season is very short because you know if they overh harvest the sea urchin that they overh harvest the sea urchin that they overh harvest the sea urchin that population won't replenish. So they have population won't replenish. So they have population won't replenish. So they have this you know system where they this you know system where they this you know system where they really take care of the marine really take care of the marine really take care of the marine environment. So it's all the proteins environment. So it's all the proteins environment. So it's all the proteins again. It's the expensive sushi. Yeah. again. It's the expensive sushi. Yeah. again. It's the expensive sushi. Yeah. I'm still developing a taste for I'm still developing a taste for I'm still developing a taste for I'm trying. But when it's when it's fresh trying. But when it's when it's fresh trying. But when it's when it's fresh out of the shell there's nothing better. out of the shell there's nothing better. out of the shell there's nothing better. I'm willing to try octopus. Uh I have I'm willing to try octopus. Uh I have I'm willing to try octopus. Uh I have too much an affinity for sephopods to too much an affinity for sephopods to too much an affinity for sephopods to eat octopus, but I have in the past and eat octopus, but I have in the past and eat octopus, but I have in the past and it can be delicious. Um and uh so it's it can be delicious. Um and uh so it's it can be delicious. Um and uh so it's amazing to me if I step back from these amazing to me if I step back from these amazing to me if I step back from these two um these two populations and I think two um these two populations and I think two um these two populations and I think more broadly as well about what people more broadly as well about what people more broadly as well about what people are willing to work for. Humans will are willing to work for. Humans will are willing to work for. Humans will work very hard to get protein. It's just work very hard to get protein. It's just work very hard to get protein. It's just kind of incredible how hard they'll work kind of incredible how hard they'll work kind of incredible how hard they'll work for proteins and lipids combined in for proteins and lipids combined in for proteins and lipids combined in delicious form. Yeah. I mean that delicious form. Yeah. I mean that delicious form. Yeah. I mean that they're we're not aquatic animals, they're we're not aquatic animals, they're we're not aquatic animals, right? Right. And they're willing to right? Right. And they're willing to right? Right. And they're willing to risk their lives and the lives of their risk their lives and the lives of their risk their lives and the lives of their fetuses to the next generation. Right. fetuses to the next generation. Right. fetuses to the next generation. Right. There's nothing I think that a species There's nothing I think that a species There's nothing I think that a species tries to protect more than Exactly. than tries to protect more than Exactly. than tries to protect more than Exactly. than the next generation one would hope than the next generation one would hope than the next generation one would hope that they're willing to risk their lives that they're willing to risk their lives that they're willing to risk their lives on a daily basis, multiple times per day on a daily basis, multiple times per day on a daily basis, multiple times per day to go collect protein basically. Yeah. to go collect protein basically. Yeah. to go collect protein basically. Yeah. And in these cold temperatures as Yeah. And in these cold temperatures as Yeah. And in these cold temperatures as well. So do you think between onland well. So do you think between onland well. So do you think between onland hunting and what you're describing hunting and what you're describing hunting and what you're describing that if we think about homo sapien that if we think about homo sapien that if we think about homo sapien evolution generally that a big part of evolution generally that a big part of evolution generally that a big part of homo sapien evolution as it relates to homo sapien evolution as it relates to homo sapien evolution as it relates to selection of particular genes to drive selection of particular genes to drive selection of particular genes to drive particular traits and abilities relates particular traits and abilities relates particular traits and abilities relates to this thing of just trying to get more to this thing of just trying to get more to this thing of just trying to get more protein and fat? I mean it certainly protein and fat? I mean it certainly protein and fat? I mean it certainly could. Diet is an incredible driver of could. Diet is an incredible driver of could. Diet is an incredible driver of selection. So um you know a very common selection. So um you know a very common selection. So um you know a very common example of natural selection is lactase example of natural selection is lactase example of natural selection is lactase persistence. So our ability to continue persistence. So our ability to continue persistence. So our ability to continue to consume milk past infancy. Um and to consume milk past infancy. Um and to consume milk past infancy. Um and that happened very quickly in that happened very quickly in that happened very quickly in multiple different human populations. So multiple different human populations. So multiple different human populations. So it happened in Africa and it happened in it happened in Africa and it happened in it happened in Africa and it happened in Europe. Um and another example is uh the Europe. Um and another example is uh the Europe. Um and another example is uh the Greenlandic Inuit. A huge part of their Greenlandic Inuit. A huge part of their Greenlandic Inuit. A huge part of their diet was marine mammals that have really diet was marine mammals that have really diet was marine mammals that have really high lipid content. And so they actually high lipid content. And so they actually high lipid content. And so they actually evolved to be able to better metabolize evolved to be able to better metabolize evolved to be able to better metabolize those lipids so that it wouldn't, you those lipids so that it wouldn't, you those lipids so that it wouldn't, you know, kill them from heart disease or know, kill them from heart disease or know, kill them from heart disease or something like that. Um, so yeah, diet something like that. Um, so yeah, diet something like that. Um, so yeah, diet as a driver of selection is extremely as a driver of selection is extremely as a driver of selection is extremely strong. Um, so it may be that this strong. Um, so it may be that this strong. Um, so it may be that this has been shaping our species in ways has been shaping our species in ways has been shaping our species in ways that we don't even know. Super that we don't even know. Super that we don't even know. Super interesting. So in this group of uh interesting. So in this group of uh interesting. So in this group of uh Korean women divers, Korean women divers, Korean women divers, um, what's going on with their um, what's going on with their um, what's going on with their cardiovascular system? Uh, you know, cardiovascular system? Uh, you know, cardiovascular system? Uh, you know, earlier we were talking about how this earlier we were talking about how this earlier we were talking about how this might have implications for oxygen might have implications for oxygen might have implications for oxygen utilization in the brain and body and utilization in the brain and body and utilization in the brain and body and potential disease treatment potential disease treatment potential disease treatment ramifications. Yeah. So, we found two ramifications. Yeah. So, we found two ramifications. Yeah. So, we found two different adaptations. Um, and I say different adaptations. Um, and I say different adaptations. Um, and I say adaptation, but there's kind of adaptation, but there's kind of adaptation, but there's kind of adaptation in a physiological sense, adaptation in a physiological sense, adaptation in a physiological sense, this thing that you can do by training. this thing that you can do by training. this thing that you can do by training. Um, or adaptation in a genetic sense. Um, or adaptation in a genetic sense. Um, or adaptation in a genetic sense. And we have found one of each. So, the And we have found one of each. So, the And we have found one of each. So, the training adaptation that we found was training adaptation that we found was training adaptation that we found was that um I mentioned before that when you that um I mentioned before that when you that um I mentioned before that when you dive, your heart rate slows down to try dive, your heart rate slows down to try dive, your heart rate slows down to try to conserve oxygen. So, their heart rate to conserve oxygen. So, their heart rate to conserve oxygen. So, their heart rate through a lifetime of training slows through a lifetime of training slows through a lifetime of training slows down even more. Um, so we could actually down even more. Um, so we could actually down even more. Um, so we could actually you could you could visually see this you could you could visually see this you could you could visually see this when they were doing these dives. We when they were doing these dives. We when they were doing these dives. We watching their heart rate, you could watching their heart rate, you could watching their heart rate, you could just see it plummeting. Um, we had one just see it plummeting. Um, we had one just see it plummeting. Um, we had one individual whose heart rate dropped more individual whose heart rate dropped more individual whose heart rate dropped more than 40 beats per minute in less than 15 than 40 beats per minute in less than 15 than 40 beats per minute in less than 15 seconds. Yikes. So really dramatic. Um, seconds. Yikes. So really dramatic. Um, seconds. Yikes. So really dramatic. Um, and the reason that we think that that's and the reason that we think that that's and the reason that we think that that's a training adaptation rather than a training adaptation rather than a training adaptation rather than a genetic adaptation was that it was only genetic adaptation was that it was only genetic adaptation was that it was only true in the divers. So non-divers with true in the divers. So non-divers with true in the divers. So non-divers with the same genetics didn't have this um the same genetics didn't have this um the same genetics didn't have this um this phenomenon. Um, so that was I mean this phenomenon. Um, so that was I mean this phenomenon. Um, so that was I mean that has you know it's interesting to that has you know it's interesting to that has you know it's interesting to think about how what the potential think about how what the potential think about how what the potential health benefits of that could be. I mean health benefits of that could be. I mean health benefits of that could be. I mean it's clearly something that you can it's clearly something that you can it's clearly something that you can train. This has also been observed in train. This has also been observed in train. This has also been observed in other competitive breathold divers. Um other competitive breathold divers. Um other competitive breathold divers. Um but in terms of how that could benefit but in terms of how that could benefit but in terms of how that could benefit your health. I mean maybe it's good for your health. I mean maybe it's good for your health. I mean maybe it's good for your heart to have that kind of your heart to have that kind of your heart to have that kind of plasticity in terms of its response. plasticity in terms of its response. plasticity in terms of its response. Yeah. When I think about heart rate, I Yeah. When I think about heart rate, I Yeah. When I think about heart rate, I think mainly about autonomic function think mainly about autonomic function think mainly about autonomic function and again veagal intervation seems to be and again veagal intervation seems to be and again veagal intervation seems to be a theme there that the vagus is a theme there that the vagus is a theme there that the vagus is responsible for slowing the heart rate responsible for slowing the heart rate responsible for slowing the heart rate down. Anytime we exhale through uh you down. Anytime we exhale through uh you down. Anytime we exhale through uh you know respiratory sinus arrhythmia, we know respiratory sinus arrhythmia, we know respiratory sinus arrhythmia, we essentially slow our heart rate down. essentially slow our heart rate down. essentially slow our heart rate down. It's fastest way I'm aware of to It's fastest way I'm aware of to It's fastest way I'm aware of to consciously slow our heart rate down. consciously slow our heart rate down. consciously slow our heart rate down. But so as one dives, I guess if they're But so as one dives, I guess if they're But so as one dives, I guess if they're exhaling, like letting out some exhaling, like letting out some exhaling, like letting out some air, dumping some carbon dioxide, which air, dumping some carbon dioxide, which air, dumping some carbon dioxide, which is probably a good thing if you're a is probably a good thing if you're a is probably a good thing if you're a free diver. I don't want to encourage free diver. I don't want to encourage free diver. I don't want to encourage people to do this because that shuts off people to do this because that shuts off people to do this because that shuts off the gasp reflex that would have you, you the gasp reflex that would have you, you the gasp reflex that would have you, you know, jolt to the surface, but assuming know, jolt to the surface, but assuming know, jolt to the surface, but assuming no one's going to go out and try no one's going to go out and try no one's going to go out and try this. By dumping air, you're uh this. By dumping air, you're uh this. By dumping air, you're uh you're exhaling. Exhaling slows the you're exhaling. Exhaling slows the you're exhaling. Exhaling slows the heart rate, but not 40 beats per minute, heart rate, but not 40 beats per minute, heart rate, but not 40 beats per minute, right? Yeah. It's usually a fraction of right? Yeah. It's usually a fraction of right? Yeah. It's usually a fraction of that. Yeah. And so then we also found that. Yeah. And so then we also found that. Yeah. And so then we also found this uh genetic adaptation that we think this uh genetic adaptation that we think this uh genetic adaptation that we think is driven by the fact that they're is driven by the fact that they're is driven by the fact that they're diving through pregnancy. So when diving through pregnancy. So when diving through pregnancy. So when pregnant women have sleep apnoa um which pregnant women have sleep apnoa um which pregnant women have sleep apnoa um which is where you hold your breath in your is where you hold your breath in your is where you hold your breath in your sleep. So it's kind of you can think of sleep. So it's kind of you can think of sleep. So it's kind of you can think of it as unintentional diving through it as unintentional diving through it as unintentional diving through pregnancy um they tend to develop these pregnancy um they tend to develop these pregnancy um they tend to develop these blood pressure related complications um blood pressure related complications um blood pressure related complications um so like preeclampsia as a they're just so like preeclampsia as a they're just so like preeclampsia as a they're just um they call them hypertensive disorders um they call them hypertensive disorders um they call them hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Um, and so we think that of pregnancy. Um, and so we think that of pregnancy. Um, and so we think that there's no studies that have been that there's no studies that have been that there's no studies that have been that have shown this yet, but we think that, have shown this yet, but we think that, have shown this yet, but we think that, you know, if you're diving, same you know, if you're diving, same you know, if you're diving, same different kind of apnea um through different kind of apnea um through different kind of apnea um through pregnancy that would also increase your pregnancy that would also increase your pregnancy that would also increase your risk for these disorders. And so what we risk for these disorders. And so what we risk for these disorders. And so what we saw was that there was a genetic variant saw was that there was a genetic variant saw was that there was a genetic variant that was actually driving their um like that was actually driving their um like that was actually driving their um like a lowering of their diastolic blood a lowering of their diastolic blood a lowering of their diastolic blood pressure while they were diving. Um, and pressure while they were diving. Um, and pressure while they were diving. Um, and so we think that this is protective so we think that this is protective so we think that this is protective against these hypertensive or high blood against these hypertensive or high blood against these hypertensive or high blood pressure effects. This is interesting. pressure effects. This is interesting. pressure effects. This is interesting. So for non-divers, so for pregnant women So for non-divers, so for pregnant women So for non-divers, so for pregnant women on land who aren't from this population, on land who aren't from this population, on land who aren't from this population, um the picture I'm getting is they're um the picture I'm getting is they're um the picture I'm getting is they're sleeping on their back perhaps because sleeping on their back perhaps because sleeping on their back perhaps because it's more comfortable as they get very it's more comfortable as they get very it's more comfortable as they get very pregnant and their airway is pregnant and their airway is pregnant and their airway is getting cut off at some point. So getting cut off at some point. So getting cut off at some point. So they're having these hypoxic episodes they're having these hypoxic episodes they're having these hypoxic episodes and then there's some gasping as the and then there's some gasping as the and then there's some gasping as the carbon dioxide gets high. This is also carbon dioxide gets high. This is also carbon dioxide gets high. This is also incanely what people who are overweight incanely what people who are overweight incanely what people who are overweight or by the way people with very big or by the way people with very big or by the way people with very big necks. This is why a lot of big necked, necks. This is why a lot of big necked, necks. This is why a lot of big necked, very lean men die in their sleep. This very lean men die in their sleep. This very lean men die in their sleep. This is a kind of well-known thing in certain is a kind of well-known thing in certain is a kind of well-known thing in certain sports communities. Okay? It's a very sports communities. Okay? It's a very sports communities. Okay? It's a very it's very tragic. You know, you say, it's very tragic. You know, you say, it's very tragic. You know, you say, "Well, this person's, you know, fit, but "Well, this person's, you know, fit, but "Well, this person's, you know, fit, but they're lying on their back. They they they're lying on their back. They they they're lying on their back. They they big necks and their airway is big necks and their airway is big necks and their airway is compressed." You have a big neck doesn't compressed." You have a big neck doesn't compressed." You have a big neck doesn't necessarily mean you're going to die necessarily mean you're going to die necessarily mean you're going to die early, but make sure you're breathing early, but make sure you're breathing early, but make sure you're breathing right at night. So, because uh sleep right at night. So, because uh sleep right at night. So, because uh sleep apnea is very dangerous. It is. Yeah. I apnea is very dangerous. It is. Yeah. I apnea is very dangerous. It is. Yeah. I think we think of it as just snoring, think we think of it as just snoring, think we think of it as just snoring, right? But it's super dangerous. Yeah. right? But it's super dangerous. Yeah. right? But it's super dangerous. Yeah. You're putting yourself into a state of You're putting yourself into a state of You're putting yourself into a state of hypoxmia. So your oxygen is very hypoxmia. So your oxygen is very hypoxmia. So your oxygen is very low. So for pregnant women who are low. So for pregnant women who are low. So for pregnant women who are concerned about hypoxia, concerned about hypoxia, concerned about hypoxia, what are the what are the um options what are the what are the um options what are the what are the um options that they have besides becoming a diver that they have besides becoming a diver that they have besides becoming a diver in this you joining this incredible in this you joining this incredible in this you joining this incredible community in Korea? Yeah. I mean I community in Korea? Yeah. I mean I community in Korea? Yeah. I mean I think well you know that's one of the think well you know that's one of the think well you know that's one of the things that we're hoping to find from things that we're hoping to find from things that we're hoping to find from studying these women. So if they've studying these women. So if they've studying these women. So if they've evolved some kind of protective evolved some kind of protective evolved some kind of protective mechanism that protects them in the case mechanism that protects them in the case mechanism that protects them in the case of apnea, maybe that's something we of apnea, maybe that's something we of apnea, maybe that's something we could develop into a therapeutic that could develop into a therapeutic that could develop into a therapeutic that could be used to help prevent that same could be used to help prevent that same could be used to help prevent that same uh you know hypertensive disorder uh you know hypertensive disorder uh you know hypertensive disorder pregnancy in pregnant women who have pregnancy in pregnant women who have pregnancy in pregnant women who have apnea for other reasons. Um but apnea for other reasons. Um but apnea for other reasons. Um but otherwise I would say I think you know otherwise I would say I think you know otherwise I would say I think you know preeacclampsia used to be a death preeacclampsia used to be a death preeacclampsia used to be a death sentence for mothers and fetus you know sentence for mothers and fetus you know sentence for mothers and fetus you know um which is why it was such a strong um which is why it was such a strong um which is why it was such a strong driver of evolution. Um now I think driver of evolution. Um now I think driver of evolution. Um now I think awareness of it enables treatment. Um awareness of it enables treatment. Um awareness of it enables treatment. Um but that's only something that's but that's only something that's but that's only something that's happened in the last you know I don't happened in the last you know I don't happened in the last you know I don't know how many decades. Um so that's why know how many decades. Um so that's why know how many decades. Um so that's why it was it could have been such a it was it could have been such a it was it could have been such a powerful force in this population. powerful force in this population. powerful force in this population. Uncomfortable topic but I think an Uncomfortable topic but I think an Uncomfortable topic but I think an important one. Uh earlier you were important one. Uh earlier you were important one. Uh earlier you were talking about genetic selection and um talking about genetic selection and um talking about genetic selection and um what determines survival of what determines survival of what determines survival of offspring. Is it the case that many offspring. Is it the case that many offspring. Is it the case that many miscarriages, if not most miscarriages, if not most miscarriages, if not most miscarriages, are because the mutations that arise are because the mutations that arise are because the mutations that arise would have been uh destructive at some would have been uh destructive at some would have been uh destructive at some point um post-natally after birth. So, point um post-natally after birth. So, point um post-natally after birth. So, it's a kind of a nature's it's a kind of a nature's it's a kind of a nature's um uh nature's veto on the genetic um uh nature's veto on the genetic um uh nature's veto on the genetic program. Yeah. I mean, you know, I'm not program. Yeah. I mean, you know, I'm not program. Yeah. I mean, you know, I'm not a maternal health specialist, but I do a maternal health specialist, but I do a maternal health specialist, but I do know that most mutations create know that most mutations create know that most mutations create non-viable embryos. Um and so uh yeah non-viable embryos. Um and so uh yeah non-viable embryos. Um and so uh yeah that's I think I think that could that's I think I think that could that's I think I think that could certainly be driving the early um certainly be driving the early um certainly be driving the early um miscarriages especially. So it could be miscarriages especially. So it could be miscarriages especially. So it could be pre-implantation or pre-implantation or pre-implantation or post-implantation. Um a mutation arises post-implantation. Um a mutation arises post-implantation. Um a mutation arises and somehow um the genetic programs and somehow um the genetic programs and somehow um the genetic programs of embryology are somehow made aware of embryology are somehow made aware of embryology are somehow made aware that down the line this is going to lead that down the line this is going to lead that down the line this is going to lead to a uh stillborn fetus or something. to a uh stillborn fetus or something. to a uh stillborn fetus or something. So, so uh I mean uh nature doesn't have So, so uh I mean uh nature doesn't have So, so uh I mean uh nature doesn't have a conscious logic in the same way that a conscious logic in the same way that a conscious logic in the same way that we think but the genetic we think but the genetic we think but the genetic decision therefore is to uh is to stop decision therefore is to uh is to stop decision therefore is to uh is to stop is essentially a stop cell proliferation is essentially a stop cell proliferation is essentially a stop cell proliferation and the pregnancy is terminated. and the pregnancy is terminated. and the pregnancy is terminated. Yeah. Because I mean a lot of proteins Yeah. Because I mean a lot of proteins Yeah. Because I mean a lot of proteins are involved in many systems and so are involved in many systems and so are involved in many systems and so if you have a mutation that's if you have a mutation that's if you have a mutation that's problematic in one of those proteins problematic in one of those proteins problematic in one of those proteins that's involved in all these different that's involved in all these different that's involved in all these different systems, it's just going to start to go systems, it's just going to start to go systems, it's just going to start to go haywire very early on. Mhm. I'm very haywire very early on. Mhm. I'm very haywire very early on. Mhm. I'm very curious about how these genetic curious about how these genetic curious about how these genetic adaptations and how they relate to adaptations and how they relate to adaptations and how they relate to behavior impact um organs versus things behavior impact um organs versus things behavior impact um organs versus things on the surface of the body that we can on the surface of the body that we can on the surface of the body that we can see versus both. I don't know if this is see versus both. I don't know if this is see versus both. I don't know if this is true, but long ago I heard that, and I true, but long ago I heard that, and I true, but long ago I heard that, and I don't want to scare anyone because it's don't want to scare anyone because it's don't want to scare anyone because it's not true in every case. I'll repeat, not true in every case. I'll repeat, not true in every case. I'll repeat, it's not true in every case, but I was it's not true in every case, but I was it's not true in every case, but I was told by a friend of mine who's a told by a friend of mine who's a told by a friend of mine who's a physician that a lot of the um wines physician that a lot of the um wines physician that a lot of the um wines spot um pigmentation spot um pigmentation spot um pigmentation uh of the surface of the body, like a uh of the surface of the body, like a uh of the surface of the body, like a baby will come out with a with a very baby will come out with a with a very baby will come out with a with a very dramatic like wine spot pigmentation of dramatic like wine spot pigmentation of dramatic like wine spot pigmentation of part of the face or the head. Sometimes, part of the face or the head. Sometimes, part of the face or the head. Sometimes, not always, it's correlated with not always, it's correlated with not always, it's correlated with mutations in internal organs. And this mutations in internal organs. And this mutations in internal organs. And this is so and this is having run a mouse is so and this is having run a mouse is so and this is having run a mouse lab for a long time, you um study mouse lab for a long time, you um study mouse lab for a long time, you um study mouse mutants, uh mice that overexpress or mutants, uh mice that overexpress or mutants, uh mice that overexpress or lack or are hypomorphic for a particular lack or are hypomorphic for a particular lack or are hypomorphic for a particular gene. And you learn as you work with one gene. And you learn as you work with one gene. And you learn as you work with one of these populations that often times of these populations that often times of these populations that often times the mutation that impacts say retinal the mutation that impacts say retinal the mutation that impacts say retinal development for which I need to take the development for which I need to take the development for which I need to take the retina out, look at it under a retina out, look at it under a retina out, look at it under a microscope and find which cells are microscope and find which cells are microscope and find which cells are miswired or something like that. Um, miswired or something like that. Um, miswired or something like that. Um, correlates with something on the surface correlates with something on the surface correlates with something on the surface of the body where you go, "Oh, yeah. The of the body where you go, "Oh, yeah. The of the body where you go, "Oh, yeah. The ones with the curly tails, those are the ones with the curly tails, those are the ones with the curly tails, those are the ones that are likely to be the mutants." ones that are likely to be the mutants." ones that are likely to be the mutants." You still have to do the genotyping. You still have to do the genotyping. You still have to do the genotyping. You still got to send out DNA and, you know, still got to send out DNA and, you know, still got to send out DNA and, you know, or analyze DNA. Now days, you send it or analyze DNA. Now days, you send it or analyze DNA. Now days, you send it out. In the old days, we genotyped our out. In the old days, we genotyped our out. In the old days, we genotyped our own mice. And what you find is that own mice. And what you find is that own mice. And what you find is that oftentimes there are these peripheral oftentimes there are these peripheral oftentimes there are these peripheral markers of central issues. markers of central issues. markers of central issues. I'm also interested in the inverse of I'm also interested in the inverse of I'm also interested in the inverse of that where there are peripheral markers that where there are peripheral markers that where there are peripheral markers of central advantages. of central advantages. of central advantages. Um, so in these populations that you Um, so in these populations that you Um, so in these populations that you studied, they have these larger spleens studied, they have these larger spleens studied, they have these larger spleens or this ability to dive deeper and or this ability to dive deeper and or this ability to dive deeper and longer, uh, can overcome hypoxia through longer, uh, can overcome hypoxia through longer, uh, can overcome hypoxia through a drop in heart rate. Is there a drop in heart rate. Is there a drop in heart rate. Is there anything about their external appearance anything about their external appearance anything about their external appearance that isn't about soft feet or exposure that isn't about soft feet or exposure that isn't about soft feet or exposure to the sun that tells you like this to the sun that tells you like this to the sun that tells you like this population is different? They look population is different? They look population is different? They look different in ways that we don't expect different in ways that we don't expect different in ways that we don't expect different populations to just look different populations to just look different populations to just look different. Does that make sense? Yeah, different. Does that make sense? Yeah, different. Does that make sense? Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. Uh and I mean you know absolutely. Yeah. Uh and I mean you know absolutely. Yeah. Uh and I mean you know to your point like the phosphodiestase to your point like the phosphodiestase to your point like the phosphodiestase that we found that was evolving in the that we found that was evolving in the that we found that was evolving in the Bajjo phosphodiestases are involved in Bajjo phosphodiestases are involved in Bajjo phosphodiestases are involved in so many different functions and so many different functions and so many different functions and so there's you know there are chances for there's you know there are chances for there's you know there are chances for these mutations to affect not just the these mutations to affect not just the these mutations to affect not just the systems that we're interested in but systems that we're interested in but systems that we're interested in but other systems as well. Um I mean in both other systems as well. Um I mean in both other systems as well. Um I mean in both populations the people look incredibly populations the people look incredibly populations the people look incredibly fit and athletic. Um and there you know fit and athletic. Um and there you know fit and athletic. Um and there you know they tend to have just a very robust they tend to have just a very robust they tend to have just a very robust appearance. Now, is that because they're appearance. Now, is that because they're appearance. Now, is that because they're diving every day, you know, and there diving every day, you know, and there diving every day, you know, and there aren't that many 70-year-old women there aren't that many 70-year-old women there aren't that many 70-year-old women who are jumping off a boat every day to who are jumping off a boat every day to who are jumping off a boat every day to go to work? Um, or is it something go to work? Um, or is it something go to work? Um, or is it something related to their genetics? I don't think related to their genetics? I don't think related to their genetics? I don't think we know yet. Um, but it would be really we know yet. Um, but it would be really we know yet. Um, but it would be really interesting to look into that more. interesting to look into that more. interesting to look into that more. The reason I asked this is that as we The reason I asked this is that as we The reason I asked this is that as we were discussing at the beginning of were discussing at the beginning of were discussing at the beginning of today's conversation, um, mate today's conversation, um, mate today's conversation, um, mate selection, we think of the they smell so selection, we think of the they smell so selection, we think of the they smell so great, we like them for this reason, we great, we like them for this reason, we great, we like them for this reason, we like them for that reason, and like them for that reason, and like them for that reason, and there's the conscious choices that there's the conscious choices that there's the conscious choices that we're making. And then there's all the we're making. And then there's all the we're making. And then there's all the stuff working below our level of stuff working below our level of stuff working below our level of consciousness, like, oh, they smell consciousness, like, oh, they smell consciousness, like, oh, they smell great, and you're actually selecting at great, and you're actually selecting at great, and you're actually selecting at least in part for their immune system, least in part for their immune system, least in part for their immune system, right? And the potential immune system right? And the potential immune system right? And the potential immune system of offspring. Even if you decide you of offspring. Even if you decide you of offspring. Even if you decide you never want to have children with this never want to have children with this never want to have children with this person for whatever reason, this stuff person for whatever reason, this stuff person for whatever reason, this stuff is happening in parallel consciously and is happening in parallel consciously and is happening in parallel consciously and unconsciously. And so when I think unconsciously. And so when I think unconsciously. And so when I think about, you know, the ability, the about, you know, the ability, the about, you know, the ability, the special abilities of different special abilities of different special abilities of different populations at the level of internal populations at the level of internal populations at the level of internal organs, like a spleen ability, you also organs, like a spleen ability, you also organs, like a spleen ability, you also have to wonder if um this is represented have to wonder if um this is represented have to wonder if um this is represented at the level of, you know, I don't know, at the level of, you know, I don't know, at the level of, you know, I don't know, like the I mean, it could be anything, like the I mean, it could be anything, like the I mean, it could be anything, right? Right? I mean, it could be uh the right? Right? I mean, it could be uh the right? Right? I mean, it could be uh the ones with the better spleens have the ones with the better spleens have the ones with the better spleens have really nice hands. I mean, and you really nice hands. I mean, and you really nice hands. I mean, and you don't think about it. You don't think to don't think about it. You don't think to don't think about it. You don't think to correlate those things, right? But as in correlate those things, right? But as in correlate those things, right? But as in the example I was discussing with the example I was discussing with the example I was discussing with the with the mice in a laboratory, when you with the mice in a laboratory, when you with the mice in a laboratory, when you get mutations that you know impact an get mutations that you know impact an get mutations that you know impact an internal organ, almost always there's internal organ, almost always there's internal organ, almost always there's something about um you know, they might something about um you know, they might something about um you know, they might have a particular fur pigmentation have a particular fur pigmentation have a particular fur pigmentation pattern, assuming it's a whole body pattern, assuming it's a whole body pattern, assuming it's a whole body mutation. Um or sometimes they'll have mutation. Um or sometimes they'll have mutation. Um or sometimes they'll have like one web toe or they'll have a like one web toe or they'll have a like one web toe or they'll have a pinkies that pinkies it's mice that they pinkies that pinkies it's mice that they pinkies that pinkies it's mice that they have a little backp um digit that have a little backp um digit that have a little backp um digit that faces in not out like the others. faces in not out like the others. faces in not out like the others. And so you learn when you work with And so you learn when you work with And so you learn when you work with these things to say those are the good these things to say those are the good these things to say those are the good ones. Those are the mutant ones or in ones. Those are the mutant ones or in ones. Those are the mutant ones or in some cases those are the good mutant some cases those are the good mutant some cases those are the good mutant ones. Right? And I think as humans we ones. Right? And I think as humans we ones. Right? And I think as humans we don't tend to do this consciously. It's don't tend to do this consciously. It's don't tend to do this consciously. It's not how we're trained to think. Thank not how we're trained to think. Thank not how we're trained to think. Thank goodness. Um that would complicate all goodness. Um that would complicate all goodness. Um that would complicate all the dating apps. um people would have to the dating apps. um people would have to the dating apps. um people would have to show their digits and lord knows what show their digits and lord knows what show their digits and lord knows what else. But um human mate selection is in else. But um human mate selection is in else. But um human mate selection is in part genetic selection. So what are your part genetic selection. So what are your part genetic selection. So what are your thoughts on this in terms of how these thoughts on this in terms of how these thoughts on this in terms of how these things correlate with uh human choice things correlate with uh human choice things correlate with uh human choice and behavior? I'm asking you to and behavior? I'm asking you to and behavior? I'm asking you to speculate here. Obviously I think that speculate here. Obviously I think that speculate here. Obviously I think that certainly you know I mean we know that certainly you know I mean we know that certainly you know I mean we know that these populations have been evolving. We these populations have been evolving. We these populations have been evolving. We have theories as to what is driving that have theories as to what is driving that have theories as to what is driving that selection but there I mean could be selection but there I mean could be selection but there I mean could be sexual selection. It could be like sexual selection. It could be like sexual selection. It could be like you're saying like that people carrying you're saying like that people carrying you're saying like that people carrying this genetic variation that happens to this genetic variation that happens to this genetic variation that happens to also make them a good diver in ways that also make them a good diver in ways that also make them a good diver in ways that we expected to find also make them more we expected to find also make them more we expected to find also make them more attractive in ways that we weren't even attractive in ways that we weren't even attractive in ways that we weren't even looking for. And and you know we weren't looking for. And and you know we weren't looking for. And and you know we weren't even thinking about pregnancy really even thinking about pregnancy really even thinking about pregnancy really when we started the study with the heno. when we started the study with the heno. when we started the study with the heno. It wasn't until we got these results and It wasn't until we got these results and It wasn't until we got these results and we're saying you know what is this we're saying you know what is this we're saying you know what is this difference in blood pressure and difference in blood pressure and difference in blood pressure and speaking with maternal health speaking with maternal health speaking with maternal health specialists that we really pieced it specialists that we really pieced it specialists that we really pieced it together. So, I think it's the kind of together. So, I think it's the kind of together. So, I think it's the kind of thing where yeah, you just you don't thing where yeah, you just you don't thing where yeah, you just you don't even really know necessarily all of the even really know necessarily all of the even really know necessarily all of the pieces of the puzzle and that's pieces of the puzzle and that's pieces of the puzzle and that's where it's a lot more questions for where it's a lot more questions for where it's a lot more questions for us to ask in the future. us to ask in the future. us to ask in the future. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can acetylcysteine, both of which can acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to access to access to function. As long as we're talking about function. As long as we're talking about function. As long as we're talking about diving underwater as a vision scientist, diving underwater as a vision scientist, diving underwater as a vision scientist, at least that's where my initial at least that's where my initial at least that's where my initial training was. I have to ask about vision training was. I have to ask about vision training was. I have to ask about vision underwater. Do these two populations use underwater. Do these two populations use underwater. Do these two populations use goggles? So, now they do. Okay. But I mean you So, now they do. Okay. But I mean you So, now they do. Okay. But I mean you can imagine goggles haven't been around can imagine goggles haven't been around can imagine goggles haven't been around that long. So at some point in the past that long. So at some point in the past that long. So at some point in the past they didn't. Um and this was you know they didn't. Um and this was you know they didn't. Um and this was you know the study that first got me interested the study that first got me interested the study that first got me interested in this was a study done in Mochen in this was a study done in Mochen in this was a study done in Mochen children where I think it was literally children where I think it was literally children where I think it was literally a researcher who was on vacation in a researcher who was on vacation in a researcher who was on vacation in Thailand noticed these little kids Thailand noticed these little kids Thailand noticed these little kids diving for things and you know having diving for things and you know having diving for things and you know having this ability to see underwater and set this ability to see underwater and set this ability to see underwater and set up an experiment and had European up an experiment and had European up an experiment and had European children and Mochin children diving um children and Mochin children diving um children and Mochin children diving um to look at things underwater. um and to look at things underwater. um and to look at things underwater. um and that the Mochan children had better that the Mochan children had better that the Mochan children had better eyesight underwater than the European eyesight underwater than the European eyesight underwater than the European children. Now that same researcher after children. Now that same researcher after children. Now that same researcher after publishing this paper went back to publishing this paper went back to publishing this paper went back to Europe and trained European children to Europe and trained European children to Europe and trained European children to do the same thing essentially to perform do the same thing essentially to perform do the same thing essentially to perform at the same level as these mochin at the same level as these mochin at the same level as these mochin children. And so you know there was this children. And so you know there was this children. And so you know there was this kind of dismissal like oh well you can kind of dismissal like oh well you can kind of dismissal like oh well you can train Europeans to see underwater just train Europeans to see underwater just train Europeans to see underwater just as well. So it must not be evolved it as well. So it must not be evolved it as well. So it must not be evolved it must not be genetic it has to just be must not be genetic it has to just be must not be genetic it has to just be training. Um, but I think that's a training. Um, but I think that's a training. Um, but I think that's a logical fallacy that has stopped a lot logical fallacy that has stopped a lot logical fallacy that has stopped a lot of or has prevented a lot of research of or has prevented a lot of research of or has prevented a lot of research from being done in these populations from being done in these populations from being done in these populations because just because you can train because just because you can train because just because you can train someone to be at the same level, you someone to be at the same level, you someone to be at the same level, you know, as someone else doesn't mean that know, as someone else doesn't mean that know, as someone else doesn't mean that person didn't have an advantage. that person didn't have an advantage. that person didn't have an advantage. Um, and so I think that's uh, yeah, I Um, and so I think that's uh, yeah, I Um, and so I think that's uh, yeah, I mean there definitely there's a mean there definitely there's a mean there definitely there's a difference in their vision and what difference in their vision and what difference in their vision and what causes that. I think we still don't causes that. I think we still don't causes that. I think we still don't know. So interesting. I'm just going to know. So interesting. I'm just going to know. So interesting. I'm just going to take one minute and um explain to people take one minute and um explain to people take one minute and um explain to people the underwater thing because um I find the underwater thing because um I find the underwater thing because um I find it fascinating that the surface of the it fascinating that the surface of the it fascinating that the surface of the of the eye is rounded. Obviously, people of the eye is rounded. Obviously, people of the eye is rounded. Obviously, people get that and that's what allows you to get that and that's what allows you to get that and that's what allows you to refract to bend the light to a single refract to bend the light to a single refract to bend the light to a single point so that things look nice and point so that things look nice and point so that things look nice and crisp. And when you're underwater, the crisp. And when you're underwater, the crisp. And when you're underwater, the water essentially fills in the water essentially fills in the water essentially fills in the roundness around it. uh the air does of roundness around it. uh the air does of roundness around it. uh the air does of course above water as well but um but course above water as well but um but course above water as well but um but because of the similarity in the because of the similarity in the because of the similarity in the basically the density of the water and basically the density of the water and basically the density of the water and the surface of the eye even though and the surface of the eye even though and the surface of the eye even though they're different you get less of a of a they're different you get less of a of a they're different you get less of a of a bending to of the light to a point. So a bending to of the light to a point. So a bending to of the light to a point. So the reason I'm saying this the reason the reason I'm saying this the reason the reason I'm saying this the reason I'm giving this very crude lesson in I'm giving this very crude lesson in I'm giving this very crude lesson in optics is there were really two optics is there were really two optics is there were really two possibilities. One is that kids that possibilities. One is that kids that possibilities. One is that kids that dive a lot in their youth have a flatter dive a lot in their youth have a flatter dive a lot in their youth have a flatter eye. Right? If you think about a goggle eye. Right? If you think about a goggle eye. Right? If you think about a goggle or you know any kind of underwater or you know any kind of underwater or you know any kind of underwater seeing device, you're basically putting seeing device, you're basically putting seeing device, you're basically putting air between the eye and the water and air between the eye and the water and air between the eye and the water and you're making it flat. So the idea that you're making it flat. So the idea that you're making it flat. So the idea that the eye would become more flat through the eye would become more flat through the eye would become more flat through diving isn't inconceivable. I suppose it diving isn't inconceivable. I suppose it diving isn't inconceivable. I suppose it could happen, but it makes perfect sense could happen, but it makes perfect sense could happen, but it makes perfect sense to me as to why the European children to me as to why the European children to me as to why the European children could do this also because you train it could do this also because you train it could do this also because you train it enough. Uh it turns out it's the ability enough. Uh it turns out it's the ability enough. Uh it turns out it's the ability to constrict the pupil down really to constrict the pupil down really to constrict the pupil down really small um that can account really small um that can account really small um that can account for this adaptation. So, I wouldn't have for this adaptation. So, I wouldn't have for this adaptation. So, I wouldn't have thought that diving underwater and thought that diving underwater and thought that diving underwater and learning to pick up small objects learning to pick up small objects learning to pick up small objects underwater would make the eye more flat, underwater would make the eye more flat, underwater would make the eye more flat, kind of like wearing a goggle kind of like wearing a goggle kind of like wearing a goggle underwater. But, um, the point you make underwater. But, um, the point you make underwater. But, um, the point you make is an extremely important one because if is an extremely important one because if is an extremely important one because if you take a population that is already, you take a population that is already, you take a population that is already, um, afforded some sort of potential um, afforded some sort of potential um, afforded some sort of potential genetic advantage and you train them genetic advantage and you train them genetic advantage and you train them even further. Exactly. That's when you even further. Exactly. That's when you even further. Exactly. That's when you get X-Men-like behavior. And this is get X-Men-like behavior. And this is get X-Men-like behavior. And this is really all about the X-Men, right? And really all about the X-Men, right? And really all about the X-Men, right? And women, as you clearly pointed out, Um, women, as you clearly pointed out, Um, women, as you clearly pointed out, Um, and I think that brings us to this and I think that brings us to this and I think that brings us to this question of like human super question of like human super question of like human super performance. I think about the fact that performance. I think about the fact that performance. I think about the fact that almost always when I see a marathon almost always when I see a marathon almost always when I see a marathon winner nowadays um, and I think about is winner nowadays um, and I think about is winner nowadays um, and I think about is it Elio Kipki? Sorry, my normally it Elio Kipki? Sorry, my normally it Elio Kipki? Sorry, my normally I don't bring him into the uh the I don't bring him into the uh the I don't bring him into the uh the frame consciously here, but uh for the frame consciously here, but uh for the frame consciously here, but uh for the audience here, but I my producer and audience here, but I my producer and audience here, but I my producer and business partner at the human lab business partner at the human lab business partner at the human lab podcast is a triathlete. What is the podcast is a triathlete. What is the podcast is a triathlete. What is the guy's name? Elliot Kipo. Eliod guy's name? Elliot Kipo. Eliod guy's name? Elliot Kipo. Eliod Kipchigible set the marathon record with Kipchigible set the marathon record with Kipchigible set the marathon record with it with mile times on the order of it with mile times on the order of it with mile times on the order of 26.3 26.2 miles at you know somewhere in 26.3 26.2 miles at you know somewhere in 26.3 26.2 miles at you know somewhere in the 4 and a half minute mile pace the 4 and a half minute mile pace the 4 and a half minute mile pace continuously. Incredible. So he continuously. Incredible. So he continuously. Incredible. So he represents among the pinnacle of that represents among the pinnacle of that represents among the pinnacle of that sport. Almost always when we see these sport. Almost always when we see these sport. Almost always when we see these incredible endurance runners, they seem incredible endurance runners, they seem incredible endurance runners, they seem to descend from specific regions of the to descend from specific regions of the to descend from specific regions of the world. Can we talk about why that's so? world. Can we talk about why that's so? world. Can we talk about why that's so? Are they inheriting some sort of red Are they inheriting some sort of red Are they inheriting some sort of red blood cell trait? Is it the blood cell trait? Is it the blood cell trait? Is it the lightbonedness combined with that? What lightbonedness combined with that? What lightbonedness combined with that? What leads to incredible human performance? I leads to incredible human performance? I leads to incredible human performance? I know you're a runner, your husband's a know you're a runner, your husband's a know you're a runner, your husband's a runner. So, like how much hope is there runner. So, like how much hope is there runner. So, like how much hope is there for the rest of us? And why is it that for the rest of us? And why is it that for the rest of us? And why is it that uh folks like Iliode are so unbelievably uh folks like Iliode are so unbelievably uh folks like Iliode are so unbelievably spectacular? you know, um I would love spectacular? you know, um I would love spectacular? you know, um I would love to look at that scientifically. Um he's to look at that scientifically. Um he's to look at that scientifically. Um he's absolutely incredible. I mean, breaking absolutely incredible. I mean, breaking absolutely incredible. I mean, breaking the two-hour marathon record is also the two-hour marathon record is also the two-hour marathon record is also just unbelievable. But, um I think uh I just unbelievable. But, um I think uh I just unbelievable. But, um I think uh I think there have been, you know, I'm not think there have been, you know, I'm not think there have been, you know, I'm not as familiar with this literature, but as familiar with this literature, but as familiar with this literature, but there have been studies looking at the there have been studies looking at the there have been studies looking at the proportion of like bone lengths in the proportion of like bone lengths in the proportion of like bone lengths in certain parts of Africa especially. Um, certain parts of Africa especially. Um, certain parts of Africa especially. Um, it's also interesting to note that a lot it's also interesting to note that a lot it's also interesting to note that a lot of these really talented runners come of these really talented runners come of these really talented runners come from Ethiopia where there are highland from Ethiopia where there are highland from Ethiopia where there are highland uh areas where humans have actually uh areas where humans have actually uh areas where humans have actually adapted to altitude. So, in addition to adapted to altitude. So, in addition to adapted to altitude. So, in addition to some of these like biomechanical some of these like biomechanical some of these like biomechanical advantages, they may actually also have advantages, they may actually also have advantages, they may actually also have physiological mechan uh advantages um physiological mechan uh advantages um physiological mechan uh advantages um that enable them to run faster. But that enable them to run faster. But that enable them to run faster. But yeah, I think this is an excellent yeah, I think this is an excellent yeah, I think this is an excellent example of there's clearly something example of there's clearly something example of there's clearly something biological making people from this part biological making people from this part biological making people from this part of the world, you know, really excellent of the world, you know, really excellent of the world, you know, really excellent runners. And just because you can train runners. And just because you can train runners. And just because you can train a European runner to compete at nearly a European runner to compete at nearly a European runner to compete at nearly the same level, that doesn't mean that the same level, that doesn't mean that the same level, that doesn't mean that there's not something special about there's not something special about there's not something special about people like Kipchoki. Um, and so, you people like Kipchoki. Um, and so, you people like Kipchoki. Um, and so, you know, people, this comes up a lot with know, people, this comes up a lot with know, people, this comes up a lot with the Bajjo as well because people say, the Bajjo as well because people say, the Bajjo as well because people say, "Oh, well, you know, they don't hold the "Oh, well, you know, they don't hold the "Oh, well, you know, they don't hold the free diving depth record." It's like, free diving depth record." It's like, free diving depth record." It's like, well, yeah, but they're not training to well, yeah, but they're not training to well, yeah, but they're not training to hold that record. You know, they're hold that record. You know, they're hold that record. You know, they're training they're diving just to training they're diving just to training they're diving just to collect food for their families. They're collect food for their families. They're collect food for their families. They're not training. So, what would happen if not training. So, what would happen if not training. So, what would happen if we did train them? Um, and I think it's, we did train them? Um, and I think it's, we did train them? Um, and I think it's, yeah, it's a great point. If we take yeah, it's a great point. If we take yeah, it's a great point. If we take this out of the realm of physical this out of the realm of physical this out of the realm of physical performance and we take it into um, performance and we take it into um, performance and we take it into um, cognitive or mathematical performance. cognitive or mathematical performance. cognitive or mathematical performance. Um, I feel like there's some Um, I feel like there's some Um, I feel like there's some fun thought experiments we could do. Uh, fun thought experiments we could do. Uh, fun thought experiments we could do. Uh, before we started, you were talking before we started, you were talking before we started, you were talking about your, uh, time at Princeton as an about your, uh, time at Princeton as an about your, uh, time at Princeton as an undergraduate seeing John Nash, you undergraduate seeing John Nash, you undergraduate seeing John Nash, you know, famed for um, sadly having uh, know, famed for um, sadly having uh, know, famed for um, sadly having uh, schizophrenia, diagnosed schizophrenia. schizophrenia, diagnosed schizophrenia. schizophrenia, diagnosed schizophrenia. um the topic of the movie uh Beautiful um the topic of the movie uh Beautiful um the topic of the movie uh Beautiful Mind with Russell Crowe, but at the same Mind with Russell Crowe, but at the same Mind with Russell Crowe, but at the same time having incredible abilities based time having incredible abilities based time having incredible abilities based on um presumably things that either on um presumably things that either on um presumably things that either correlate with or just by chance run in correlate with or just by chance run in correlate with or just by chance run in parallel with the schizophrenia. Who parallel with the schizophrenia. Who parallel with the schizophrenia. Who knows what's driving what or if they're knows what's driving what or if they're knows what's driving what or if they're in parallel. Uh we have examples again in parallel. Uh we have examples again in parallel. Uh we have examples again I'm pulling from movies like Rainman I'm pulling from movies like Rainman I'm pulling from movies like Rainman where there's a um a person has autism where there's a um a person has autism where there's a um a person has autism of a type that make social interactions of a type that make social interactions of a type that make social interactions very challenging. Uh but in that example challenging. Uh but in that example challenging. Uh but in that example which is I think representative of at which is I think representative of at which is I think representative of at least some people with autism uh extreme least some people with autism uh extreme least some people with autism uh extreme uh mathematical uh calculation abilities uh mathematical uh calculation abilities uh mathematical uh calculation abilities especially in the physical space being especially in the physical space being especially in the physical space being able to see things and count them very able to see things and count them very able to see things and count them very rapidly. Uh last example I'll give is uh rapidly. Uh last example I'll give is uh rapidly. Uh last example I'll give is uh there's this um math competition held in there's this um math competition held in there's this um math competition held in India where the kids can update the India where the kids can update the India where the kids can update the numbers by moving their hands with a numbers by moving their hands with a numbers by moving their hands with a sensor on it and they're adding the sensor on it and they're adding the sensor on it and they're adding the numbers very fast and you just see this numbers very fast and you just see this numbers very fast and you just see this kid basically spooling numbers spooling kid basically spooling numbers spooling kid basically spooling numbers spooling numbers spooling the numbers at the end numbers spooling the numbers at the end numbers spooling the numbers at the end they get one opportunity to answer the they get one opportunity to answer the they get one opportunity to answer the addition of this immensely long string addition of this immensely long string addition of this immensely long string of numbers correctly and this kid nails of numbers correctly and this kid nails of numbers correctly and this kid nails it and you go whoa like he's adding it and you go whoa like he's adding it and you go whoa like he's adding things very fast presumably through some things very fast presumably through some things very fast presumably through some training But is it possible? Is it within the But is it possible? Is it within the But is it possible? Is it within the realm of reality based on what we know realm of reality based on what we know realm of reality based on what we know about human genetics that there could be about human genetics that there could be about human genetics that there could be genes that select for say um rapid genes that select for say um rapid genes that select for say um rapid updating of visual scenes combined updating of visual scenes combined updating of visual scenes combined with um short-term memory or whatever with um short-term memory or whatever with um short-term memory or whatever duration of memory is required that duration of memory is required that duration of memory is required that would afford certain people certain would afford certain people certain would afford certain people certain advantages in this based on inheritance advantages in this based on inheritance advantages in this based on inheritance that's then combined with training. much that's then combined with training. much that's then combined with training. much in the same way that the ability of in the same way that the ability of in the same way that the ability of the spleen to expand if you dive a lot the spleen to expand if you dive a lot the spleen to expand if you dive a lot and you happen to be born in one of and you happen to be born in one of and you happen to be born in one of these uh communities that we've been these uh communities that we've been these uh communities that we've been talking about. Is that possible? Yeah, I talking about. Is that possible? Yeah, I talking about. Is that possible? Yeah, I mean I think certainly um you know I mean I think certainly um you know I mean I think certainly um you know I mean there's an interesting correlation mean there's an interesting correlation mean there's an interesting correlation between uh like between people in STEM between uh like between people in STEM between uh like between people in STEM fields and um having family members with fields and um having family members with fields and um having family members with autism. Um and so I was actually at a autism. Um and so I was actually at a autism. Um and so I was actually at a lecture um by in Princeton where um the lecture um by in Princeton where um the lecture um by in Princeton where um the professor asked the incoming class of professor asked the incoming class of professor asked the incoming class of students you know how many of you um students you know how many of you um students you know how many of you um have a family member with autism and have a family member with autism and have a family member with autism and then of those you know and he had the he then of those you know and he had the he then of those you know and he had the he displayed the statistics how many of you displayed the statistics how many of you displayed the statistics how many of you are joining the engineering are joining the engineering are joining the engineering department and it was you know it was department and it was you know it was department and it was you know it was much higher amongst engineers and he much higher amongst engineers and he much higher amongst engineers and he explained that this um can have to do explained that this um can have to do explained that this um can have to do with the fact that I mean people on the with the fact that I mean people on the with the fact that I mean people on the spectrum tend to have an ability to spectrum tend to have an ability to spectrum tend to have an ability to hyperfocus and that actually makes you hyperfocus and that actually makes you hyperfocus and that actually makes you know the ability to really kind of you know the ability to really kind of you know the ability to really kind of narrow yourself to this one thing can narrow yourself to this one thing can narrow yourself to this one thing can make you a really good engineer. Um, and make you a really good engineer. Um, and make you a really good engineer. Um, and so in that way it's, you know, it's a so in that way it's, you know, it's a so in that way it's, you know, it's a huge advantage because it's allowing you huge advantage because it's allowing you huge advantage because it's allowing you to succeed in that field. Um, you know, to succeed in that field. Um, you know, to succeed in that field. Um, you know, depending obviously where you are on depending obviously where you are on depending obviously where you are on that spectrum and how that affects that spectrum and how that affects that spectrum and how that affects you in other ways. Um, and so if that in you in other ways. Um, and so if that in you in other ways. Um, and so if that in some way is giving you an advantage, you some way is giving you an advantage, you some way is giving you an advantage, you know, why wouldn't it be selected for? know, why wouldn't it be selected for? know, why wouldn't it be selected for? Um, of course there are other ways that Um, of course there are other ways that Um, of course there are other ways that it could be a disadvantage. Um, Oliver it could be a disadvantage. Um, Oliver it could be a disadvantage. Um, Oliver Saxs, I think, wrote about um how people Saxs, I think, wrote about um how people Saxs, I think, wrote about um how people with Tourettes may have faster with Tourettes may have faster with Tourettes may have faster processing speeds. Um, and so again, processing speeds. Um, and so again, processing speeds. Um, and so again, maybe this is a place where, you know, maybe this is a place where, you know, maybe this is a place where, you know, that is advantageous um, despite the that is advantageous um, despite the that is advantageous um, despite the other disadvantages that might come other disadvantages that might come other disadvantages that might come along with having that syndrome. along with having that syndrome. along with having that syndrome. Huge Oliver Saxs fan here. I'm sort of Huge Oliver Saxs fan here. I'm sort of Huge Oliver Saxs fan here. I'm sort of becoming a historian of him, an informal becoming a historian of him, an informal becoming a historian of him, an informal historian, and he also loved to spend historian, and he also loved to spend historian, and he also loved to spend much of his time underwater. Oh, did he? much of his time underwater. Oh, did he? much of his time underwater. Oh, did he? Yeah. He was an avid diver and Yeah. He was an avid diver and Yeah. He was an avid diver and snorkeler and scuba diver. And um, for snorkeler and scuba diver. And um, for snorkeler and scuba diver. And um, for uh, I think in part he said because it uh, I think in part he said because it uh, I think in part he said because it was so quiet down there. Mhm. Um, was so quiet down there. Mhm. Um, was so quiet down there. Mhm. Um, incidentally, he had proposia. He incidentally, he had proposia. He incidentally, he had proposia. He couldn't recognize faces. I think I have couldn't recognize faces. I think I have couldn't recognize faces. I think I have that right. I've known a few other that right. I've known a few other that right. I've known a few other people with that. And propaggnosia, the people with that. And propaggnosia, the people with that. And propaggnosia, the inability to recognize faces, um, also inability to recognize faces, um, also inability to recognize faces, um, also seems to correlate with this, uh, for seems to correlate with this, uh, for seems to correlate with this, uh, for lack of a better way to put it, kind of lack of a better way to put it, kind of lack of a better way to put it, kind of nerdy, quirky phenotype. Um, a former nerdy, quirky phenotype. Um, a former nerdy, quirky phenotype. Um, a former adviser of mine had this. Although, in adviser of mine had this. Although, in adviser of mine had this. Although, in part, I thought he told us that because part, I thought he told us that because part, I thought he told us that because then it gave him an out anytime he then it gave him an out anytime he then it gave him an out anytime he couldn't remember somebody's name. couldn't remember somebody's name. couldn't remember somebody's name. Disorder. Yeah, it's a great thing to Disorder. Yeah, it's a great thing to Disorder. Yeah, it's a great thing to put forward um, if you can't remember put forward um, if you can't remember put forward um, if you can't remember people's names. uh no disrespect to the people's names. uh no disrespect to the people's names. uh no disrespect to the actually clinically diagnosed people actually clinically diagnosed people actually clinically diagnosed people with proposia and gets you out of a lot with proposia and gets you out of a lot with proposia and gets you out of a lot of uh having to remember things. Um of uh having to remember things. Um of uh having to remember things. Um yeah, I find this fascinating because in yeah, I find this fascinating because in yeah, I find this fascinating because in this day and age of um pathizing this day and age of um pathizing this day and age of um pathizing everything. Mhm. It's interesting to everything. Mhm. It's interesting to everything. Mhm. It's interesting to take as you as you just did and I really take as you as you just did and I really take as you as you just did and I really appreciate taking a step back and saying appreciate taking a step back and saying appreciate taking a step back and saying yes there are instances where people on yes there are instances where people on yes there are instances where people on the spectrum have you know they need the spectrum have you know they need the spectrum have you know they need assisted living their entire lives but assisted living their entire lives but assisted living their entire lives but there are also people who are living you there are also people who are living you there are also people who are living you know incredibly productive lives even uh know incredibly productive lives even uh know incredibly productive lives even uh making incredibly uh enormous meaningful making incredibly uh enormous meaningful making incredibly uh enormous meaningful and uniquely meaningful contributions to and uniquely meaningful contributions to and uniquely meaningful contributions to society who we would say are probably on society who we would say are probably on society who we would say are probably on the spectrum right um and so the spectrum right um and so the spectrum right um and so the question then becomes to what extent is question then becomes to what extent is question then becomes to what extent is it genetic to what extent Is are genes it genetic to what extent Is are genes it genetic to what extent Is are genes driving a proclivity for numbers or a driving a proclivity for numbers or a driving a proclivity for numbers or a proclivity for engineering? Um, and on proclivity for engineering? Um, and on proclivity for engineering? Um, and on the opposite side, like our great the opposite side, like our great the opposite side, like our great creatives, are they carrying a different creatives, are they carrying a different creatives, are they carrying a different set of genes or are they just the ones set of genes or are they just the ones set of genes or are they just the ones that can't pay attention to anything so that can't pay attention to anything so that can't pay attention to anything so they start throwing things together? You they start throwing things together? You they start throwing things together? You know, that was a joke against the know, that was a joke against the know, that was a joke against the creatives. It's interesting because it creatives. It's interesting because it creatives. It's interesting because it becomes a really difficult thing to test becomes a really difficult thing to test becomes a really difficult thing to test because how do you how do you measure because how do you how do you measure because how do you how do you measure creativity in a way that you could then creativity in a way that you could then creativity in a way that you could then link to genetic information? So a lot of link to genetic information? So a lot of link to genetic information? So a lot of these kinds of understandings of genes these kinds of understandings of genes these kinds of understandings of genes come from things called genomewide come from things called genomewide come from things called genomewide association studies where essentially association studies where essentially association studies where essentially they perform a correlation at every site they perform a correlation at every site they perform a correlation at every site in the genome to see which of these in the genome to see which of these in the genome to see which of these sites correlates statistically with sites correlates statistically with sites correlates statistically with whatever phenotype it is. So whether whatever phenotype it is. So whether whatever phenotype it is. So whether that's you know um kidney disease or you that's you know um kidney disease or you that's you know um kidney disease or you know creativity. Um but you have to have know creativity. Um but you have to have know creativity. Um but you have to have a really good way of quantifying that a really good way of quantifying that a really good way of quantifying that trait. So um you know creativity is trait. So um you know creativity is trait. So um you know creativity is nearly impossible to quantify. um nearly impossible to quantify. um nearly impossible to quantify. um something like uh you know mathematical something like uh you know mathematical something like uh you know mathematical ability there's so many potential ability there's so many potential ability there's so many potential environmental you know nurture factors environmental you know nurture factors environmental you know nurture factors that could contribute to how that could contribute to how that could contribute to how that manifests in an individual that it also manifests in an individual that it also manifests in an individual that it also becomes quite difficult to quantify um becomes quite difficult to quantify um becomes quite difficult to quantify um and therefore difficult to find any and therefore difficult to find any and therefore difficult to find any genetic factor that's contributing. It's genetic factor that's contributing. It's genetic factor that's contributing. It's so interesting how we um classify so interesting how we um classify so interesting how we um classify intelligence, you know, and some years intelligence, you know, and some years intelligence, you know, and some years back there was a lot of debate about, back there was a lot of debate about, back there was a lot of debate about, you know, IQ versus, you know, emotional you know, IQ versus, you know, emotional you know, IQ versus, you know, emotional intelligence. But um there's this intelligence. But um there's this intelligence. But um there's this wonderful documentary, by the way, wonderful documentary, by the way, wonderful documentary, by the way, there's several movies by this title, there's several movies by this title, there's several movies by this title, but the one I'm thinking of is the but the one I'm thinking of is the but the one I'm thinking of is the documentary Spellbound, which is about documentary Spellbound, which is about documentary Spellbound, which is about the spelling bee competition. Um, and it the spelling bee competition. Um, and it the spelling bee competition. Um, and it was the case for a long time that how was the case for a long time that how was the case for a long time that how well and how quickly kids could remember well and how quickly kids could remember well and how quickly kids could remember to spell certain words was thought of as to spell certain words was thought of as to spell certain words was thought of as some important correlate of some important correlate of some important correlate of intelligence, which is kind of crazy. intelligence, which is kind of crazy. intelligence, which is kind of crazy. And now in the day, an age of And now in the day, an age of And now in the day, an age of autocorrect and things like that, but autocorrect and things like that, but autocorrect and things like that, but one could argue that being able to spell one could argue that being able to spell one could argue that being able to spell is an interesting one. But that the is an interesting one. But that the is an interesting one. But that the different kids that they detail, one different kids that they detail, one different kids that they detail, one from a farming community, one from a from a farming community, one from a from a farming community, one from a community uh where the parents were community uh where the parents were community uh where the parents were really hard driving about academics, um really hard driving about academics, um really hard driving about academics, um it tiles the entire representation of it tiles the entire representation of it tiles the entire representation of every kind of background you could every kind of background you could every kind of background you could imagine. Different types of parents, imagine. Different types of parents, imagine. Different types of parents, bluecollar parents, highly educated bluecollar parents, highly educated bluecollar parents, highly educated parents, boys, girls, one that uh set parents, boys, girls, one that uh set parents, boys, girls, one that uh set that's clearly on the spectrum and you that's clearly on the spectrum and you that's clearly on the spectrum and you see it in the family. You can see that see it in the family. You can see that see it in the family. You can see that um and everything in between. And what um and everything in between. And what um and everything in between. And what you come to realize is that training you come to realize is that training you come to realize is that training effects are very real. Mhm. Like if you effects are very real. Mhm. Like if you effects are very real. Mhm. Like if you take a kid in particular and you give take a kid in particular and you give take a kid in particular and you give them an activity and they repeat that them an activity and they repeat that them an activity and they repeat that activity. Yeah. No surprise here. They activity. Yeah. No surprise here. They activity. Yeah. No surprise here. They get very good at that. But it also get very good at that. But it also get very good at that. But it also narrows the number of things that they narrows the number of things that they narrows the number of things that they can also be good at. This is what I can also be good at. This is what I can also be good at. This is what I think we forget about neuroplasticity is think we forget about neuroplasticity is think we forget about neuroplasticity is that the choice to get very good at one that the choice to get very good at one that the choice to get very good at one thing is also the choice to not get good thing is also the choice to not get good thing is also the choice to not get good at a bunch of other things. So when you at a bunch of other things. So when you at a bunch of other things. So when you step back and I'm not going to ask you step back and I'm not going to ask you step back and I'm not going to ask you for parenting advice, but when you step for parenting advice, but when you step for parenting advice, but when you step back and you and you think about what back and you and you think about what back and you and you think about what you know about human you know about human you know about human genetics, is there a kind of genetics, is there a kind of genetics, is there a kind of a assuming one doesn't have to hunt for a assuming one doesn't have to hunt for a assuming one doesn't have to hunt for their food uh the way these populations their food uh the way these populations their food uh the way these populations you've been studying do, uh is there a you've been studying do, uh is there a you've been studying do, uh is there a kind of a optimal way to think about kind of a optimal way to think about kind of a optimal way to think about kind of genetic bias and what we perhaps kind of genetic bias and what we perhaps kind of genetic bias and what we perhaps should focus on or are you a equal should focus on or are you a equal should focus on or are you a equal opportunity get after whatever interests opportunity get after whatever interests opportunity get after whatever interests you the most kind of uh person? I mean, you the most kind of uh person? I mean, you the most kind of uh person? I mean, you know, there's like companies where you know, there's like companies where you know, there's like companies where you can test yourself to find out what you can test yourself to find out what you can test yourself to find out what kind of athlete you should be. And I kind of athlete you should be. And I kind of athlete you should be. And I think um that kind of gets into think um that kind of gets into think um that kind of gets into something called um genetic determinism, something called um genetic determinism, something called um genetic determinism, which is this idea that your genes which is this idea that your genes which is this idea that your genes determine everything about you, which we determine everything about you, which we determine everything about you, which we know isn't true. Um we know that it's a know isn't true. Um we know that it's a know isn't true. Um we know that it's a combination of, you know, genetic combination of, you know, genetic combination of, you know, genetic factors, um environmental factors, all factors, um environmental factors, all factors, um environmental factors, all these different things. Um, but I think these different things. Um, but I think these different things. Um, but I think it's interesting how much the idea it's interesting how much the idea it's interesting how much the idea that we're genetically predisposed to that we're genetically predisposed to that we're genetically predisposed to something or um, you know, we're something or um, you know, we're something or um, you know, we're genetically better at something can genetically better at something can genetically better at something can actually influence how we are at that actually influence how we are at that actually influence how we are at that thing. Um, so we talked a little bit um thing. Um, so we talked a little bit um thing. Um, so we talked a little bit um before about you know there was a before about you know there was a before about you know there was a study where they told people they said study where they told people they said study where they told people they said we're going to take your take your DNA, we're going to take your take your DNA, we're going to take your take your DNA, we're going to genotype you, we're going we're going to genotype you, we're going we're going to genotype you, we're going to find out, you know, whether if you to find out, you know, whether if you to find out, you know, whether if you train you're going to get faster or train you're going to get faster or train you're going to get faster or whether it's not going to affect you at whether it's not going to affect you at whether it's not going to affect you at all. Um, and so they did that and they all. Um, and so they did that and they all. Um, and so they did that and they put people into these groups and then put people into these groups and then put people into these groups and then they tested them after a few months they tested them after a few months they tested them after a few months and the people who they told were going and the people who they told were going and the people who they told were going to do better did better. And this was to do better did better. And this was to do better did better. And this was like something they could measure at the like something they could measure at the like something they could measure at the bi the biological level. They could bi the biological level. They could bi the biological level. They could measure specific molecules that had measure specific molecules that had measure specific molecules that had changed in that population of people um changed in that population of people um changed in that population of people um compared to the other group of people. compared to the other group of people. compared to the other group of people. Now the trick was that there was no Now the trick was that there was no Now the trick was that there was no difference genetically between these difference genetically between these difference genetically between these groups. It was just what they were told. groups. It was just what they were told. groups. It was just what they were told. Um, so it's really interesting to think Um, so it's really interesting to think Um, so it's really interesting to think about, you know, if you tell a child about, you know, if you tell a child about, you know, if you tell a child what they should or shouldn't do based what they should or shouldn't do based what they should or shouldn't do based on, you know, their genes, I think it's on, you know, their genes, I think it's on, you know, their genes, I think it's a really dangerous thing or a really dangerous thing or a really dangerous thing or potentially you could motivate them potentially you could motivate them potentially you could motivate them through that. So interesting. I mean, I through that. So interesting. I mean, I through that. So interesting. I mean, I think mindset effects are so think mindset effects are so think mindset effects are so important under discussed. I'm so glad important under discussed. I'm so glad important under discussed. I'm so glad this is coming up. Um, Allrum was a this is coming up. Um, Allrum was a this is coming up. Um, Allrum was a guest on this podcast and um, she shared guest on this podcast and um, she shared guest on this podcast and um, she shared with us some incredible data on it. You with us some incredible data on it. You with us some incredible data on it. You know, you tell people that stress is know, you tell people that stress is know, you tell people that stress is good for them, you stress them out, good for them, you stress them out, good for them, you stress them out, their health improves. You tell people their health improves. You tell people their health improves. You tell people stress is bad for them. You stress them stress is bad for them. You stress them stress is bad for them. You stress them out, their health gets worse. And and on out, their health gets worse. And and on out, their health gets worse. And and on and on. There's just so many examples of and on. There's just so many examples of and on. There's just so many examples of these. Most of the time, people aren't these. Most of the time, people aren't these. Most of the time, people aren't taking a genetic test to determine taking a genetic test to determine taking a genetic test to determine whether or not they're likely to be good whether or not they're likely to be good whether or not they're likely to be good or bad at something. They're looking at or bad at something. They're looking at or bad at something. They're looking at their family photos or they're looking their family photos or they're looking their family photos or they're looking at their parents or their grandparents. at their parents or their grandparents. at their parents or their grandparents. This is the old version of genetic This is the old version of genetic This is the old version of genetic information. Sure. And I'm guessing here information. Sure. And I'm guessing here information. Sure. And I'm guessing here too, one should be very cautious. If too, one should be very cautious. If too, one should be very cautious. If your parents weren't athletes, does that your parents weren't athletes, does that your parents weren't athletes, does that mean that you don't have the genes to be mean that you don't have the genes to be mean that you don't have the genes to be a great athlete? Clearly, the answer is a great athlete? Clearly, the answer is a great athlete? Clearly, the answer is no. Yeah. Right. Um likewise for no. Yeah. Right. Um likewise for no. Yeah. Right. Um likewise for intellectual pursuits. We really have intellectual pursuits. We really have intellectual pursuits. We really have very little evidence that um very little evidence that um very little evidence that um intelligence is heritable. Um so I think intelligence is heritable. Um so I think intelligence is heritable. Um so I think that's a big one, especially, you know, that's a big one, especially, you know, that's a big one, especially, you know, if you if you feel like you're not if you if you feel like you're not if you if you feel like you're not coming from a very intelligent family, coming from a very intelligent family, coming from a very intelligent family, that doesn't that doesn't mean anything that doesn't that doesn't mean anything that doesn't that doesn't mean anything really um based on what we know really um based on what we know really um based on what we know currently. What about rhythm and dancing currently. What about rhythm and dancing currently. What about rhythm and dancing ability? Oh man, I don't know. But I'll ability? Oh man, I don't know. But I'll ability? Oh man, I don't know. But I'll tell you, I did not inherit any rhythm tell you, I did not inherit any rhythm tell you, I did not inherit any rhythm from my dad. from my dad. from my dad. Um, I didn't inherit any rhythm from my Um, I didn't inherit any rhythm from my Um, I didn't inherit any rhythm from my dad or my mom. Uh, although my dad is a dad or my mom. Uh, although my dad is a dad or my mom. Uh, although my dad is a bit more musical by virtue of being more bit more musical by virtue of being more bit more musical by virtue of being more mathematical, but that is not the same mathematical, but that is not the same mathematical, but that is not the same thing as dancing ability. I don't know thing as dancing ability. I don't know thing as dancing ability. I don't know if we have any truly bad dancers in our if we have any truly bad dancers in our if we have any truly bad dancers in our family, but um, we have at least one family, but um, we have at least one family, but um, we have at least one with exceptional rhythm and ability. Uh, with exceptional rhythm and ability. Uh, with exceptional rhythm and ability. Uh, she happens to be adopted, so there you she happens to be adopted, so there you she happens to be adopted, so there you go. you know, um that's a different go. you know, um that's a different go. you know, um that's a different version of genetic variation. Um and version of genetic variation. Um and version of genetic variation. Um and an important one in the sense that it's an important one in the sense that it's an important one in the sense that it's a cross fostering experiment to put it a cross fostering experiment to put it a cross fostering experiment to put it in uh animal laboratory terms. Um if you in uh animal laboratory terms. Um if you in uh animal laboratory terms. Um if you don't mind, I'd like to talk about the don't mind, I'd like to talk about the don't mind, I'd like to talk about the ethics of genetics and genetic ethics of genetics and genetic ethics of genetics and genetic engineering. Mhm. Uh few years back a engineering. Mhm. Uh few years back a engineering. Mhm. Uh few years back a guy in China running a laboratory um guy in China running a laboratory um guy in China running a laboratory um used crisper uh to modify the genome of crisper uh to modify the genome of crisper uh to modify the genome of babies. I believe he mutated the HIV babies. I believe he mutated the HIV babies. I believe he mutated the HIV receptor. I believe it wasn't to prevent receptor. I believe it wasn't to prevent receptor. I believe it wasn't to prevent them from contracting HIV under any them from contracting HIV under any them from contracting HIV under any circumstances, but rather the circumstances, but rather the circumstances, but rather the relationship between the HIV receptor relationship between the HIV receptor relationship between the HIV receptor and some things related to human memory. and some things related to human memory. and some things related to human memory. That was the speculation. There was very That was the speculation. There was very That was the speculation. There was very little known about this because this was little known about this because this was little known about this because this was happening in China in a kind of a happening in China in a kind of a happening in China in a kind of a closed format. It wasn't published in a closed format. It wasn't published in a closed format. It wasn't published in a peer-reviewed journal, but he showed up peer-reviewed journal, but he showed up peer-reviewed journal, but he showed up at a human genetics meeting and he at a human genetics meeting and he at a human genetics meeting and he announced to the world that he had announced to the world that he had announced to the world that he had genetically modified babies through the genetically modified babies through the genetically modified babies through the use of genetic engineering. Now, on the use of genetic engineering. Now, on the use of genetic engineering. Now, on the backdrop of this, up until now, we've backdrop of this, up until now, we've backdrop of this, up until now, we've basically been talking about genetic basically been talking about genetic basically been talking about genetic selection through partner selection, selection through partner selection, selection through partner selection, through all sorts of things. So, that through all sorts of things. So, that through all sorts of things. So, that there are kind of indirect ways to uh there are kind of indirect ways to uh there are kind of indirect ways to uh genetically select. I think people genetically select. I think people genetically select. I think people forget that. But here we're talking forget that. But here we're talking forget that. But here we're talking about deliberate gene insertion or about deliberate gene insertion or about deliberate gene insertion or removal in removal in removal in embryos creating genetically modified embryos creating genetically modified embryos creating genetically modified humans. After he did that, there was a humans. After he did that, there was a humans. After he did that, there was a sort of pause as I recall. I was paying sort of pause as I recall. I was paying sort of pause as I recall. I was paying very close attention to this as to very close attention to this as to very close attention to this as to whether or not the international whether or not the international whether or not the international community of genetic ethicists and um community of genetic ethicists and um community of genetic ethicists and um scientists would say, "Wow, this is scientists would say, "Wow, this is scientists would say, "Wow, this is potentially a feat of human engineering potentially a feat of human engineering potentially a feat of human engineering that could prevent disease, etc., etc." that could prevent disease, etc., etc." that could prevent disease, etc., etc." or they were going to chastise him. And or they were going to chastise him. And or they were going to chastise him. And it turned out they chastised him. And as it turned out they chastised him. And as it turned out they chastised him. And as it were, we were told uh that he was it were, we were told uh that he was it were, we were told uh that he was actually put into prison. Now, whether actually put into prison. Now, whether actually put into prison. Now, whether or not that prison included a or not that prison included a or not that prison included a laboratory, we don't know, right? We laboratory, we don't know, right? We laboratory, we don't know, right? We have no idea. And there were there were have no idea. And there were there were have no idea. And there were there were a few other countries that chimed in and a few other countries that chimed in and a few other countries that chimed in and said, "Oh, yeah, you know, programs like said, "Oh, yeah, you know, programs like said, "Oh, yeah, you know, programs like this have actually been underway this have actually been underway this have actually been underway elsewhere for a long time." And then it elsewhere for a long time." And then it elsewhere for a long time." And then it just went silent. Right now the just went silent. Right now the just went silent. Right now the idea of the use of crisper to the idea of the use of crisper to the idea of the use of crisper to improve babies or to protect them improve babies or to protect them improve babies or to protect them against potential diseases is not common against potential diseases is not common against potential diseases is not common place or if it is it's not place or if it is it's not place or if it is it's not discussed. What are your thoughts on the discussed. What are your thoughts on the discussed. What are your thoughts on the use of crisper to protect children from use of crisper to protect children from use of crisper to protect children from certain diseases? Let's just put it in certain diseases? Let's just put it in certain diseases? Let's just put it in that domain. And then of course we could that domain. And then of course we could that domain. And then of course we could talk about um the misuse of this, but talk about um the misuse of this, but talk about um the misuse of this, but you know, you could think of parents who you know, you could think of parents who you know, you could think of parents who are maybe carrying a mutation. They are maybe carrying a mutation. They are maybe carrying a mutation. They don't want their kids to have don't want their kids to have don't want their kids to have Huntington's for instance, and you could Huntington's for instance, and you could Huntington's for instance, and you could potentially fix that gene. So I'm just potentially fix that gene. So I'm just potentially fix that gene. So I'm just going to cast all of that out there to going to cast all of that out there to going to cast all of that out there to give the kind of backdrop and get give the kind of backdrop and get give the kind of backdrop and get your thoughts. And there's clear clearly your thoughts. And there's clear clearly your thoughts. And there's clear clearly no right or wrong answer here, but this no right or wrong answer here, but this no right or wrong answer here, but this is very likely to be a big topic in the is very likely to be a big topic in the is very likely to be a big topic in the upcoming decade. Yeah, it's a I mean, upcoming decade. Yeah, it's a I mean, upcoming decade. Yeah, it's a I mean, it's a really great question and I think it's a really great question and I think it's a really great question and I think one without, you know, a very good one without, you know, a very good one without, you know, a very good answer at this point. I think one of the answer at this point. I think one of the answer at this point. I think one of the one of the things holding back this one of the things holding back this one of the things holding back this discussion up till now um is that you discussion up till now um is that you discussion up till now um is that you know crisper is still a little bit of a know crisper is still a little bit of a know crisper is still a little bit of a blunt tool. You know we're not we blunt tool. You know we're not we blunt tool. You know we're not we haven't um like the way that we're haven't um like the way that we're haven't um like the way that we're applying it isn't as precise as we'd applying it isn't as precise as we'd applying it isn't as precise as we'd like it to be to do the kind of gene like it to be to do the kind of gene like it to be to do the kind of gene editing that um that you know you would editing that um that you know you would editing that um that you know you would need to protect babies in the way need to protect babies in the way need to protect babies in the way that you're describing. Um and this is that you're describing. Um and this is that you're describing. Um and this is there are things like um offtarget there are things like um offtarget there are things like um offtarget effects they say. So, you know, you're effects they say. So, you know, you're effects they say. So, you know, you're trying to edit one very specific part of trying to edit one very specific part of trying to edit one very specific part of the genome, but it ends up editing the genome, but it ends up editing the genome, but it ends up editing places that you didn't intend it to places that you didn't intend it to places that you didn't intend it to edit. Um, so that's kind of one of the edit. Um, so that's kind of one of the edit. Um, so that's kind of one of the issues. I think technologically that I issues. I think technologically that I issues. I think technologically that I think if I remember right, when that think if I remember right, when that think if I remember right, when that happened, people were a little bit like happened, people were a little bit like happened, people were a little bit like that technology isn't ready to be that technology isn't ready to be that technology isn't ready to be used in that way yet. But, of course, used in that way yet. But, of course, used in that way yet. But, of course, that's something that is changing really that's something that is changing really that's something that is changing really rapidly. We're getting so much better at rapidly. We're getting so much better at rapidly. We're getting so much better at this. Um, we're able to do it this. Um, we're able to do it this. Um, we're able to do it successfully in lab animals. Um and successfully in lab animals. Um and successfully in lab animals. Um and so yeah, ethically I mean it's just I so yeah, ethically I mean it's just I so yeah, ethically I mean it's just I think it's also interesting to think it's also interesting to think it's also interesting to think about um you know enhancement versus um about um you know enhancement versus um about um you know enhancement versus um you know like correction like at what you know like correction like at what you know like correction like at what point you know where is the line between point you know where is the line between point you know where is the line between those two. So if we're correcting some those two. So if we're correcting some those two. So if we're correcting some kind of genetic defect first of all some kind of genetic defect first of all some kind of genetic defect first of all some defects other people might not even see defects other people might not even see defects other people might not even see them as defects they might just see that them as defects they might just see that them as defects they might just see that as variation amongst humans. So, you as variation amongst humans. So, you as variation amongst humans. So, you know, where's the line between defect, know, where's the line between defect, know, where's the line between defect, normal, enhanced? Um, and so it's yeah, normal, enhanced? Um, and so it's yeah, normal, enhanced? Um, and so it's yeah, it's I don't know who would make it's I don't know who would make it's I don't know who would make those decisions um once the technology those decisions um once the technology those decisions um once the technology is even available um to apply that in is even available um to apply that in is even available um to apply that in unborn children. I mean, of course, in unborn children. I mean, of course, in unborn children. I mean, of course, it's it would be a dream to prevent it's it would be a dream to prevent it's it would be a dream to prevent disease um using these technologies, but disease um using these technologies, but disease um using these technologies, but it's a slippery slope, maybe. Yeah, it's a slippery slope, maybe. Yeah, it's a slippery slope, maybe. Yeah, there's a lot of debate right now online there's a lot of debate right now online there's a lot of debate right now online about some of these companies that allow about some of these companies that allow about some of these companies that allow for a deep sequencing of embryos in for a deep sequencing of embryos in for a deep sequencing of embryos in particular in cases of IVF. Uh there's a particular in cases of IVF. Uh there's a particular in cases of IVF. Uh there's a company I believe it's called Orchid up company I believe it's called Orchid up company I believe it's called Orchid up in the Bay Area that's kind of foremost in the Bay Area that's kind of foremost in the Bay Area that's kind of foremost in this where um you know typically for in this where um you know typically for in this where um you know typically for IVF um or even for natural pregnancy IVF um or even for natural pregnancy IVF um or even for natural pregnancy there'll be an analysis of like is there there'll be an analysis of like is there there'll be an analysis of like is there tricome like you know extra chromosomes tricome like you know extra chromosomes tricome like you know extra chromosomes um which we know can lead to down um which we know can lead to down um which we know can lead to down syndrome etc. Um but these companies for syndrome etc. Um but these companies for syndrome etc. Um but these companies for a price offer deep sequencing of a price offer deep sequencing of a price offer deep sequencing of genes that correlate with right they're genes that correlate with right they're genes that correlate with right they're not causal in many cases sometimes yes not causal in many cases sometimes yes not causal in many cases sometimes yes but oftentimes correlate with um you but oftentimes correlate with um you but oftentimes correlate with um you know potential uh spectrum phenotypes or know potential uh spectrum phenotypes or know potential uh spectrum phenotypes or um you know things of that sort um you know things of that sort um you know things of that sort um cancer susceptibility brackutation right cancer susceptibility brackutation right cancer susceptibility brackutation right I know several people unfortunately that I know several people unfortunately that I know several people unfortunately that died from cancer and they carried died from cancer and they carried died from cancer and they carried brackutations right uh so there's a this brackutations right uh so there's a this brackutations right uh so there's a this is real stuff I think that the is real stuff I think that the is real stuff I think that the challenge for a lot of people is that as challenge for a lot of people is that as challenge for a lot of people is that as it stands now, it's very costly. So, it stands now, it's very costly. So, it stands now, it's very costly. So, it sets up a scenario where um wealthy sets up a scenario where um wealthy sets up a scenario where um wealthy people can afford to um analyze embryos people can afford to um analyze embryos people can afford to um analyze embryos more vigorously than people who don't more vigorously than people who don't more vigorously than people who don't have the means to do it. But if we have the means to do it. But if we have the means to do it. But if we look back 10, 20, 30 look back 10, 20, 30 look back 10, 20, 30 years, you know, getting your whole years, you know, getting your whole years, you know, getting your whole genome sequenced in the early 90s was genome sequenced in the early 90s was genome sequenced in the early 90s was when Venter and those guys first when Venter and those guys first when Venter and those guys first nailed that ability. Something like nailed that ability. Something like nailed that ability. Something like that. I'm thinking 90s sometimes. Okay, that. I'm thinking 90s sometimes. Okay, that. I'm thinking 90s sometimes. Okay, maybe I'm a little early. Um, we're a maybe I'm a little early. Um, we're a maybe I'm a little early. Um, we're a little late on that one, but was little late on that one, but was little late on that one, but was extremely expensive, but now it's like extremely expensive, but now it's like extremely expensive, but now it's like what, a hundred bucks or even free what, a hundred bucks or even free what, a hundred bucks or even free depending on the coverage. Yeah, you can depending on the coverage. Yeah, you can depending on the coverage. Yeah, you can sequence a genome for pretty cheap these sequence a genome for pretty cheap these sequence a genome for pretty cheap these days. Yeah. So most technologies tend to days. Yeah. So most technologies tend to days. Yeah. So most technologies tend to advance that way. Mh. So it gets back to advance that way. Mh. So it gets back to advance that way. Mh. So it gets back to also this issue of how much information also this issue of how much information also this issue of how much information do you want? Mh. And so I guess given do you want? Mh. And so I guess given do you want? Mh. And so I guess given your training and understanding of your training and understanding of your training and understanding of human genetics, uh there's obviously no human genetics, uh there's obviously no human genetics, uh there's obviously no oneizefits-all answer. But when it comes oneizefits-all answer. But when it comes oneizefits-all answer. But when it comes to understanding to understanding to understanding um how much control to exert over the um how much control to exert over the um how much control to exert over the genome, um where do you land on this? I'm not um where do you land on this? I'm not um where do you land on this? I'm not trying to put you in the hot seat here. trying to put you in the hot seat here. trying to put you in the hot seat here. I just I think people are going I just I think people are going I just I think people are going to hear more about these technologies to hear more about these technologies to hear more about these technologies and just want to understand how to frame and just want to understand how to frame and just want to understand how to frame them. Yeah. Well, first of all, for them. Yeah. Well, first of all, for them. Yeah. Well, first of all, for context, I only have dogs. Um so I don't context, I only have dogs. Um so I don't context, I only have dogs. Um so I don't have to think about this in terms of have to think about this in terms of have to think about this in terms of human babies. Um but yeah, I think human babies. Um but yeah, I think human babies. Um but yeah, I think um say you get your baby's genome um say you get your baby's genome um say you get your baby's genome sequenced and it's going to that sequenced and it's going to that sequenced and it's going to that baby is going to be blind. Um is that baby is going to be blind. Um is that baby is going to be blind. Um is that a problem? Um you know, a lot of blind a problem? Um you know, a lot of blind a problem? Um you know, a lot of blind people would say no. Um so, you know, people would say no. Um so, you know, people would say no. Um so, you know, it's I think it's um it's such a it's I think it's um it's such a it's I think it's um it's such a personal question. No, I think that's a personal question. No, I think that's a personal question. No, I think that's a great answer. I think it's a really hard great answer. I think it's a really hard great answer. I think it's a really hard question to answer for any of us, but I question to answer for any of us, but I question to answer for any of us, but I appreciate you um being able to look at appreciate you um being able to look at appreciate you um being able to look at it and consider it. Dog genetics it and consider it. Dog genetics it and consider it. Dog genetics is fascinating. Uh they're uh the is fascinating. Uh they're uh the is fascinating. Uh they're uh the selection seems to be for phenotype, but selection seems to be for phenotype, but selection seems to be for phenotype, but also behavioral type. Yes. Which is also behavioral type. Yes. Which is also behavioral type. Yes. Which is fascinating. Yeah. My fur babies were fascinating. Yeah. My fur babies were fascinating. Yeah. My fur babies were 100% selected to be cute. So that 100% selected to be cute. So that 100% selected to be cute. So that was the basis. They looked it was the was the basis. They looked it was the was the basis. They looked it was the eye contact for the Yeah. I mean, eye contact for the Yeah. I mean, eye contact for the Yeah. I mean, actually, literally, one of my dogs is a actually, literally, one of my dogs is a actually, literally, one of my dogs is a type of dog that was bred to be a type of dog that was bred to be a type of dog that was bred to be a companion. So the only thing that they companion. So the only thing that they companion. So the only thing that they selected for was cuteness and selected for was cuteness and selected for was cuteness and companionship. Is it the Bolognese? Yes, companionship. Is it the Bolognese? Yes, companionship. Is it the Bolognese? Yes, that's right. Yeah. There is a dog named that's right. Yeah. There is a dog named that's right. Yeah. There is a dog named after the spaghetti sauce or vice versa. after the spaghetti sauce or vice versa. after the spaghetti sauce or vice versa. Yeah. Named after Bolognia in Italy. Oh, Yeah. Named after Bolognia in Italy. Oh, Yeah. Named after Bolognia in Italy. Oh, right. No, I was I was joking. Yeah. Um right. No, I was I was joking. Yeah. Um right. No, I was I was joking. Yeah. Um what could tell us what is the breed of what could tell us what is the breed of what could tell us what is the breed of dog? Bolognes. And and it's a mix dog? Bolognes. And and it's a mix dog? Bolognes. And and it's a mix between. It's um it's in the family of between. It's um it's in the family of between. It's um it's in the family of like the Maltese Bishon um Katone like the Maltese Bishon um Katone like the Maltese Bishon um Katone family. So these little fluffy white family. So these little fluffy white family. So these little fluffy white dogs that are in Renaissance paintings dogs that are in Renaissance paintings dogs that are in Renaissance paintings um sitting in the laps of royalty. um sitting in the laps of royalty. um sitting in the laps of royalty. It strikes me that whether or not we're It strikes me that whether or not we're It strikes me that whether or not we're talking about Mendele's peas in the talking about Mendele's peas in the talking about Mendele's peas in the garden, whether or not we're talking garden, whether or not we're talking garden, whether or not we're talking about dogs, whether or not we're talking about dogs, whether or not we're talking about dogs, whether or not we're talking about corn varieties or we're talking about corn varieties or we're talking about corn varieties or we're talking about humans, that um for some reason we about humans, that um for some reason we about humans, that um for some reason we like to underestimate the power that like to underestimate the power that like to underestimate the power that genes and natural selection have. Um and genes and natural selection have. Um and genes and natural selection have. Um and behavioral selection, I guess, is the behavioral selection, I guess, is the behavioral selection, I guess, is the more appropriate term, right? I'm very more appropriate term, right? I'm very more appropriate term, right? I'm very curious about this concept of ad mixing. curious about this concept of ad mixing. curious about this concept of ad mixing. Mhm. Um, if you could explain what ad Mhm. Um, if you could explain what ad Mhm. Um, if you could explain what ad mixing is and what I'm getting at here mixing is and what I'm getting at here mixing is and what I'm getting at here is probably the biggest question for me, is probably the biggest question for me, is probably the biggest question for me, which is, are we all really one species? which is, are we all really one species? which is, are we all really one species? I mean, I like the idea that we are all I mean, I like the idea that we are all I mean, I like the idea that we are all one, collective consciousness and unity one, collective consciousness and unity one, collective consciousness and unity and peace on earth. Awesome. But really, and peace on earth. Awesome. But really, and peace on earth. Awesome. But really, in a serious sense, is homo sapiens one in a serious sense, is homo sapiens one in a serious sense, is homo sapiens one species? I mean, there's a lot of species? I mean, there's a lot of species? I mean, there's a lot of genetic variation. And so if you could genetic variation. And so if you could genetic variation. And so if you could explain ad mixing and if you're willing explain ad mixing and if you're willing explain ad mixing and if you're willing to go out on a limb and address whether to go out on a limb and address whether to go out on a limb and address whether or not there might be multiple species or not there might be multiple species or not there might be multiple species of primates walking around that we say, of primates walking around that we say, of primates walking around that we say, "Oh, that's a person, but they might be "Oh, that's a person, but they might be "Oh, that's a person, but they might be that much different than us." Yeah. So that much different than us." Yeah. So that much different than us." Yeah. So starting with ad mixture, ad mixture is starting with ad mixture, ad mixture is starting with ad mixture, ad mixture is just when uh different ancestry just when uh different ancestry just when uh different ancestry populations mix. Um so it's, you know, populations mix. Um so it's, you know, populations mix. Um so it's, you know, it's kind of this relative term because, it's kind of this relative term because, it's kind of this relative term because, you know, if we're all descended from you know, if we're all descended from you know, if we're all descended from one ancestral population, then maybe we one ancestral population, then maybe we one ancestral population, then maybe we all have one ancestry. But I always like all have one ancestry. But I always like all have one ancestry. But I always like to put it in the context of myself. So, to put it in the context of myself. So, to put it in the context of myself. So, um, my dad is 100% Italian. My mom's a um, my dad is 100% Italian. My mom's a um, my dad is 100% Italian. My mom's a mix of Northern European. I am an mix of Northern European. I am an mix of Northern European. I am an admixed individual. Um, you know, if you admixed individual. Um, you know, if you admixed individual. Um, you know, if you think about it that way. And the reason think about it that way. And the reason think about it that way. And the reason that this is important in genetic that this is important in genetic that this is important in genetic studies is that if I claimed to be studies is that if I claimed to be studies is that if I claimed to be Italian and were included in a genetic Italian and were included in a genetic Italian and were included in a genetic study of Italians, um, the genetic study of Italians, um, the genetic study of Italians, um, the genetic variation that I have coming in from my variation that I have coming in from my variation that I have coming in from my mom's side would confuse that analysis. mom's side would confuse that analysis. mom's side would confuse that analysis. So ad mixture creates a ton of problems So ad mixture creates a ton of problems So ad mixture creates a ton of problems when we try to do genetic analysis. Um when we try to do genetic analysis. Um when we try to do genetic analysis. Um and so that's generally why we try to and so that's generally why we try to and so that's generally why we try to quantify it in genetics. Uh but yeah, quantify it in genetics. Uh but yeah, quantify it in genetics. Uh but yeah, you know, when we're talking about it you know, when we're talking about it you know, when we're talking about it depends on kind of what scale because depends on kind of what scale because depends on kind of what scale because I'm 100% European. Um so in that way I'm 100% European. Um so in that way I'm 100% European. Um so in that way I'm not admixed. Um if we're talking on I'm not admixed. Um if we're talking on I'm not admixed. Um if we're talking on the scale of continents um so it's it the scale of continents um so it's it the scale of continents um so it's it becomes kind of a blurry concept of ad becomes kind of a blurry concept of ad becomes kind of a blurry concept of ad mixture um depending on what level we're mixture um depending on what level we're mixture um depending on what level we're looking at. Um, but as to your question looking at. Um, but as to your question looking at. Um, but as to your question of whether we are all one species, I of whether we are all one species, I of whether we are all one species, I would say I've actually, this is not the would say I've actually, this is not the would say I've actually, this is not the first time I've been asked this, first time I've been asked this, first time I've been asked this, especially given these, you know, we especially given these, you know, we especially given these, you know, we call them superhuman populations, these call them superhuman populations, these call them superhuman populations, these people who have these extraordinary people who have these extraordinary people who have these extraordinary abilities, extraordinary physiology that abilities, extraordinary physiology that abilities, extraordinary physiology that makes them, you know, really good at makes them, you know, really good at makes them, you know, really good at what they do. Um, I think the thing to what they do. Um, I think the thing to what they do. Um, I think the thing to keep in mind is that some of that keep in mind is that some of that keep in mind is that some of that variation can come from just a single variation can come from just a single variation can come from just a single base pair difference. I mean, a lot of base pair difference. I mean, a lot of base pair difference. I mean, a lot of times it's multiple genetic changes that times it's multiple genetic changes that times it's multiple genetic changes that create the differences between create the differences between create the differences between individuals. Um but like when you think individuals. Um but like when you think individuals. Um but like when you think about you know eye color that's just one about you know eye color that's just one about you know eye color that's just one genetic variation or genetic variant in genetic variation or genetic variant in genetic variation or genetic variant in some cases like the case of blue eyes some cases like the case of blue eyes some cases like the case of blue eyes you know so you could be exactly the you know so you could be exactly the you know so you could be exactly the same as someone else except for this one same as someone else except for this one same as someone else except for this one change out of 3.5 billion you know so change out of 3.5 billion you know so change out of 3.5 billion you know so does that like at what point do we need does that like at what point do we need does that like at what point do we need enough genetic diversity to call a group enough genetic diversity to call a group enough genetic diversity to call a group of humans a different species? Um and I of humans a different species? Um and I of humans a different species? Um and I don't think that's something that we see don't think that's something that we see don't think that's something that we see anywhere on the planet that I know of. anywhere on the planet that I know of. anywhere on the planet that I know of. Well, this has been incredibly Well, this has been incredibly Well, this has been incredibly illuminating. I I've learned so much and illuminating. I I've learned so much and illuminating. I I've learned so much and I know everyone listening has as well. I know everyone listening has as well. I know everyone listening has as well. I don't think we've ever had a discussion don't think we've ever had a discussion don't think we've ever had a discussion about these topics on this podcast in a about these topics on this podcast in a about these topics on this podcast in a solo episode or guest episode. You're solo episode or guest episode. You're solo episode or guest episode. You're truly the first person to come on here truly the first person to come on here truly the first person to come on here and talk about human genetics. And these and talk about human genetics. And these and talk about human genetics. And these incredible populations that you study um incredible populations that you study um incredible populations that you study um are not only interesting in their own are not only interesting in their own are not only interesting in their own right, but they really shed light on the right, but they really shed light on the right, but they really shed light on the interplay between culture, between culture, between culture, uh selection, behavior, genetics, and uh selection, behavior, genetics, and uh selection, behavior, genetics, and basically what's possible uh in terms of basically what's possible uh in terms of basically what's possible uh in terms of human potential. And they also have human potential. And they also have human potential. And they also have important relevance to human disease as important relevance to human disease as important relevance to human disease as you mentioned with the hypoxia work. And you mentioned with the hypoxia work. And you mentioned with the hypoxia work. And it also shines light on something that it also shines light on something that it also shines light on something that um I don't think we can get enough of, um I don't think we can get enough of, um I don't think we can get enough of, which is uh the incredible things that which is uh the incredible things that which is uh the incredible things that humans are capable of um in these very humans are capable of um in these very humans are capable of um in these very different populations that you know grew different populations that you know grew different populations that you know grew up and continue to exist in ways that up and continue to exist in ways that up and continue to exist in ways that are so different than us. I think it are so different than us. I think it are so different than us. I think it can't help but um uh turn the mirror on can't help but um uh turn the mirror on can't help but um uh turn the mirror on ourselves and ask ourselves like what ourselves and ask ourselves like what ourselves and ask ourselves like what are we doing in our daily lives are we doing in our daily lives are we doing in our daily lives behaviorally? How might that be behaviorally? How might that be behaviorally? How might that be impacting our genes? And and to start to impacting our genes? And and to start to impacting our genes? And and to start to speculate about that in constructive speculate about that in constructive speculate about that in constructive ways. So, I just really want to thank ways. So, I just really want to thank ways. So, I just really want to thank you for coming here today and sharing you for coming here today and sharing you for coming here today and sharing your knowledge, for the incredible work your knowledge, for the incredible work your knowledge, for the incredible work that you're doing. Um, to be honest, I'm that you're doing. Um, to be honest, I'm that you're doing. Um, to be honest, I'm envious if I were ever going to do a envious if I were ever going to do a envious if I were ever going to do a sbatical. I don't think I'll ever have sbatical. I don't think I'll ever have sbatical. I don't think I'll ever have time for to take the sabbatical that time for to take the sabbatical that time for to take the sabbatical that I've been acrewing, but if I ever did, I've been acrewing, but if I ever did, I've been acrewing, but if I ever did, I'd love to study one of these I'd love to study one of these I'd love to study one of these incredible populations and try the incredible populations and try the incredible populations and try the free dive um uh thing. Uh, it's really free dive um uh thing. Uh, it's really free dive um uh thing. Uh, it's really wonderful work and it's having a wonderful work and it's having a wonderful work and it's having a huge impact. It's in the news often, as huge impact. It's in the news often, as huge impact. It's in the news often, as we'll put links to and recently as well. we'll put links to and recently as well. we'll put links to and recently as well. I'm not going to ask you what you're on I'm not going to ask you what you're on I'm not going to ask you what you're on to now and what's coming next because um to now and what's coming next because um to now and what's coming next because um we'll save that for a future we'll save that for a future we'll save that for a future installment, but uh just want to really installment, but uh just want to really installment, but uh just want to really extend my gratitude and on behalf of extend my gratitude and on behalf of extend my gratitude and on behalf of myself and all the listeners, thank you myself and all the listeners, thank you myself and all the listeners, thank you so much for the work you do and for so much for the work you do and for so much for the work you do and for educating us. Thank you so much for educating us. Thank you so much for educating us. Thank you so much for having me and you're welcome in the having me and you're welcome in the having me and you're welcome in the field anytime. Awesome. I'll take you up field anytime. Awesome. I'll take you up field anytime. Awesome. I'll take you up on that. Thank you for joining me for on that. Thank you for joining me for on that. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Melissa today's discussion with Dr. Melissa today's discussion with Dr. Melissa Ardo. To learn more about her work, Ardo. To learn more about her work, Ardo. To learn more about her work, please see the links in the show not please see the links in the show not please see the links in the show not captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social not already following me on social not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools. Some of which and science related tools. Some of which and science related tools. Some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Melissa today's discussion with Dr. Melissa today's discussion with Dr. Melissa Lardo. And last, but certainly not Lardo. And last, but certainly not Lardo. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]