Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and of opthalmology at of neurobiology and of opthalmology at of neurobiology and of opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today I Stanford School of Medicine. Today I Stanford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. have the pleasure of introducing Dr. have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Robert Seapolski. Thank you so much Robert Seapolski. Thank you so much Robert Seapolski. Thank you so much Robert for joining us today. Robert for joining us today. Robert for joining us today. Well, it's glad to be here. Well, it's glad to be here. Well, it's glad to be here. I want to return to a topic that is near I want to return to a topic that is near I want to return to a topic that is near and dear to your heart which is stress. and dear to your heart which is stress. and dear to your heart which is stress. What is the difference between short and What is the difference between short and What is the difference between short and long-term stress in terms of their long-term stress in terms of their long-term stress in terms of their benefits and their drawback? How should benefits and their drawback? How should benefits and their drawback? How should we conceptualize stress? Basically, sort we conceptualize stress? Basically, sort we conceptualize stress? Basically, sort of two graphs that one would draw. The of two graphs that one would draw. The of two graphs that one would draw. The first one is just all sorts of first one is just all sorts of first one is just all sorts of beneficial effects of stress shortterm. beneficial effects of stress shortterm. beneficial effects of stress shortterm. And then once we get into chronicity, And then once we get into chronicity, And then once we get into chronicity, it's just downhill from there. the sorts it's just downhill from there. the sorts it's just downhill from there. the sorts of chronic stressors that most people of chronic stressors that most people of chronic stressors that most people deal with are just undeniably in the deal with are just undeniably in the deal with are just undeniably in the chronic range like having spent the last chronic range like having spent the last chronic range like having spent the last 20 years daily traffic jams or abusive 20 years daily traffic jams or abusive 20 years daily traffic jams or abusive boss or some such thing. Um the other boss or some such thing. Um the other boss or some such thing. Um the other curve that's sort of perpendicular to curve that's sort of perpendicular to curve that's sort of perpendicular to this is dealing with the fact that this is dealing with the fact that this is dealing with the fact that sometimes stress is a great thing. Um, sometimes stress is a great thing. Um, sometimes stress is a great thing. Um, like our goal is not to cure people of like our goal is not to cure people of like our goal is not to cure people of stress. Um, because if it's the right stress. Um, because if it's the right stress. Um, because if it's the right kind, we love it. We we pay good money kind, we love it. We we pay good money kind, we love it. We we pay good money to be stressed that way by a scary movie to be stressed that way by a scary movie to be stressed that way by a scary movie or roller coaster ride. Um, what you or roller coaster ride. Um, what you or roller coaster ride. Um, what you wind up seeing is when it's the right wind up seeing is when it's the right wind up seeing is when it's the right amount of stress, it's what we call amount of stress, it's what we call amount of stress, it's what we call stimulation. One thing that's really striking to me One thing that's really striking to me One thing that's really striking to me is how the physiologically is how the physiologically is how the physiologically the stress response looks so much like the stress response looks so much like the stress response looks so much like the excitement response to a positive the excitement response to a positive the excitement response to a positive event. But is there anything else that event. But is there anything else that event. But is there anything else that we know about the biology that reveals we know about the biology that reveals we know about the biology that reveals to us, you know, what really to us, you know, what really to us, you know, what really creates this thing we call veilance that creates this thing we call veilance that creates this thing we call veilance that an experience can be terrible or feel an experience can be terrible or feel an experience can be terrible or feel awful or it can feel wonderful depending awful or it can feel wonderful depending awful or it can feel wonderful depending on this somewhat subjective feature we on this somewhat subjective feature we on this somewhat subjective feature we call veilance. on a really mechanical call veilance. on a really mechanical call veilance. on a really mechanical level. Um, if you're in a circumstance level. Um, if you're in a circumstance level. Um, if you're in a circumstance that is requiring that your heart races that is requiring that your heart races that is requiring that your heart races and your breathing is fast and your breathing is fast and your breathing is fast and you're using your muscles and some such you're using your muscles and some such you're using your muscles and some such thing, um, you're going to be having thing, um, you're going to be having thing, um, you're going to be having roughly the same brain activation roughly the same brain activation roughly the same brain activation profile, whether this is for something profile, whether this is for something profile, whether this is for something wonderful or something terrible, with wonderful or something terrible, with wonderful or something terrible, with the one exception being that if the one exception being that if the one exception being that if the amygdala is part of the activation, amygdala is part of the activation, amygdala is part of the activation, this is something that's going to be this is something that's going to be this is something that's going to be counting as adverse. The amygdala in counting as adverse. The amygdala in counting as adverse. The amygdala in some ways is kind of the checkpoint as some ways is kind of the checkpoint as some ways is kind of the checkpoint as to whether we're talking about to whether we're talking about to whether we're talking about excitement or terror. excitement or terror. excitement or terror. Let's use the amygdala as a transition Let's use the amygdala as a transition Let's use the amygdala as a transition point to another topic that you've spent point to another topic that you've spent point to another topic that you've spent uh many years working on and thinking uh many years working on and thinking uh many years working on and thinking about which is testosterone and other about which is testosterone and other about which is testosterone and other sex steroid hormones. How should we sex steroid hormones. How should we sex steroid hormones. How should we think about the role of testosterone in think about the role of testosterone in think about the role of testosterone in the amygdala given that the engagement the amygdala given that the engagement the amygdala given that the engagement of the amydala is fundamental in this of the amydala is fundamental in this of the amydala is fundamental in this transition point between a exhilarating transition point between a exhilarating transition point between a exhilarating positive response and a uh and a positive response and a uh and a positive response and a uh and a negative stressful response or maybe negative stressful response or maybe negative stressful response or maybe just broadly how should we think about just broadly how should we think about just broadly how should we think about testosterone and its effects on the testosterone and its effects on the testosterone and its effects on the brain? Basically, brain? Basically, brain? Basically, um, almost everybody out there has a um, almost everybody out there has a um, almost everybody out there has a completely wrong idea as to what completely wrong idea as to what completely wrong idea as to what testosterone does, which is testosterone does, which is testosterone does, which is testosterone makes you aggressive because males of makes you aggressive because males of makes you aggressive because males of virtually every species out there have virtually every species out there have virtually every species out there have more testosterone that are more testosterone that are more testosterone that are more aggressive. And the reality is aggressive. And the reality is aggressive. And the reality is testosterone does no such thing. It testosterone does no such thing. It testosterone does no such thing. It doesn't cause aggression. And you can doesn't cause aggression. And you can doesn't cause aggression. And you can see this both behaviorally and in the see this both behaviorally and in the see this both behaviorally and in the amydala. It lowers the threshold for the amydala. It lowers the threshold for the amydala. It lowers the threshold for the sort of things that would normally sort of things that would normally sort of things that would normally provoke you into being progressive so provoke you into being progressive so provoke you into being progressive so that it happens more easily. It makes that it happens more easily. It makes that it happens more easily. It makes systems that are already turned on turn systems that are already turned on turn systems that are already turned on turn on louder rather than turning on louder rather than turning on louder rather than turning on aggressive music or some such thing. aggressive music or some such thing. aggressive music or some such thing. It's not creating aggression. It's just It's not creating aggression. It's just It's not creating aggression. It's just upping the volume of whatever aggression upping the volume of whatever aggression upping the volume of whatever aggression is already there. is already there. is already there. Yeah. And in terms of uh status and the Yeah. And in terms of uh status and the Yeah. And in terms of uh status and the relationship between individuals either relationship between individuals either relationship between individuals either non-human primates or humans, can we say non-human primates or humans, can we say non-human primates or humans, can we say that relative levels of testosterone that relative levels of testosterone that relative levels of testosterone between individuals is correlated to between individuals is correlated to between individuals is correlated to status within the hierarchy? status within the hierarchy? status within the hierarchy? Yes. Like you go back I don't know Yes. Like you go back I don't know Yes. Like you go back I don't know whatever number of decades to whatever number of decades to whatever number of decades to endocrinology texts and there were two endocrinology texts and there were two endocrinology texts and there were two totally reliable findings in there which totally reliable findings in there which totally reliable findings in there which is higher levels of testosterone predict is higher levels of testosterone predict is higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of aggression in penins higher levels of aggression in penins higher levels of aggression in penins and other animals. Higher levels of and other animals. Higher levels of and other animals. Higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of sexual activity. And the correlation is sexual activity. And the correlation is sexual activity. And the correlation is there. And when you look closely we got there. And when you look closely we got there. And when you look closely we got cause and effect stuff. Sexual behavior cause and effect stuff. Sexual behavior cause and effect stuff. Sexual behavior raises testosterone levels. Aggression raises testosterone levels. Aggression raises testosterone levels. Aggression raises testosterone levels. Your levels raises testosterone levels. Your levels raises testosterone levels. Your levels beforehand are barely predictive of beforehand are barely predictive of beforehand are barely predictive of what's going to happen. So, it's a what's going to happen. So, it's a what's going to happen. So, it's a response rather than a cause. This is a response rather than a cause. This is a response rather than a cause. This is a great footnote. Um, if you have the great footnote. Um, if you have the great footnote. Um, if you have the right type of willing to die in the right type of willing to die in the right type of willing to die in the trenches, devotion sort of thing. trenches, devotion sort of thing. trenches, devotion sort of thing. Watching your favorite team play a sport Watching your favorite team play a sport Watching your favorite team play a sport will raise your testosterone levels as will raise your testosterone levels as will raise your testosterone levels as you sit there with a potato chips in you sit there with a potato chips in you sit there with a potato chips in your armchair. So, it's not the your armchair. So, it's not the your armchair. So, it's not the physicality of aggression, it's the physicality of aggression, it's the physicality of aggression, it's the psychological framing of it. So, yeah, psychological framing of it. So, yeah, psychological framing of it. So, yeah, testosterone is not causing that. And a testosterone is not causing that. And a testosterone is not causing that. And a great way to appreciate that is you do a great way to appreciate that is you do a great way to appreciate that is you do a subtraction study. You remove the a subtraction study. You remove the a subtraction study. You remove the testes, then as I said before, levels of testes, then as I said before, levels of testes, then as I said before, levels of sexual behavior goes down. Good. We've sexual behavior goes down. Good. We've sexual behavior goes down. Good. We've just shown that testosterone is somehow just shown that testosterone is somehow just shown that testosterone is somehow causitive. Critically, they go down, but causitive. Critically, they go down, but causitive. Critically, they go down, but not down to zero, whether you are a rat not down to zero, whether you are a rat not down to zero, whether you are a rat or a monkey or a human, whatever. And or a monkey or a human, whatever. And or a monkey or a human, whatever. And what predicts how much residual sexual what predicts how much residual sexual what predicts how much residual sexual behavior is there? How much sexual behavior is there? How much sexual behavior is there? How much sexual behavior there was before castration? behavior there was before castration? behavior there was before castration? What that's telling you is by then What that's telling you is by then What that's telling you is by then that's behavior that's being carried by that's behavior that's being carried by that's behavior that's being carried by social learning and context rather than social learning and context rather than social learning and context rather than by the hormone. The exact same thing by the hormone. The exact same thing by the hormone. The exact same thing with aggression drops after castration with aggression drops after castration with aggression drops after castration doesn't go to zero. The more prior doesn't go to zero. The more prior doesn't go to zero. The more prior history of it, the more it just keeps history of it, the more it just keeps history of it, the more it just keeps coasting along on its own, even without coasting along on its own, even without coasting along on its own, even without testosterone. As I've heard you talk testosterone. As I've heard you talk testosterone. As I've heard you talk about testosterone today and over the about testosterone today and over the about testosterone today and over the years, I start to get the impression years, I start to get the impression years, I start to get the impression that as the most misunderstood molecule that as the most misunderstood molecule that as the most misunderstood molecule in human health, in the universe, it in human health, in the universe, it in human health, in the universe, it has it it's clearly doing something very has it it's clearly doing something very has it it's clearly doing something very powerful. It's it's shifting the way powerful. It's it's shifting the way powerful. It's it's shifting the way that certain neural circuits work, that certain neural circuits work, that certain neural circuits work, adjusting the gain on the amydala, as adjusting the gain on the amydala, as adjusting the gain on the amydala, as you described. And is there any um you described. And is there any um you described. And is there any um truism about testosterone like and its truism about testosterone like and its truism about testosterone like and its relationship to effort or its relationship to effort or its relationship to effort or its relationship to um resilience and uh in relationship to um resilience and uh in relationship to um resilience and uh in a way that will maybe will help me and a way that will maybe will help me and a way that will maybe will help me and other people sort of think about how to other people sort of think about how to other people sort of think about how to think about testosterone. think about testosterone. think about testosterone. Yeah. Um Yeah. Um Yeah. Um maybe three separate answers to that. maybe three separate answers to that. maybe three separate answers to that. The first one is I think it's a fair The first one is I think it's a fair The first one is I think it's a fair summary to think that when it comes to summary to think that when it comes to summary to think that when it comes to motivated strong behaviors, what motivated strong behaviors, what motivated strong behaviors, what testosterone does is make you more of testosterone does is make you more of testosterone does is make you more of whatever you already are in that domain. whatever you already are in that domain. whatever you already are in that domain. Sexual arousal, libido, aggressiveness, Sexual arousal, libido, aggressiveness, Sexual arousal, libido, aggressiveness, spontaneous aggression, reactive spontaneous aggression, reactive spontaneous aggression, reactive aggression, things of that sort. It's aggression, things of that sort. It's aggression, things of that sort. It's upping the volume of things that are upping the volume of things that are upping the volume of things that are already strongly there. Um, second way already strongly there. Um, second way already strongly there. Um, second way to think about it is to think about it is to think about it is well, here's like my favorite well, here's like my favorite well, here's like my favorite finding about testosterone. Um, and this finding about testosterone. Um, and this finding about testosterone. Um, and this was some wonderful work by a guy this was some wonderful work by a guy this was some wonderful work by a guy John Wingfield, who's one of the best John Wingfield, who's one of the best John Wingfield, who's one of the best behavioral endocrinologists out there. behavioral endocrinologists out there. behavioral endocrinologists out there. And about 20 years ago, he formulated And about 20 years ago, he formulated And about 20 years ago, he formulated what was called the challenge hypothesis what was called the challenge hypothesis what was called the challenge hypothesis of testosterone action. What does of testosterone action. What does of testosterone action. What does testosterone do? Testosterone is what testosterone do? Testosterone is what testosterone do? Testosterone is what you secrete when your status is being you secrete when your status is being you secrete when your status is being challenged and it makes it more likely challenged and it makes it more likely challenged and it makes it more likely that you'll do the behaviors needed to that you'll do the behaviors needed to that you'll do the behaviors needed to hold on to your status. Okay, so that's hold on to your status. Okay, so that's hold on to your status. Okay, so that's totally boringly straightforward. If totally boringly straightforward. If totally boringly straightforward. If you're a baboon, if somebody is you're a baboon, if somebody is you're a baboon, if somebody is challenging your high rank, the challenging your high rank, the challenging your high rank, the appropriate response on your part is appropriate response on your part is appropriate response on your part is going to be aggression. All right, so going to be aggression. All right, so going to be aggression. All right, so we've just gotten through the back door we've just gotten through the back door we've just gotten through the back door testosterone and aggression again. But testosterone and aggression again. But testosterone and aggression again. But then you get to humans and humans have then you get to humans and humans have then you get to humans and humans have lots of different ways of achieving or lots of different ways of achieving or lots of different ways of achieving or maintaining status and all you need to maintaining status and all you need to maintaining status and all you need to do is go to like some fancy private do is go to like some fancy private do is go to like some fancy private schools annual auction and you will see schools annual auction and you will see schools annual auction and you will see all these half-drunk alpha males all these half-drunk alpha males all these half-drunk alpha males competing to see who can give the most competing to see who can give the most competing to see who can give the most money away as a show of conspicuous like money away as a show of conspicuous like money away as a show of conspicuous like you know property that they have. And in you know property that they have. And in you know property that they have. And in a setting like that, I mean, I I've a setting like that, I mean, I I've a setting like that, I mean, I I've haven't been able to take urine samples haven't been able to take urine samples haven't been able to take urine samples at those times, unfortunately. But that at those times, unfortunately. But that at those times, unfortunately. But that shows the flip side of it. If you have a shows the flip side of it. If you have a shows the flip side of it. If you have a species that hands up status in a very species that hands up status in a very species that hands up status in a very different sort of way, testosterone is different sort of way, testosterone is different sort of way, testosterone is going to boost that also. Okay. So, that going to boost that also. Okay. So, that going to boost that also. Okay. So, that generates a totally nutty prediction. generates a totally nutty prediction. generates a totally nutty prediction. Wow. Take people in a circumstance, say Wow. Take people in a circumstance, say Wow. Take people in a circumstance, say playing an economic game, where you get playing an economic game, where you get playing an economic game, where you get status by being trustworthy and being status by being trustworthy and being status by being trustworthy and being generous in your interactions with the generous in your interactions with the generous in your interactions with the game. If you give people testosterone, game. If you give people testosterone, game. If you give people testosterone, does that make them more generous? And does that make them more generous? And does that make them more generous? And that's absolutely the case. Totally cool that's absolutely the case. Totally cool that's absolutely the case. Totally cool finding. And if we have a societal finding. And if we have a societal finding. And if we have a societal problem with too much aggression, the problem with too much aggression, the problem with too much aggression, the first culture to look at is not first culture to look at is not first culture to look at is not testosterone. The first to look at is testosterone. The first to look at is testosterone. The first to look at is that we hand out so much damn elevated that we hand out so much damn elevated that we hand out so much damn elevated status for aggression in so many status for aggression in so many status for aggression in so many circumstances. Third thing about circumstances. Third thing about circumstances. Third thing about subtlety of testosterone. Okay, so like subtlety of testosterone. Okay, so like subtlety of testosterone. Okay, so like some subtler behavioral effects. You some subtler behavioral effects. You some subtler behavioral effects. You give testosterone to people and they give testosterone to people and they give testosterone to people and they become more confident. They become more become more confident. They become more become more confident. They become more self-confident. Well, that's good. People pay to take Well, that's good. People pay to take Well, that's good. People pay to take all sorts of nonsensical self-help all sorts of nonsensical self-help all sorts of nonsensical self-help courses that will boost your self-esteem courses that will boost your self-esteem courses that will boost your self-esteem and that's a good thing unless and that's a good thing unless and that's a good thing unless testosterone makes you more confident testosterone makes you more confident testosterone makes you more confident that is inaccurate and you're more that is inaccurate and you're more that is inaccurate and you're more likely to barrel into wrong decisions. likely to barrel into wrong decisions. likely to barrel into wrong decisions. What's shown in economic game play is What's shown in economic game play is What's shown in economic game play is that testosterone by making you more that testosterone by making you more that testosterone by making you more confident makes you less cooperative confident makes you less cooperative confident makes you less cooperative because who needs to cooperate because who needs to cooperate because who needs to cooperate because I'm on top of this all on my own. Um, I'm on top of this all on my own. Um, I'm on top of this all on my own. Um, testosterone makes people cocky and testosterone makes people cocky and testosterone makes people cocky and impulsive and that may be great in one impulsive and that may be great in one impulsive and that may be great in one setting, but if in the others you're setting, but if in the others you're setting, but if in the others you're absolutely sure your army is going to absolutely sure your army is going to absolutely sure your army is going to overrun the other country in 3 days, so overrun the other country in 3 days, so overrun the other country in 3 days, so hell, let's start World War I and you hell, let's start World War I and you hell, let's start World War I and you get a big surprise out of it, get a big surprise out of it, get a big surprise out of it, testosterone altering risk assessment testosterone altering risk assessment testosterone altering risk assessment beforehand probably played a big role in beforehand probably played a big role in beforehand probably played a big role in that kind of miscalculation. that kind of miscalculation. that kind of miscalculation. Super interesting. I always think about Super interesting. I always think about Super interesting. I always think about testosterone and dopamine being close testosterone and dopamine being close testosterone and dopamine being close cousins in the brain because of cousins in the brain because of cousins in the brain because of dopamine's salient role in creating this dopamine's salient role in creating this dopamine's salient role in creating this uh bias towards extterosception. You uh bias towards extterosception. You uh bias towards extterosception. You know, when uh somebody takes a drug that know, when uh somebody takes a drug that know, when uh somebody takes a drug that increases dopamine or their chaka block increases dopamine or their chaka block increases dopamine or their chaka block full of dopamine, they tend with I want full of dopamine, they tend with I want full of dopamine, they tend with I want to highlight tend because this is I'm to highlight tend because this is I'm to highlight tend because this is I'm really generalizing here, but they tend really generalizing here, but they tend really generalizing here, but they tend to focus on outward goals, you know, to focus on outward goals, you know, to focus on outward goals, you know, things beyond the boundaries of things beyond the boundaries of things beyond the boundaries of their skin. And testosterone seems to do their skin. And testosterone seems to do their skin. And testosterone seems to do a bit of the same. It tends to put us a bit of the same. It tends to put us a bit of the same. It tends to put us into a similar mode of perceiving the into a similar mode of perceiving the into a similar mode of perceiving the outside world in ways that we're asking outside world in ways that we're asking outside world in ways that we're asking questions like uh how do I relate to questions like uh how do I relate to questions like uh how do I relate to this other of my species? How do I this other of my species? How do I this other of my species? How do I relate to these goals? Is there anything relate to these goals? Is there anything relate to these goals? Is there anything that um we can do to better that um we can do to better that um we can do to better conceptualize the relationship between conceptualize the relationship between conceptualize the relationship between testosterone and dopamine and testosterone and dopamine and testosterone and dopamine and motivation? Well, I think it's got lots to do with Well, I think it's got lots to do with Well, I think it's got lots to do with sort of this massive revisionism about sort of this massive revisionism about sort of this massive revisionism about dopamine. Everyone since the pharaohs dopamine. Everyone since the pharaohs dopamine. Everyone since the pharaohs got brought up being taught that got brought up being taught that got brought up being taught that dopamine is about pleasure and reward. dopamine is about pleasure and reward. dopamine is about pleasure and reward. Turns out it isn't. It's about Turns out it isn't. It's about Turns out it isn't. It's about anticipation of reward. And it's about anticipation of reward. And it's about anticipation of reward. And it's about generating the motivation, the goal- generating the motivation, the goal- generating the motivation, the goal- directed behavior needed to go get that directed behavior needed to go get that directed behavior needed to go get that reward. And before you know it, you're reward. And before you know it, you're reward. And before you know it, you're using like elevated dopamine your entire using like elevated dopamine your entire using like elevated dopamine your entire life to motivate you to do whatever is life to motivate you to do whatever is life to motivate you to do whatever is going to get you like entry into heaven going to get you like entry into heaven going to get you like entry into heaven afterlife kind of, you know, it's afterlife kind of, you know, it's afterlife kind of, you know, it's doing that sort of thing. So, it's doing that sort of thing. So, it's doing that sort of thing. So, it's really about the motivation. And what really about the motivation. And what really about the motivation. And what testosterone does even in individuals testosterone does even in individuals testosterone does even in individuals who are not aggressive and why who are not aggressive and why who are not aggressive and why testosterone replacement is often a very testosterone replacement is often a very testosterone replacement is often a very helpful thing for aging males is it helpful thing for aging males is it helpful thing for aging males is it increases energy. It increases a sense increases energy. It increases a sense increases energy. It increases a sense of awareness, of presence, of alertness. It awareness, of presence, of alertness. It awareness, of presence, of alertness. It increases motivation. Testosterone increases motivation. Testosterone increases motivation. Testosterone within minutes increases glucose uptake within minutes increases glucose uptake within minutes increases glucose uptake into skeletal muscle. You're just more into skeletal muscle. You're just more into skeletal muscle. You're just more awake and alert and all of that. And awake and alert and all of that. And awake and alert and all of that. And that has a lot to do with what dopamine that has a lot to do with what dopamine that has a lot to do with what dopamine does. And as one might predict, then does. And as one might predict, then does. And as one might predict, then getting just the right levels of getting just the right levels of getting just the right levels of testosterone uh infused into your bloodstream feels uh infused into your bloodstream feels uh infused into your bloodstream feels great to lab rats. They will lever press great to lab rats. They will lever press great to lab rats. They will lever press to get infused into the range that to get infused into the range that to get infused into the range that optimizes dopamine release. So these optimizes dopamine release. So these optimizes dopamine release. So these you're absolutely right. They're they're you're absolutely right. They're they're you're absolutely right. They're they're deeply intertwined. deeply intertwined. deeply intertwined. I want to ask about estrogen. Um, you I want to ask about estrogen. Um, you I want to ask about estrogen. Um, you know, we don't hear as about estrogen as know, we don't hear as about estrogen as know, we don't hear as about estrogen as often, and yet estrogen has some very often, and yet estrogen has some very often, and yet estrogen has some very powerful effects on both the animal powerful effects on both the animal powerful effects on both the animal brain and on the human brain of males brain and on the human brain of males brain and on the human brain of males and females. Are there any general and females. Are there any general and females. Are there any general themes of estrogen that are uh that themes of estrogen that are uh that themes of estrogen that are uh that people should be aware of or do you people should be aware of or do you people should be aware of or do you think that are generally misunderstood? think that are generally misunderstood? think that are generally misunderstood? Is it really all about feelings and Is it really all about feelings and Is it really all about feelings and empathy and making us more sensitive? I empathy and making us more sensitive? I empathy and making us more sensitive? I sense not. I sense not. I sense not. No. If you had a choice in the matter No. If you had a choice in the matter No. If you had a choice in the matter between having a lot of estrogen in your between having a lot of estrogen in your between having a lot of estrogen in your bloodstream or not, go for having a lot bloodstream or not, go for having a lot bloodstream or not, go for having a lot of estrogen. It in it enhances of estrogen. It in it enhances of estrogen. It in it enhances cognition. It stimulates neurogenesis in cognition. It stimulates neurogenesis in cognition. It stimulates neurogenesis in the hypnoc campus. It increases glucose the hypnoc campus. It increases glucose the hypnoc campus. It increases glucose and oxygen delivery. It protects you and oxygen delivery. It protects you and oxygen delivery. It protects you from dementia. It decreases inflammatory from dementia. It decreases inflammatory from dementia. It decreases inflammatory oxidative damage to blood vessels, which oxidative damage to blood vessels, which oxidative damage to blood vessels, which is why it's good for protecting from is why it's good for protecting from is why it's good for protecting from cardiovascular disease. In contrast to cardiovascular disease. In contrast to cardiovascular disease. In contrast to testosterone, which is making every one testosterone, which is making every one testosterone, which is making every one of those things worse, estrogen is one of those things worse, estrogen is one of those things worse, estrogen is one of the greatest predictors of protection of the greatest predictors of protection of the greatest predictors of protection from Alzheimer's disease, all of that. from Alzheimer's disease, all of that. from Alzheimer's disease, all of that. But it needs to be physiological. But it needs to be physiological. But it needs to be physiological. Just keep going what? Keep continuing Just keep going what? Keep continuing Just keep going what? Keep continuing what your body has been doing for a long what your body has been doing for a long what your body has been doing for a long time versus let the whole thing shut time versus let the whole thing shut time versus let the whole thing shut down and suddenly like try to fire up down and suddenly like try to fire up down and suddenly like try to fire up the coal stoves at the bottom of the coal stoves at the bottom of the coal stoves at the bottom of the basement kind of thing and get that basement kind of thing and get that basement kind of thing and get that going. there you get utterly different going. there you get utterly different going. there you get utterly different outcomes. Fascinating. I guess it raises the Fascinating. I guess it raises the Fascinating. I guess it raises the question about testosterone replacement question about testosterone replacement question about testosterone replacement too, whether or not uh people should uh too, whether or not uh people should uh too, whether or not uh people should uh talk to their doctor before uh too long. talk to their doctor before uh too long. talk to their doctor before uh too long. Uh men and women, talk to your Uh men and women, talk to your Uh men and women, talk to your physicians before too long uh to avoid physicians before too long uh to avoid physicians before too long uh to avoid these uh whatever is happening in these uh whatever is happening in these uh whatever is happening in these periods where there isn't sufficient periods where there isn't sufficient periods where there isn't sufficient testosterone andor estrogen. Sounds like testosterone andor estrogen. Sounds like testosterone andor estrogen. Sounds like could um cause longerterm problems even could um cause longerterm problems even could um cause longerterm problems even when therapies are introduced. I'd when therapies are introduced. I'd when therapies are introduced. I'd like to briefly return to stress. Um like to briefly return to stress. Um like to briefly return to stress. Um you described a study uh once about two you described a study uh once about two you described a study uh once about two rats, one running on a wheel rats, one running on a wheel rats, one running on a wheel voluntarily, one who's basically stuck in a running one who's basically stuck in a running one who's basically stuck in a running wheel and is forced to run anytime rat wheel and is forced to run anytime rat wheel and is forced to run anytime rat number one runs. So in one case the rat number one runs. So in one case the rat number one runs. So in one case the rat is voluntarily exercising and in the is voluntarily exercising and in the is voluntarily exercising and in the other case the rat is being forced other case the rat is being forced other case the rat is being forced to go to PE class so to speak and seeing to go to PE class so to speak and seeing to go to PE class so to speak and seeing divergent effects on biology. What do divergent effects on biology. What do divergent effects on biology. What do you think about stress mitigation and you think about stress mitigation and you think about stress mitigation and what should we do as individuals and as what should we do as individuals and as what should we do as individuals and as families and as a culture to try and families and as a culture to try and families and as a culture to try and encourage people to mitigate their encourage people to mitigate their encourage people to mitigate their stress but in ways that are not going to stress but in ways that are not going to stress but in ways that are not going to turn us into rat number two where we're turn us into rat number two where we're turn us into rat number two where we're being forced to mitigate our own stress being forced to mitigate our own stress being forced to mitigate our own stress and therefore becomes more stressful. and therefore becomes more stressful. and therefore becomes more stressful. And what you see is rat number one gets And what you see is rat number one gets And what you see is rat number one gets all the benefits of exercise. Rat number all the benefits of exercise. Rat number all the benefits of exercise. Rat number two gets all the downsides of severe two gets all the downsides of severe two gets all the downsides of severe stress with the same exact muscle stress with the same exact muscle stress with the same exact muscle expenditure and movements going on. expenditure and movements going on. expenditure and movements going on. Perfectly yolked. Great example that Perfectly yolked. Great example that Perfectly yolked. Great example that it's the interpretation in your head. it's the interpretation in your head. it's the interpretation in your head. Um, anything I should say here? I should Um, anything I should say here? I should Um, anything I should say here? I should preface with I'm reasonably good at preface with I'm reasonably good at preface with I'm reasonably good at telling people what's going to happen if telling people what's going to happen if telling people what's going to happen if they don't manage their stress, but I'm they don't manage their stress, but I'm they don't manage their stress, but I'm terrible at actually like managing terrible at actually like managing terrible at actually like managing stress or advising how to manage it. I'm stress or advising how to manage it. I'm stress or advising how to manage it. I'm much better with the bad news aspect I'm much better with the bad news aspect I'm much better with the bad news aspect of it. Um, but some people have massive of it. Um, but some people have massive of it. Um, but some people have massive stress responses, others not at all in stress responses, others not at all in stress responses, others not at all in between. Enjoy it. Like what are the between. Enjoy it. Like what are the between. Enjoy it. Like what are the building blocks of what makes building blocks of what makes building blocks of what makes psychological stress stress? And the psychological stress stress? And the psychological stress stress? And the first one is exactly what is brought up first one is exactly what is brought up first one is exactly what is brought up by that running study. Do you have a by that running study. Do you have a by that running study. Do you have a sense of control? A sense of control sense of control? A sense of control sense of control? A sense of control makes stressors less stressful. And makes stressors less stressful. And makes stressors less stressful. And related to that is a sense of related to that is a sense of related to that is a sense of predictability and that's enormously protect and that's enormously protect and that's enormously protect protective. Others outlet for frustration. You take Others outlet for frustration. You take Others outlet for frustration. You take a rat who's getting shocked and he can a rat who's getting shocked and he can a rat who's getting shocked and he can gnaw on a bar of wood. A stressor is gnaw on a bar of wood. A stressor is gnaw on a bar of wood. A stressor is less stressful. Uh, unfortunately, if less stressful. Uh, unfortunately, if less stressful. Uh, unfortunately, if you have a rat or primate or human and you have a rat or primate or human and you have a rat or primate or human and they're stressed, the ability to they're stressed, the ability to they're stressed, the ability to aggressively dump on somebody smaller aggressively dump on somebody smaller aggressively dump on somebody smaller and weaker also reduces the stress and weaker also reduces the stress and weaker also reduces the stress response and displacement aggression response and displacement aggression response and displacement aggression explainment aggression reduces stress accounts for a aggression reduces stress accounts for a aggression reduces stress accounts for a huge percentage of Earth's like huge percentage of Earth's like huge percentage of Earth's like unhappiness. So, all those variables get social So, all those variables get social So, all those variables get social support as well. Oh, that's a good one. support as well. Oh, that's a good one. support as well. Oh, that's a good one. Interpreting circumstances being good Interpreting circumstances being good Interpreting circumstances being good news rather than bad. Hooray. So, you've news rather than bad. Hooray. So, you've news rather than bad. Hooray. So, you've got this very simple sort of like got this very simple sort of like got this very simple sort of like take-home recipe of go out and get as take-home recipe of go out and get as take-home recipe of go out and get as much control and as much predictability much control and as much predictability much control and as much predictability and as many outlets and as much social and as many outlets and as much social and as many outlets and as much social support as possible and you're going to support as possible and you're going to support as possible and you're going to do just fine. And you go out and do that do just fine. And you go out and do that do just fine. And you go out and do that and that's a recipe for total disaster and that's a recipe for total disaster and that's a recipe for total disaster because it's much more subtle than because it's much more subtle than because it's much more subtle than that. And that's why stress management that. And that's why stress management that. And that's why stress management techniques about control and techniques about control and techniques about control and predictability wind up being far worse predictability wind up being far worse predictability wind up being far worse than neutral. If you're preaching that than neutral. If you're preaching that than neutral. If you're preaching that to somebody homeless or somebody with to somebody homeless or somebody with to somebody homeless or somebody with terminal cancer or somebody who's a terminal cancer or somebody who's a terminal cancer or somebody who's a refugee, tell a neurotic middleclass person that tell a neurotic middleclass person that tell a neurotic middleclass person that they have the psychological tools to they have the psychological tools to they have the psychological tools to turn, you know, hell into heaven and turn, you know, hell into heaven and turn, you know, hell into heaven and there's some truth to that. do the same there's some truth to that. do the same there's some truth to that. do the same thing to somebody who's going through a thing to somebody who's going through a thing to somebody who's going through a real hell and that's just privileged, real hell and that's just privileged, real hell and that's just privileged, you know, heartlessness to do that you know, heartlessness to do that you know, heartlessness to do that because that doesn't work. It's not because that doesn't work. It's not because that doesn't work. It's not simple. It takes a lot of work to like simple. It takes a lot of work to like simple. It takes a lot of work to like do it right because you know you do it do it right because you know you do it do it right because you know you do it wrong and it may temporarily seem like a wrong and it may temporarily seem like a wrong and it may temporarily seem like a great thing but when it turns out to be great thing but when it turns out to be great thing but when it turns out to be completely misplaced faith you're going completely misplaced faith you're going completely misplaced faith you're going to be feeling worse than before you to be feeling worse than before you to be feeling worse than before you started. These days there's a lot of interest in These days there's a lot of interest in These days there's a lot of interest in using physical practices to mitigate using physical practices to mitigate using physical practices to mitigate stress. you know, trying to get out of stress. you know, trying to get out of stress. you know, trying to get out of the ruminating and uh to some extent the ruminating and uh to some extent the ruminating and uh to some extent take control of neural circuits in take control of neural circuits in take control of neural circuits in the brain by using exercise and using the brain by using exercise and using the brain by using exercise and using breathing and hypnosis. What are your breathing and hypnosis. What are your breathing and hypnosis. What are your thoughts on more uh for lack of a better thoughts on more uh for lack of a better thoughts on more uh for lack of a better way to put it more head-entered way to put it more head-entered way to put it more head-entered cognitive approaches to stress cognitive approaches to stress cognitive approaches to stress mitigation versus kind of uh going at mitigation versus kind of uh going at mitigation versus kind of uh going at the core physiology? Cold showers uh now the core physiology? Cold showers uh now the core physiology? Cold showers uh now are even a thing to some extent you know are even a thing to some extent you know are even a thing to some extent you know just to get people stress acclimated just to get people stress acclimated just to get people stress acclimated voluntarily taking cold showers you know voluntarily taking cold showers you know voluntarily taking cold showers you know oh transcendental meditation mindfulness oh transcendental meditation mindfulness oh transcendental meditation mindfulness exercise prayer exercise prayer exercise prayer sort of reflecting on gratitude sort of reflecting on gratitude sort of reflecting on gratitude all that sort of thing collectively they all that sort of thing collectively they all that sort of thing collectively they work on the average they work in terms work on the average they work in terms work on the average they work in terms of they can lower heart rate and of they can lower heart rate and of they can lower heart rate and cholesterol levels and have all sorts of cholesterol levels and have all sorts of cholesterol levels and have all sorts of good outcomes um but they from provisos. good outcomes um but they from provisos. good outcomes um but they from provisos. One is exactly the caveat that comes out One is exactly the caveat that comes out One is exactly the caveat that comes out in the grunding meal study is it doesn't in the grunding meal study is it doesn't in the grunding meal study is it doesn't matter how many of your friends swear by matter how many of your friends swear by matter how many of your friends swear by this stress management technique if this stress management technique if this stress management technique if doing it makes you want to scream your doing it makes you want to scream your doing it makes you want to scream your head off after 10 seconds. That's not head off after 10 seconds. That's not head off after 10 seconds. That's not the one that's going to work for you. the one that's going to work for you. the one that's going to work for you. So, you know, read the fine printing the So, you know, read the fine printing the So, you know, read the fine printing the testimonials, but it's got to be testimonials, but it's got to be testimonials, but it's got to be something that works for you. Another something that works for you. Another something that works for you. Another one is the stress management type one is the stress management type one is the stress management type techniques that work. You can't save techniques that work. You can't save techniques that work. You can't save them for the weekend. You can't save them for the weekend. You can't save them for the weekend. You can't save them for when you're stuck on hold on them for when you're stuck on hold on them for when you're stuck on hold on the phone with music for two minutes. the phone with music for two minutes. the phone with music for two minutes. It's got to be something where you stop It's got to be something where you stop It's got to be something where you stop what you're doing and do it virtually what you're doing and do it virtually what you're doing and do it virtually daily or every other day and spend 20, daily or every other day and spend 20, daily or every other day and spend 20, 30 minutes doing it. Whatever stress 30 minutes doing it. Whatever stress 30 minutes doing it. Whatever stress management technique you then do in management technique you then do in management technique you then do in those 20 minutes short of who knows those 20 minutes short of who knows those 20 minutes short of who knows what, you're already 80% of the way what, you're already 80% of the way what, you're already 80% of the way there simply by having decided your there simply by having decided your there simply by having decided your well-being is important enough that well-being is important enough that well-being is important enough that you're going to stop every single day you're going to stop every single day you're going to stop every single day and have that as priority. So there's no and have that as priority. So there's no and have that as priority. So there's no magic breathing tool or exercise. It's magic breathing tool or exercise. It's magic breathing tool or exercise. It's uh any variety of those or one of those. uh any variety of those or one of those. uh any variety of those or one of those. And again, we come back to this idea And again, we come back to this idea And again, we come back to this idea that it's the one that you select and that it's the one that you select and that it's the one that you select and the one that you make space for and it's the one that you make space for and it's the one that you make space for and it's the one that uh you hopefully enjoy the one that uh you hopefully enjoy the one that uh you hopefully enjoy that's going to work best in terms of that's going to work best in terms of that's going to work best in terms of physiology. That brings me to this physiology. That brings me to this physiology. That brings me to this question of I find it amazing that how question of I find it amazing that how question of I find it amazing that how we perceive an event and whether or not we perceive an event and whether or not we perceive an event and whether or not we chose to be in that event or not can we chose to be in that event or not can we chose to be in that event or not can have such incredibly different effects have such incredibly different effects have such incredibly different effects on circuitry of the brain and circuitry on circuitry of the brain and circuitry on circuitry of the brain and circuitry of the body and biology of cells. A and of the body and biology of cells. A and of the body and biology of cells. A and in some ways it boggles my mind like how in some ways it boggles my mind like how in some ways it boggles my mind like how can a decision made presumably with the can a decision made presumably with the can a decision made presumably with the prefrontal cortex although other parts prefrontal cortex although other parts prefrontal cortex although other parts of the brain as well. How can that of the brain as well. How can that of the brain as well. How can that change essentially the polarity of a change essentially the polarity of a change essentially the polarity of a response in the body? And I mean you've response in the body? And I mean you've response in the body? And I mean you've talked before about type A personalities talked before about type A personalities talked before about type A personalities and we don't have to go into all the and we don't have to go into all the and we don't have to go into all the detail there uh for sake of time but it detail there uh for sake of time but it detail there uh for sake of time but it is interesting that the effects of is interesting that the effects of is interesting that the effects of endothelial cells. I mean literally of endothelial cells. I mean literally of endothelial cells. I mean literally of the size of the portals for blood are the size of the portals for blood are the size of the portals for blood are in opposite direction depending on in opposite direction depending on in opposite direction depending on whether or not somebody wants to be in a whether or not somebody wants to be in a whether or not somebody wants to be in a situation is a highly motivated person. situation is a highly motivated person. situation is a highly motivated person. Maybe you could just give us the top Maybe you could just give us the top Maybe you could just give us the top contour of that and then maybe if you contour of that and then maybe if you contour of that and then maybe if you would you could just speculate on how would you could just speculate on how would you could just speculate on how the brain might have this switch to turn the brain might have this switch to turn the brain might have this switch to turn one experience from terrible to one experience from terrible to one experience from terrible to beneficial or from beneficial to beneficial or from beneficial to beneficial or from beneficial to terrible. It's really fascinating. U you terrible. It's really fascinating. U you terrible. It's really fascinating. U you can think autonomic regulatory neurons can think autonomic regulatory neurons can think autonomic regulatory neurons into action in ways that only other into action in ways that only other into action in ways that only other animals can do with like extremes of animals can do with like extremes of animals can do with like extremes of environmental circumstances. You we talk environmental circumstances. You we talk environmental circumstances. You we talk about the optimal amount of stress that about the optimal amount of stress that about the optimal amount of stress that counts as stimulation and in general counts as stimulation and in general counts as stimulation and in general that's stress that's not too severe and that's stress that's not too severe and that's stress that's not too severe and doesn't go on for too long and is doesn't go on for too long and is doesn't go on for too long and is overall in a benevolent setting. And overall in a benevolent setting. And overall in a benevolent setting. And under those conditions, we love being under those conditions, we love being under those conditions, we love being stressed by something unexpected and out stressed by something unexpected and out stressed by something unexpected and out of control and predictability like a of control and predictability like a of control and predictability like a really interesting plot turn in the really interesting plot turn in the really interesting plot turn in the movie you're watching. That's great. But movie you're watching. That's great. But movie you're watching. That's great. But you get the individual differences that you get the individual differences that you get the individual differences that somehow has to accommodate the fact that somehow has to accommodate the fact that somehow has to accommodate the fact that for some people the perfect stimulatory for some people the perfect stimulatory for some people the perfect stimulatory amount of stress is like getting up amount of stress is like getting up amount of stress is like getting up early for an Audabon bird watching walk early for an Audabon bird watching walk early for an Audabon bird watching walk next Sunday morning. And for somebody next Sunday morning. And for somebody next Sunday morning. And for somebody else, it's signing up to be like a else, it's signing up to be like a else, it's signing up to be like a mercenary in Yemen. And tremendous mercenary in Yemen. And tremendous mercenary in Yemen. And tremendous individual differences that swamp any individual differences that swamp any individual differences that swamp any simple, you know, prescriptions. simple, you know, prescriptions. simple, you know, prescriptions. Yeah. The the prefrontal cortex, this Yeah. The the prefrontal cortex, this Yeah. The the prefrontal cortex, this thinking machinery that we all harbor, thinking machinery that we all harbor, thinking machinery that we all harbor, it's such a double-edged sword. uh and it's such a double-edged sword. uh and it's such a double-edged sword. uh and uh what's remarkable to me is how the uh what's remarkable to me is how the uh what's remarkable to me is how the areas of the brain like the hypothalamus areas of the brain like the hypothalamus areas of the brain like the hypothalamus and the amydala they're sort of like and the amydala they're sort of like and the amydala they're sort of like switches. I mean if you stimulate switches. I mean if you stimulate switches. I mean if you stimulate ventromedial hypothalamus you get the ventromedial hypothalamus you get the ventromedial hypothalamus you get the right neurons an animal will try and right neurons an animal will try and right neurons an animal will try and kill even an object that's sitting next kill even an object that's sitting next kill even an object that's sitting next to it. You tickle some other neurons to it. You tickle some other neurons to it. You tickle some other neurons it'll try and mate with that same it'll try and mate with that same it'll try and mate with that same object. I mean it's really wild. I think object. I mean it's really wild. I think object. I mean it's really wild. I think there are probably rules to prefrontal there are probably rules to prefrontal there are probably rules to prefrontal cortex also, but it sounds like the cortex also, but it sounds like the cortex also, but it sounds like the context plural from which prefrontal context plural from which prefrontal context plural from which prefrontal cortex can draw from are is probably cortex can draw from are is probably cortex can draw from are is probably infinite. Um so that we could probably infinite. Um so that we could probably infinite. Um so that we could probably learn to perceive threat in anything learn to perceive threat in anything learn to perceive threat in anything whether or not it's another group or whether or not it's another group or whether or not it's another group or whether or not it's um science or whether or not it's um science or whether or not it's um science or whether or not it's uh somebody's whether or not it's uh somebody's whether or not it's uh somebody's version of the shape of the earth versus version of the shape of the earth versus version of the shape of the earth versus another. I mean, it's like you can another. I mean, it's like you can another. I mean, it's like you can plug in anything to this system and give plug in anything to this system and give plug in anything to this system and give it enough data and I think it sounds it enough data and I think it sounds it enough data and I think it sounds like you could drive a fear response or like you could drive a fear response or like you could drive a fear response or a love response. Is that overstepping? a love response. Is that overstepping? a love response. Is that overstepping? No, that's absolutely the case. No, that's absolutely the case. No, that's absolutely the case. To what extent can we toggle this To what extent can we toggle this To what extent can we toggle this relationship between the prefrontal relationship between the prefrontal relationship between the prefrontal cortex and these other more primitive cortex and these other more primitive cortex and these other more primitive systems? Oh, and an enormous amount. Um Oh, and an enormous amount. Um Oh, and an enormous amount. Um you know for example being low in a you know for example being low in a you know for example being low in a hierarchy um is generally bad for health hierarchy um is generally bad for health hierarchy um is generally bad for health and like every mammal out there and like every mammal out there and like every mammal out there including us. But we do something including us. But we do something including us. But we do something special which is we can be part of special which is we can be part of special which is we can be part of multiple hierarchies at the same time multiple hierarchies at the same time multiple hierarchies at the same time and while you may be low ranking in one and while you may be low ranking in one and while you may be low ranking in one of them, you could be extremely high of them, you could be extremely high of them, you could be extremely high ranking in another. You're like have the ranking in another. You're like have the ranking in another. You're like have the crappiest job in your corporation, but crappiest job in your corporation, but crappiest job in your corporation, but you're the captain of the team softball you're the captain of the team softball you're the captain of the team softball of the softball team this year for the of the softball team this year for the of the softball team this year for the company. And you better bet that's company. And you better bet that's company. And you better bet that's somebody who's going to find all sorts somebody who's going to find all sorts somebody who's going to find all sorts of ways to decide that 9 to5 Monday to of ways to decide that 9 to5 Monday to of ways to decide that 9 to5 Monday to Friday is just stupid paying the bills Friday is just stupid paying the bills Friday is just stupid paying the bills and what really matters is, you know, and what really matters is, you know, and what really matters is, you know, the prestige of the weekend. And so we the prestige of the weekend. And so we the prestige of the weekend. And so we can play all sorts of psychological can play all sorts of psychological can play all sorts of psychological games with that. One of the most like games with that. One of the most like games with that. One of the most like consistent reliable ones that we do and consistent reliable ones that we do and consistent reliable ones that we do and need to use the frontal cortex like need to use the frontal cortex like need to use the frontal cortex like crazy is somebody does something rotten crazy is somebody does something rotten crazy is somebody does something rotten and you need to attribute it. And the and you need to attribute it. And the and you need to attribute it. And the answer is they did something rotten answer is they did something rotten answer is they did something rotten because they're rotten. Always have because they're rotten. Always have because they're rotten. Always have been, always will be this constitutional been, always will be this constitutional been, always will be this constitutional explanation. You do something rotten to explanation. You do something rotten to explanation. You do something rotten to somebody and how do you explain it somebody and how do you explain it somebody and how do you explain it afterward? A situational one. I was afterward? A situational one. I was afterward? A situational one. I was tired. I was stressed. in this sort of tired. I was stressed. in this sort of tired. I was stressed. in this sort of setting. I misunderstood this. Um, we're setting. I misunderstood this. Um, we're setting. I misunderstood this. Um, we're best at excusing ourselves from bad best at excusing ourselves from bad best at excusing ourselves from bad things because we have access to our things because we have access to our things because we have access to our inner lives and we've got prefrontal inner lives and we've got prefrontal inner lives and we've got prefrontal cortexes that are great at coming up cortexes that are great at coming up cortexes that are great at coming up with a situational explanation rather with a situational explanation rather with a situational explanation rather than, hey, maybe you're just like a than, hey, maybe you're just like a than, hey, maybe you're just like a selfish, rotten human. You need to selfish, rotten human. You need to selfish, rotten human. You need to change. And that's all prefrontal change. And that's all prefrontal change. And that's all prefrontal cortex. And we do that every time. We cortex. And we do that every time. We cortex. And we do that every time. We don't let somebody, you know, merge in don't let somebody, you know, merge in don't let somebody, you know, merge in the lane in front of us, even though you the lane in front of us, even though you the lane in front of us, even though you curse somebody who does the same thing curse somebody who does the same thing curse somebody who does the same thing to you and, you know, endlessly. to you and, you know, endlessly. to you and, you know, endlessly. Your I love it. Your statement about uh Your I love it. Your statement about uh Your I love it. Your statement about uh the fact that we can select multiple the fact that we can select multiple the fact that we can select multiple hierarchies to participate in um to me hierarchies to participate in um to me hierarchies to participate in um to me seems like a particularly important one seems like a particularly important one seems like a particularly important one nowadays with social media being so nowadays with social media being so nowadays with social media being so prevalent. But what's interesting about prevalent. But what's interesting about prevalent. But what's interesting about social media I found is that the context social media I found is that the context social media I found is that the context is very broad. As you scroll is very broad. As you scroll is very broad. As you scroll through a feed, you are being exposed to through a feed, you are being exposed to through a feed, you are being exposed to thousands if not millions of context. thousands if not millions of context. thousands if not millions of context. This meal, that soccer game, this This meal, that soccer game, this This meal, that soccer game, this person's body, this person's intellect. person's body, this person's intellect. person's body, this person's intellect. It's a vast landscape. So the It's a vast landscape. So the It's a vast landscape. So the context is completely mishmash. context is completely mishmash. context is completely mishmash. Whereas I'm assuming we evolved, I think Whereas I'm assuming we evolved, I think Whereas I'm assuming we evolved, I think we did evolve under contexts that were we did evolve under contexts that were we did evolve under contexts that were much more constrained. We interacted much more constrained. We interacted much more constrained. We interacted with a limited number of individuals and with a limited number of individuals and with a limited number of individuals and a limited number of different domains. a limited number of different domains. a limited number of different domains. But now more than ever, our brain, our But now more than ever, our brain, our But now more than ever, our brain, our prefrontal cortex and our sense of where prefrontal cortex and our sense of where prefrontal cortex and our sense of where we exist in these multiple hierarchies we exist in these multiple hierarchies we exist in these multiple hierarchies has essentially wicked out into has essentially wicked out into has essentially wicked out into infinity. How do you think this might be infinity. How do you think this might be infinity. How do you think this might be interacting with some of these more um interacting with some of these more um interacting with some of these more um primitive systems and other aspects primitive systems and other aspects primitive systems and other aspects of our of our biology? of our of our biology? of our of our biology? Well, I think what you get is in some Well, I think what you get is in some Well, I think what you get is in some ways the punchline of what's most ways the punchline of what's most ways the punchline of what's most human about humans, which is over and human about humans, which is over and human about humans, which is over and over we use the exact same blueprint, over we use the exact same blueprint, over we use the exact same blueprint, the same hormones, the same kynases, the same hormones, the same kynases, the same hormones, the same kynases, the same receptors, the same everything. same receptors, the same everything. same receptors, the same everything. We're built out of the exact same stuff We're built out of the exact same stuff We're built out of the exact same stuff as all these other species out there. as all these other species out there. as all these other species out there. And then we go and use it in a And then we go and use it in a And then we go and use it in a completely novel way. And usually in completely novel way. And usually in completely novel way. And usually in terms of being able to abstract stuff terms of being able to abstract stuff terms of being able to abstract stuff over space and time and dramatic ways. over space and time and dramatic ways. over space and time and dramatic ways. So, okay, you're a lowranking baboon and So, okay, you're a lowranking baboon and So, okay, you're a lowranking baboon and you can feel badly because you just like you can feel badly because you just like you can feel badly because you just like killed a rabbit and you're about to eat killed a rabbit and you're about to eat killed a rabbit and you're about to eat and some higher ranking guy boots you and some higher ranking guy boots you and some higher ranking guy boots you off and takes it away from you and you off and takes it away from you and you off and takes it away from you and you feel crummy and it's stressful and feel crummy and it's stressful and feel crummy and it's stressful and you're unhappy. We are doing the exact you're unhappy. We are doing the exact you're unhappy. We are doing the exact same things with like our brain and same things with like our brain and same things with like our brain and bodies when we're losing a sense of bodies when we're losing a sense of bodies when we're losing a sense of self-esteem. But we can do it by self-esteem. But we can do it by self-esteem. But we can do it by watching a movie character on the screen watching a movie character on the screen watching a movie character on the screen and feeling inadequate compared to like and feeling inadequate compared to like and feeling inadequate compared to like how wonderful or attractive they are. We how wonderful or attractive they are. We how wonderful or attractive they are. We can do it by somebody driving past us in can do it by somebody driving past us in can do it by somebody driving past us in an expensive car and we don't even see an expensive car and we don't even see an expensive car and we don't even see their face. And you can feel belittled their face. And you can feel belittled their face. And you can feel belittled by your own socioeconomic status. Um, by your own socioeconomic status. Um, by your own socioeconomic status. Um, you can watch like the lifestyles of the you can watch like the lifestyles of the you can watch like the lifestyles of the rich and famous or read about what Bezos rich and famous or read about what Bezos rich and famous or read about what Bezos is up to and for some reason decide your is up to and for some reason decide your is up to and for some reason decide your life is less fulfilling because you your life is less fulfilling because you your life is less fulfilling because you didn't fly into space for 11 minutes. didn't fly into space for 11 minutes. didn't fly into space for 11 minutes. And so you can feel miserable about And so you can feel miserable about And so you can feel miserable about yourself in ways that no other organism yourself in ways that no other organism yourself in ways that no other organism can simply because we can have our can simply because we can have our can simply because we can have our meaningful social networks include like meaningful social networks include like meaningful social networks include like the party you're reading about on the party you're reading about on the party you're reading about on Facebook that you weren't invited to Facebook that you weren't invited to Facebook that you weren't invited to because it's taking place in Singapore because it's taking place in Singapore because it's taking place in Singapore and you don't know any of those people. and you don't know any of those people. and you don't know any of those people. But nonetheless, somehow that could be a But nonetheless, somehow that could be a But nonetheless, somehow that could be a means for you to feel less content with means for you to feel less content with means for you to feel less content with who you've turned out to be. who you've turned out to be. who you've turned out to be. um very grateful to you for this um very grateful to you for this um very grateful to you for this conversation today. I learned a ton. Um conversation today. I learned a ton. Um conversation today. I learned a ton. Um every time you speak I learn and for me every time you speak I learn and for me every time you speak I learn and for me it's really been a pleasure and a it's really been a pleasure and a it's really been a pleasure and a delight to interact with you today and delight to interact with you today and delight to interact with you today and over the previous uh years um I over the previous uh years um I over the previous uh years um I should say as colleagues and um thank should say as colleagues and um thank should say as colleagues and um thank you again Robert for everything that you again Robert for everything that you again Robert for everything that you do and all the hard work and do and all the hard work and do and all the hard work and thinking that you put into your work thinking that you put into your work thinking that you put into your work because it's clear that you put a lot of because it's clear that you put a lot of because it's clear that you put a lot of hard work and thinking and we all hard work and thinking and we all hard work and thinking and we all benefit as a consequence. benefit as a consequence. benefit as a consequence. Thanks, Senator. Thanks for having me. Thanks, Senator. Thanks for having me. Thanks, Senator. Thanks for having me. This was a blast. [Music]