What's the deal? Can people reverse the What's the deal? Can people reverse the What's the deal? Can people reverse the graying of their hair by reducing their graying of their hair by reducing their graying of their hair by reducing their stress? Can people accelerate the stress? Can people accelerate the stress? Can people accelerate the graying of their hair by stressing more? graying of their hair by stressing more? graying of their hair by stressing more? Likely both are true. Yes. Likely both are true. Yes. Likely both are true. Yes. &gt;&gt; Okay. And I think what we discovered is &gt;&gt; Okay. And I think what we discovered is &gt;&gt; Okay. And I think what we discovered is that hair graying, at least temporarily, that hair graying, at least temporarily, that hair graying, at least temporarily, is reversible. This was surprising is reversible. This was surprising is reversible. This was surprising because it goes against this notion that because it goes against this notion that because it goes against this notion that aging is a linear, you know, uh, process aging is a linear, you know, uh, process aging is a linear, you know, uh, process that just happens over time no matter that just happens over time no matter that just happens over time no matter what you do. And here we should know what you do. And here we should know what you do. And here we should know actually a hallmark of aging which is actually a hallmark of aging which is actually a hallmark of aging which is you know depigmentation losing color and you know depigmentation losing color and you know depigmentation losing color and your beard and your hair um is something your beard and your hair um is something your beard and your hair um is something that happens to almost everyone but at that happens to almost everyone but at that happens to almost everyone but at different you know stages of life and different you know stages of life and different you know stages of life and so on and then on the same person and so on and then on the same person and so on and then on the same person and the reason we got into this was that and the reason we got into this was that and the reason we got into this was that this felt like the perfect experiment. this felt like the perfect experiment. this felt like the perfect experiment. Every hair has the same genome. They're Every hair has the same genome. They're Every hair has the same genome. They're all genetically identical twins, right? all genetically identical twins, right? all genetically identical twins, right? And they're all exposed to the same And they're all exposed to the same And they're all exposed to the same exercise regime, the same food, the same exercise regime, the same food, the same exercise regime, the same food, the same stress levels. Uh but yet some hairs go stress levels. Uh but yet some hairs go stress levels. Uh but yet some hairs go gray when you're like late 30s and then gray when you're like late 30s and then gray when you're like late 30s and then some hairs go gray when you're like in some hairs go gray when you're like in some hairs go gray when you're like in your 80s. What the hell's happening? If your 80s. What the hell's happening? If your 80s. What the hell's happening? If we could figure this out, maybe we can we could figure this out, maybe we can we could figure this out, maybe we can understand why different people age at understand why different people age at understand why different people age at different rates. different rates. different rates. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very clear that there's &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very clear that there's &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very clear that there's no more than 10% of how long you live no more than 10% of how long you live no more than 10% of how long you live that genetically driven. Like the best that genetically driven. Like the best that genetically driven. Like the best studies put this at around 7%. 7% of studies put this at around 7%. 7% of studies put this at around 7%. 7% of longevity is genetically inherited maybe longevity is genetically inherited maybe longevity is genetically inherited maybe and then about 90% is not. Welcome to and then about 90% is not. Welcome to and then about 90% is not. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we the Huberman Lab podcast where we the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools discuss science and science-based tools discuss science and science-based tools [music] for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Martin Peard. Dr. Martin today is Dr. Martin Peard. Dr. Martin today is Dr. Martin Peard. Dr. Martin Peard is a professor of behavioral Peard is a professor of behavioral Peard is a professor of behavioral medicine at Columbia University. He is medicine at Columbia University. He is medicine at Columbia University. He is also a leading expert on how your daily also a leading expert on how your daily also a leading expert on how your daily behaviors and your mode of thinking, behaviors and your mode of thinking, behaviors and your mode of thinking, meaning your psychology, change energy meaning your psychology, change energy meaning your psychology, change energy production in your cells and can production in your cells and can production in your cells and can accelerate or reverse biological aging. accelerate or reverse biological aging. accelerate or reverse biological aging. Most people have heard of mitochondria Most people have heard of mitochondria Most people have heard of mitochondria as the energy producing organels within as the energy producing organels within as the energy producing organels within their cells. And of course, that's their cells. And of course, that's their cells. And of course, that's linked to what we call metabolism and linked to what we call metabolism and linked to what we call metabolism and metabolic health. And of course, most metabolic health. And of course, most metabolic health. And of course, most people understand that eating properly, people understand that eating properly, people understand that eating properly, exercising, and sleep are critical for exercising, and sleep are critical for exercising, and sleep are critical for metabolic health. But it turns out metabolic health. But it turns out metabolic health. But it turns out that's only part of the story. As Dr. that's only part of the story. As Dr. that's only part of the story. As Dr. Bicard explains, "Mychondria don't just Bicard explains, "Mychondria don't just Bicard explains, "Mychondria don't just make energy. They act as sort of make energy. They act as sort of make energy. They act as sort of antennas to link your psychological antennas to link your psychological antennas to link your psychological experiences to your organ health, your experiences to your organ health, your experiences to your organ health, your rate of aging, and your sense of vigor, rate of aging, and your sense of vigor, rate of aging, and your sense of vigor, meaning your mental and physical meaning your mental and physical meaning your mental and physical readiness." He explains that how well readiness." He explains that how well readiness." He explains that how well your mitochondria work in different your mitochondria work in different your mitochondria work in different organs and brain areas reflects what organs and brain areas reflects what organs and brain areas reflects what specific forms of exercise you do, as specific forms of exercise you do, as specific forms of exercise you do, as well as how you think and how you manage well as how you think and how you manage well as how you think and how you manage stress. Today he explains the things stress. Today he explains the things stress. Today he explains the things that you can do to enhance mitochondrial that you can do to enhance mitochondrial that you can do to enhance mitochondrial function that go beyond the typical get function that go beyond the typical get function that go beyond the typical get sleep, eat right, and exercise advice. sleep, eat right, and exercise advice. sleep, eat right, and exercise advice. His lab has shown that aging is not His lab has shown that aging is not His lab has shown that aging is not linear. It's not just a progression from linear. It's not just a progression from linear. It's not just a progression from youth to death where your mitochondria youth to death where your mitochondria youth to death where your mitochondria decline over that time. At different decline over that time. At different decline over that time. At different ages and stages, mitochondrial health ages and stages, mitochondrial health ages and stages, mitochondrial health drops off like a cliff. But there are drops off like a cliff. But there are drops off like a cliff. But there are critical things that you can do in terms critical things that you can do in terms critical things that you can do in terms of how you eat, your mindset, and of how you eat, your mindset, and of how you eat, your mindset, and exercise that can offset those changes. exercise that can offset those changes. exercise that can offset those changes. His lab also famously showed that His lab also famously showed that His lab also famously showed that graying of hair is indeed related to graying of hair is indeed related to graying of hair is indeed related to stress and is also fortunately stress and is also fortunately stress and is also fortunately reversible. By the end of today's reversible. By the end of today's reversible. By the end of today's episode, you will not only have had a episode, you will not only have had a episode, you will not only have had a master class in mitochondria, he master class in mitochondria, he master class in mitochondria, he explains mitochondria with immense explains mitochondria with immense explains mitochondria with immense clarity so that you really will clarity so that you really will clarity so that you really will understand how these incredible organels understand how these incredible organels understand how these incredible organels work to produce energy and as these sort work to produce energy and as these sort work to produce energy and as these sort of antennas to direct that energy from of antennas to direct that energy from of antennas to direct that energy from outside you and by the things you do. outside you and by the things you do. outside you and by the things you do. And by the end of today's episode, And by the end of today's episode, And by the end of today's episode, you'll also have a lot of actionable you'll also have a lot of actionable you'll also have a lot of actionable items that you can apply toward your items that you can apply toward your items that you can apply toward your health and to offset aging. Before we health and to offset aging. Before we health and to offset aging. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools about science and science related tools about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Martin Peard. Dr. Martin Peard, Dr. Martin Peard. Dr. Martin Peard, Dr. Martin Peard. Dr. Martin Peard, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Your work is so relevant &gt;&gt; Thank you. Your work is so relevant &gt;&gt; Thank you. Your work is so relevant nowadays. I suppose it was relevant nowadays. I suppose it was relevant nowadays. I suppose it was relevant always, but these days we hear so much always, but these days we hear so much always, but these days we hear so much about mitochondria. Most people have about mitochondria. Most people have about mitochondria. Most people have perhaps heard of mitochondria, they perhaps heard of mitochondria, they perhaps heard of mitochondria, they think the powerhouse of the cell, but think the powerhouse of the cell, but think the powerhouse of the cell, but you're going to tell us that it's a lot you're going to tell us that it's a lot you're going to tell us that it's a lot more than that. And I should say right more than that. And I should say right more than that. And I should say right off the bat that if people think that off the bat that if people think that off the bat that if people think that perhaps a discussion about these little perhaps a discussion about these little perhaps a discussion about these little organels we call mitochondria is not for organels we call mitochondria is not for organels we call mitochondria is not for them, keep in mind Martin's laboratory them, keep in mind Martin's laboratory them, keep in mind Martin's laboratory was the one that discovered that you can was the one that discovered that you can was the one that discovered that you can indeed reverse the graying of your hair. indeed reverse the graying of your hair. indeed reverse the graying of your hair. Uh that graying of hair is not a Uh that graying of hair is not a Uh that graying of hair is not a prerequisite uh of aging. There's some prerequisite uh of aging. There's some prerequisite uh of aging. There's some other ways that hair grays. So we'll get other ways that hair grays. So we'll get other ways that hair grays. So we'll get to that later. Super interesting work. I to that later. Super interesting work. I to that later. Super interesting work. I have a million questions for you. Let's have a million questions for you. Let's have a million questions for you. Let's start off with the most important and start off with the most important and start off with the most important and most basic question which is what is most basic question which is what is most basic question which is what is this thing that we call energy? There's this thing that we call energy? There's this thing that we call energy? There's electrical energy. We know the sun gives electrical energy. We know the sun gives electrical energy. We know the sun gives us energy etc. But when we're talking us energy etc. But when we're talking us energy etc. But when we're talking about the energy of life about the energy of life about the energy of life &gt;&gt; physical and mental vigor, the feeling &gt;&gt; physical and mental vigor, the feeling &gt;&gt; physical and mental vigor, the feeling that we want to do something as opposed that we want to do something as opposed that we want to do something as opposed to have to force ourselves to do it. to have to force ourselves to do it. to have to force ourselves to do it. What is this at the organism and What is this at the organism and What is this at the organism and cellular level? I mean even physicists cellular level? I mean even physicists cellular level? I mean even physicists don't agree on what energy is and don't agree on what energy is and don't agree on what energy is and there's been debates you know Richard there's been debates you know Richard there's been debates you know Richard Fineman who was like this amazing Fineman who was like this amazing Fineman who was like this amazing science communicator physicist said like science communicator physicist said like science communicator physicist said like we don't even know what energy is and we don't even know what energy is and we don't even know what energy is and what's the best way to define it because what's the best way to define it because what's the best way to define it because there are all of these forms thermal there are all of these forms thermal there are all of these forms thermal energy heat right energy electromagnetic energy heat right energy electromagnetic energy heat right energy electromagnetic uh kinetic energy movement speed right uh kinetic energy movement speed right uh kinetic energy movement speed right uh potential energy so uh energy kind of uh potential energy so uh energy kind of uh potential energy so uh energy kind of manifests in all of these different ways manifests in all of these different ways manifests in all of these different ways so in a nutshell I think the best so in a nutshell I think the best so in a nutshell I think the best definition I've heard uh from definition I've heard uh from definition I've heard uh from my wife Nosha is uh who's a biohysicist my wife Nosha is uh who's a biohysicist my wife Nosha is uh who's a biohysicist energy is the potential for change energy is the potential for change energy is the potential for change &gt;&gt; right so and that applies to any kind of &gt;&gt; right so and that applies to any kind of &gt;&gt; right so and that applies to any kind of form any form of energy you can think form any form of energy you can think form any form of energy you can think about it's the potential for change for about it's the potential for change for about it's the potential for change for changing something in the system and changing something in the system and changing something in the system and that's uh I think an accurate that's uh I think an accurate that's uh I think an accurate description of you know thermal energy description of you know thermal energy description of you know thermal energy if something is frozen solid there's no if something is frozen solid there's no if something is frozen solid there's no you know potential for moving you know potential for moving you know potential for moving something we need to be at 37 7 Celsius, something we need to be at 37 7 Celsius, something we need to be at 37 7 Celsius, right? The human body it gives us the right? The human body it gives us the right? The human body it gives us the potential to move and muscles to potential to move and muscles to potential to move and muscles to contract and you know our biology to contract and you know our biology to contract and you know our biology to function. So this is just one example to function. So this is just one example to function. So this is just one example where there's like a sweet spot of where there's like a sweet spot of where there's like a sweet spot of energy or there needs to be some thermal energy or there needs to be some thermal energy or there needs to be some thermal energy. You need to be a little warm to energy. You need to be a little warm to energy. You need to be a little warm to be alive. be alive. be alive. &gt;&gt; Um uh so the potential for change and &gt;&gt; Um uh so the potential for change and &gt;&gt; Um uh so the potential for change and then it manifests in all these beautiful then it manifests in all these beautiful then it manifests in all these beautiful ways. Uh and it's something that flows. ways. Uh and it's something that flows. ways. Uh and it's something that flows. You know when a key property of You know when a key property of You know when a key property of energy is something that has the ability energy is something that has the ability energy is something that has the ability to flow and to transform. So you can to flow and to transform. So you can to flow and to transform. So you can never create nor destroy energy, right? never create nor destroy energy, right? never create nor destroy energy, right? That's like a fundamental law of That's like a fundamental law of That's like a fundamental law of thermodynamics. But energy always thermodynamics. But energy always thermodynamics. But energy always transforms. So you can transform heat, transforms. So you can transform heat, transforms. So you can transform heat, right, into motion, right? And like the right, into motion, right? And like the right, into motion, right? And like the steam engine, for example, through the steam engine, for example, through the steam engine, for example, through pressure, another form of energy. Uh or pressure, another form of energy. Uh or pressure, another form of energy. Uh or you can transform electricity into, you can transform electricity into, you can transform electricity into, you know, a picture on your screen. That's, know, a picture on your screen. That's, know, a picture on your screen. That's, you know, what your computer does. uh you know, what your computer does. uh you know, what your computer does. uh transforms your raw energy electricity transforms your raw energy electricity transforms your raw energy electricity into you know a picture a sound or um so into you know a picture a sound or um so into you know a picture a sound or um so that's what happens all around us. It's that's what happens all around us. It's that's what happens all around us. It's all you know energy moving transforming all you know energy moving transforming all you know energy moving transforming energy from the sun this outer you know energy from the sun this outer you know energy from the sun this outer you know reactor in you know nuclear reactor in reactor in you know nuclear reactor in reactor in you know nuclear reactor in outer space beams energy at us and then outer space beams energy at us and then outer space beams energy at us and then what plants do is they take that energy what plants do is they take that energy what plants do is they take that energy transform you know light into transform you know light into transform you know light into biochemistry and then you get energy biochemistry and then you get energy biochemistry and then you get energy which used to be immaterial that gets which used to be immaterial that gets which used to be immaterial that gets crystallized into biochemistry and then crystallized into biochemistry and then crystallized into biochemistry and then we human beings animals eat that biochem we human beings animals eat that biochem we human beings animals eat that biochem cold energy and then the inner cold energy and then the inner cold energy and then the inner mitochondria that energy gets mitochondria that energy gets mitochondria that energy gets transformed Right? Again, the potential transformed Right? Again, the potential transformed Right? Again, the potential for change and then the that biochemical for change and then the that biochemical for change and then the that biochemical energy gets transformed into an energy gets transformed into an energy gets transformed into an electrochemical gradient. Like you electrochemical gradient. Like you electrochemical gradient. Like you charge your little batteries, your charge your little batteries, your charge your little batteries, your mitochondria and then that's another mitochondria and then that's another mitochondria and then that's another form of energy which again is a form of energy which again is a form of energy which again is a potential for change. And then you can potential for change. And then you can potential for change. And then you can make ATP with this. You can make ATP with this. You can make ATP with this. You can make reactive oxygen species, you can make reactive oxygen species, you can make reactive oxygen species, you can make hormones, you can you know all of the hormones, you can you know all of the hormones, you can you know all of the beautiful things that mitochondria do. beautiful things that mitochondria do. beautiful things that mitochondria do. So energy is that potential for change So energy is that potential for change So energy is that potential for change that has all of these different forms that has all of these different forms that has all of these different forms that continuously transforms. that continuously transforms. that continuously transforms. &gt;&gt; Amazing. Or you can use your brain to &gt;&gt; Amazing. Or you can use your brain to &gt;&gt; Amazing. Or you can use your brain to create technologies that create other create technologies that create other create technologies that create other forms of energy or excuse me transform forms of energy or excuse me transform forms of energy or excuse me transform other forms of energy. other forms of energy. other forms of energy. &gt;&gt; Exactly. uh and your question it was &gt;&gt; Exactly. uh and your question it was &gt;&gt; Exactly. uh and your question it was about you know the human energy about you know the human energy about you know the human energy vitality like you know the vitality like you know the vitality like you know the energy to do something and that's I energy to do something and that's I energy to do something and that's I think another manifestation of energy as think another manifestation of energy as think another manifestation of energy as energy flows through this thing that we energy flows through this thing that we energy flows through this thing that we call biology or you know the human call biology or you know the human call biology or you know the human body uh it kind of moves us into body uh it kind of moves us into body uh it kind of moves us into action right and uh we know from first action right and uh we know from first action right and uh we know from first principles that the basis for principles that the basis for principles that the basis for human experiences you know the mind and human experiences you know the mind and human experiences you know the mind and our ability to be inspired to feel our ability to be inspired to feel our ability to be inspired to feel you positive things or to feel negative you positive things or to feel negative you positive things or to feel negative things depends on the flow of energy, things depends on the flow of energy, things depends on the flow of energy, right? That the difference between a right? That the difference between a right? That the difference between a thinking, feeling, conscious person thinking, feeling, conscious person thinking, feeling, conscious person having experiences and uh being able to having experiences and uh being able to having experiences and uh being able to go to the gym and lift and like or and a go to the gym and lift and like or and a go to the gym and lift and like or and a cadaavver is really it's not the size of cadaavver is really it's not the size of cadaavver is really it's not the size of the muscles, the number of cells, the muscles, the number of cells, the muscles, the number of cells, the nucleus, the genes, the mitochondria. nucleus, the genes, the mitochondria. nucleus, the genes, the mitochondria. It's none of this. The difference It's none of this. The difference It's none of this. The difference between a living person and a cadaavver between a living person and a cadaavver between a living person and a cadaavver is the flow of energy. When you die, all is the flow of energy. When you die, all is the flow of energy. When you die, all of the structure, you know, the physical of the structure, you know, the physical of the structure, you know, the physical stuff remains as is, but energy stops stuff remains as is, but energy stops stuff remains as is, but energy stops flowing. If you stop breathing, if your flowing. If you stop breathing, if your flowing. If you stop breathing, if your heart stops beating, energy flow stops heart stops beating, energy flow stops heart stops beating, energy flow stops and then energy transformation, and then energy transformation, and then energy transformation, therefore it can't happen. And then therefore it can't happen. And then therefore it can't happen. And then that's what we call death and then the that's what we call death and then the that's what we call death and then the mind dies, right? Like you don't mind dies, right? Like you don't mind dies, right? Like you don't have an experience anymore. And um so have an experience anymore. And um so have an experience anymore. And um so the flow of energy I think has to be the flow of energy I think has to be the flow of energy I think has to be the basis not only of life which we the basis not only of life which we the basis not only of life which we know you know to be to be correct but know you know to be to be correct but know you know to be to be correct but also the basis of human experiences and also the basis of human experiences and also the basis of human experiences and what we experience as energy. We think what we experience as energy. We think what we experience as energy. We think about energy. We we crave energy and we about energy. We we crave energy and we about energy. We we crave energy and we know and the way we talk about you know and the way we talk about you know and the way we talk about you know this person is really good energy or this person is really good energy or this person is really good energy or this thing you know really energize me this thing you know really energize me this thing you know really energize me or you know had this great idea your or you know had this great idea your or you know had this great idea your friend was telling you I had this great friend was telling you I had this great friend was telling you I had this great idea I'm buzzing man like what's that idea I'm buzzing man like what's that idea I'm buzzing man like what's that buzzing thing it is a real experience buzzing thing it is a real experience buzzing thing it is a real experience and uh most people have you know had the and uh most people have you know had the and uh most people have you know had the experience of feeling really excited the experience of feeling really excited the experience of feeling really excited about something right a new idea a new about something right a new idea a new about something right a new idea a new person and then you know you have person and then you know you have person and then you know you have butterflies and you know their emotions butterflies and you know their emotions butterflies and you know their emotions going on in your body. I suspect going on in your body. I suspect going on in your body. I suspect emotions the best kind of first emotions the best kind of first emotions the best kind of first principles definition of an emotion is principles definition of an emotion is principles definition of an emotion is energy and motion energy and motion energy and motion &gt;&gt; and uh we can talk more about like uh &gt;&gt; and uh we can talk more about like uh &gt;&gt; and uh we can talk more about like uh what we experience in terms of energy what we experience in terms of energy what we experience in terms of energy but I think it's pretty clear we don't but I think it's pretty clear we don't but I think it's pretty clear we don't experience energy per se like you don't experience energy per se like you don't experience energy per se like you don't have a direct experience have a direct experience have a direct experience um an empirical uh you know access to um an empirical uh you know access to um an empirical uh you know access to how much fat you have in your body like how much fat you have in your body like how much fat you have in your body like there are hormones that communicate and there are hormones that communicate and there are hormones that communicate and you know how much energy is in your you know how much energy is in your you know how much energy is in your liver and or how much you heat uh is liver and or how much you heat uh is liver and or how much you heat uh is in you know something what you feel what in you know something what you feel what in you know something what you feel what you experience is a change in energy you experience is a change in energy you experience is a change in energy when energy moves you feel that right when energy moves you feel that right when energy moves you feel that right and I suspect that's what emotions are and I suspect that's what emotions are and I suspect that's what emotions are there's like a movement of energy there's like a movement of energy there's like a movement of energy something shifts and then you experience something shifts and then you experience something shifts and then you experience that a bit like uh like if you're in that a bit like uh like if you're in that a bit like uh like if you're in a car and your eyes are closed and a car and your eyes are closed and a car and your eyes are closed and you're going constant speed right you're going constant speed right you're going constant speed right kinetic energy you have no way of kinetic energy you have no way of kinetic energy you have no way of knowing from first experience if you're knowing from first experience if you're knowing from first experience if you're going at 100 miles an hour 10 miles an going at 100 miles an hour 10 miles an going at 100 miles an hour 10 miles an hour or if you're standing still. These hour or if you're standing still. These hour or if you're standing still. These are very different energy, energetic are very different energy, energetic are very different energy, energetic quantities, right? The kinetic energy. quantities, right? The kinetic energy. quantities, right? The kinetic energy. Uh what you do feel is acceleration and Uh what you do feel is acceleration and Uh what you do feel is acceleration and deceleration. You feel the delta in deceleration. You feel the delta in deceleration. You feel the delta in energy, &gt;&gt; right? The change in energy, &gt;&gt; right? The change in energy, &gt;&gt; right? The change in energy, acceleration, deceleration. Same with acceleration, deceleration. Same with acceleration, deceleration. Same with temperature. Like if you touch something temperature. Like if you touch something temperature. Like if you touch something and it's body temperature, right? The and it's body temperature, right? The and it's body temperature, right? The same temperature as your hand, you don't same temperature as your hand, you don't same temperature as your hand, you don't feel it. You don't feel, you know, room feel it. You don't feel, you know, room feel it. You don't feel, you know, room temperature, you know, or body temperature, you know, or body temperature, you know, or body temperature. What you feel if some you temperature. What you feel if some you temperature. What you feel if some you touch something that's cooler than your touch something that's cooler than your touch something that's cooler than your body, what you're feeling is not the body, what you're feeling is not the body, what you're feeling is not the temperature of what you're touching. temperature of what you're touching. temperature of what you're touching. You're feeling your temperature leaving You're feeling your temperature leaving You're feeling your temperature leaving your body, right? It's the heat of your body, right? It's the heat of your body, right? It's the heat of your body leaving through conduction towards body leaving through conduction towards body leaving through conduction towards this. And then that's what you this. And then that's what you this. And then that's what you experience. And if you touch something experience. And if you touch something experience. And if you touch something that's hot, you're not feeling in the that's hot, you're not feeling in the that's hot, you're not feeling in the energy of the thing, you're feeling the energy of the thing, you're feeling the energy of the thing, you're feeling the heat that's coming into your body. So heat that's coming into your body. So heat that's coming into your body. So you feel that delta and that change. And you feel that delta and that change. And you feel that delta and that change. And that's how human perception also uh that's how human perception also uh that's how human perception also uh works. like you we're able to see colors works. like you we're able to see colors works. like you we're able to see colors to see light. You've studied the to see light. You've studied the to see light. You've studied the visual system a lot. You know, visual system a lot. You know, visual system a lot. You know, fundamentally the ability of the eye of fundamentally the ability of the eye of fundamentally the ability of the eye of the retina to perceive, right? To to the retina to perceive, right? To to the retina to perceive, right? To to sense light uh requires that you bring sense light uh requires that you bring sense light uh requires that you bring photons, right, that are beaming from photons, right, that are beaming from photons, right, that are beaming from whatever source, short, long wavelength. whatever source, short, long wavelength. whatever source, short, long wavelength. Uh you need to bring them into Uh you need to bring them into Uh you need to bring them into stillness, right? You need to resist the stillness, right? You need to resist the stillness, right? You need to resist the flow of photons. And then so you flow of photons. And then so you flow of photons. And then so you change the speed of the photon and it's change the speed of the photon and it's change the speed of the photon and it's that change in energy. you get kinetic that change in energy. you get kinetic that change in energy. you get kinetic energy, speed of light [laughter] energy, speed of light [laughter] energy, speed of light [laughter] and then boom that when that the and then boom that when that the and then boom that when that the delta v the change in the delta v the change in the delta v the change in speed uh happens this is when you can speed uh happens this is when you can speed uh happens this is when you can you can trigger you a calcium release you can trigger you a calcium release you can trigger you a calcium release and then molecular series of events and then molecular series of events and then molecular series of events and action potential and so in order to see action potential and so in order to see action potential and so in order to see you need to resist the flow of photons you need to resist the flow of photons you need to resist the flow of photons right you need to uh resist you know right you need to uh resist you know right you need to uh resist you know energy movement and then that triggers a energy movement and then that triggers a energy movement and then that triggers a transformation same for hearing right we transformation same for hearing right we transformation same for hearing right we here and I hear your voice uh because my here and I hear your voice uh because my here and I hear your voice uh because my eardrum resists the pressure waves that eardrum resists the pressure waves that eardrum resists the pressure waves that you know you're producing. So your you know you're producing. So your you know you're producing. So your energy is being channeled and projected energy is being channeled and projected energy is being channeled and projected through the air as sound waves, through the air as sound waves, through the air as sound waves, another form of energy. And then I'm another form of energy. And then I'm another form of energy. And then I'm feeling you right through your energy feeling you right through your energy feeling you right through your energy that's carried through the air. And then that's carried through the air. And then that's carried through the air. And then because my eardrum resists the because my eardrum resists the because my eardrum resists the pressure wave that you're producing and pressure wave that you're producing and pressure wave that you're producing and then it's that resistance right and that then it's that resistance right and that then it's that resistance right and that change that delta again in speed by change that delta again in speed by change that delta again in speed by resisting your the sound waves coming resisting your the sound waves coming resisting your the sound waves coming from you by resisting your energy now I from you by resisting your energy now I from you by resisting your energy now I can perceive them and then the little can perceive them and then the little can perceive them and then the little osticles in the ear that transmit what osticles in the ear that transmit what osticles in the ear that transmit what used to be pressure waves into now used to be pressure waves into now used to be pressure waves into now mechanical motion and then into like mechanical motion and then into like mechanical motion and then into like fluid into the inner ear and then the fluid into the inner ear and then the fluid into the inner ear and then the cilia that move and then ions that come cilia that move and then ions that come cilia that move and then ions that come in then eventually they get transformed in then eventually they get transformed in then eventually they get transformed into electricity right so again it's one into electricity right so again it's one into electricity right so again it's one form of energy pressure waves turn into form of energy pressure waves turn into form of energy pressure waves turn into electricity and then the brain uses electricity and then the brain uses electricity and then the brain uses electricity as a form of energy. There electricity as a form of energy. There electricity as a form of energy. There can there are many right but that can there are many right but that can there are many right but that electricity is just so amendable to electricity is just so amendable to electricity is just so amendable to computation processing and integration. computation processing and integration. computation processing and integration. So once you have this common energetic So once you have this common energetic So once you have this common energetic language for sight for hearing for you language for sight for hearing for you language for sight for hearing for you know uh touch and smell and taste know uh touch and smell and taste know uh touch and smell and taste then you can integrate that we perceive then you can integrate that we perceive then you can integrate that we perceive energy uh transformation and change in energy uh transformation and change in energy uh transformation and change in energy. We don't perceive energy, you energy. We don't perceive energy, you energy. We don't perceive energy, you know, per se. know, per se. know, per se. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on the Hubberman Lab podcast and before on the Hubberman Lab podcast and before on the Hubberman Lab podcast and elsewhere about the fact that getting a elsewhere about the fact that getting a elsewhere about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of great night's sleep is the foundation of great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in terms of on makes a huge difference in terms of on makes a huge difference in terms of the quality of sleep that you get each the quality of sleep that you get each the quality of sleep that you get each night. how soft it is, how firm it is, night. how soft it is, how firm it is, night. how soft it is, how firm it is, how breathable it is, the temperature, how breathable it is, the temperature, how breathable it is, the temperature, all play into your comfort and needs to all play into your comfort and needs to all play into your comfort and needs to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you'll If you go to the Helix website, you'll If you go to the Helix website, you'll take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will ask you questions such as, do you tend ask you questions such as, do you tend ask you questions such as, do you tend to sleep on your back, your side, or to sleep on your back, your side, or to sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe you don't know, but your stomach? Maybe you don't know, but your stomach? Maybe you don't know, but it will also ask you, do you tend to run it will also ask you, do you tend to run it will also ask you, do you tend to run hot or cold during the night or the hot or cold during the night or the hot or cold during the night or the early part of the night, etc. Things of early part of the night, etc. Things of early part of the night, etc. Things of that sort. Maybe you know the answers to that sort. Maybe you know the answers to that sort. Maybe you know the answers to those questions, maybe you don't. But those questions, maybe you don't. But those questions, maybe you don't. But either way, Helix will match you to the either way, Helix will match you to the either way, Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that ideal mattress for you. For me, that ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress, Dus turned out to be the Dusk mattress, Dus turned out to be the Dusk mattress, Dus SK. I started sleeping on the Dusk SK. I started sleeping on the Dusk SK. I started sleeping on the Dusk mattress about 3 and a half years ago, mattress about 3 and a half years ago, mattress about 3 and a half years ago, and it's been far and away the best and it's been far and away the best and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. It's sleep that I've ever had. It's sleep that I've ever had. It's absolutely clear to me that having a absolutely clear to me that having a absolutely clear to me that having a mattress that's right for you does mattress that's right for you does mattress that's right for you does improve one's sleep. If you'd like to improve one's sleep. If you'd like to improve one's sleep. If you'd like to try Helix, you can go to try Helix, you can go to try Helix, you can go to helixleep.com/huberman, take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that is will match you to a mattress that is will match you to a mattress that is customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 20% off sitewide. Helix has giving up to 20% off sitewide. Helix has giving up to 20% off sitewide. Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, which also teamed up with TrueMed, which also teamed up with TrueMed, which allows you to use your HSA FSA dollars allows you to use your HSA FSA dollars allows you to use your HSA FSA dollars to shop Helix's award-winning to shop Helix's award-winning to shop Helix's award-winning mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's helix.com/huberman to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Lingo. Glucose is also brought to us by Lingo. Glucose is also brought to us by Lingo. Glucose is a key player in how our body functions, a key player in how our body functions, a key player in how our body functions, not just in the long term, but in every not just in the long term, but in every not just in the long term, but in every moment of our lives. That's because it moment of our lives. That's because it moment of our lives. That's because it is the major fuel for our cells, is the major fuel for our cells, is the major fuel for our cells, especially our brain cells. Glucose especially our brain cells. Glucose especially our brain cells. Glucose directly impacts our brain function, directly impacts our brain function, directly impacts our brain function, mood, and energy levels. and it may even mood, and energy levels. and it may even mood, and energy levels. and it may even affect our levels of tenacity and affect our levels of tenacity and affect our levels of tenacity and willpower. This is why I use the willpower. This is why I use the willpower. This is why I use the continuous glucose monitor from Lingo. I continuous glucose monitor from Lingo. I continuous glucose monitor from Lingo. I absolutely love it and I'm thrilled to absolutely love it and I'm thrilled to absolutely love it and I'm thrilled to have them as a sponsor of the podcast. have them as a sponsor of the podcast. have them as a sponsor of the podcast. Lingo helps me track my glucose in real Lingo helps me track my glucose in real Lingo helps me track my glucose in real time to see how the foods I eat and the time to see how the foods I eat and the time to see how the foods I eat and the actions I take impact my glucose. When actions I take impact my glucose. When actions I take impact my glucose. When glucose in your body spikes or crashes, glucose in your body spikes or crashes, glucose in your body spikes or crashes, your cognitive and physical performance your cognitive and physical performance your cognitive and physical performance do too. In fact, large glucose peaks and do too. In fact, large glucose peaks and do too. In fact, large glucose peaks and valleys lead to brain fog, fatigue, valleys lead to brain fog, fatigue, valleys lead to brain fog, fatigue, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes and big crashes and others do not. But and big crashes and others do not. But and big crashes and others do not. But not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Visit hellolingo.com/huberman Visit hellolingo.com/huberman Visit hellolingo.com/huberman for more information. The Lingo glucose for more information. The Lingo glucose for more information. The Lingo glucose system is for users 18 and older, not on system is for users 18 and older, not on system is for users 18 and older, not on insulin. It is not intended for the insulin. It is not intended for the insulin. It is not intended for the diagnosis of diseases including diagnosis of diseases including diagnosis of diseases including diabetes. Individual responses may vary. diabetes. Individual responses may vary. diabetes. Individual responses may vary. Your description uh brings to mind a Your description uh brings to mind a Your description uh brings to mind a number of things but uh years ago a number of things but uh years ago a number of things but uh years ago a colleague of mine who unfortunately now colleague of mine who unfortunately now colleague of mine who unfortunately now has passed um stopped me in the hallway has passed um stopped me in the hallway has passed um stopped me in the hallway at Stanford this was Ben Barers my at Stanford this was Ben Barers my at Stanford this was Ben Barers my postto adviser later my colleague as a postto adviser later my colleague as a postto adviser later my colleague as a faculty member he said faculty member he said faculty member he said why do we have so much less energy as we why do we have so much less energy as we why do we have so much less energy as we get older and [laughter] I said well get older and [laughter] I said well get older and [laughter] I said well it's probably not a concern with you Ben it's probably not a concern with you Ben it's probably not a concern with you Ben I mean he was known for having I mean he was known for having I mean he was known for having tremendous amounts of energy he probably tremendous amounts of energy he probably tremendous amounts of energy he probably only slept four or five hours a night only slept four or five hours a night only slept four or five hours a night but in any case I said I don't know and but in any case I said I don't know and but in any case I said I don't know and he goes well how come no 's working on he goes well how come no 's working on he goes well how come no 's working on that? Like, why are we working on all that? Like, why are we working on all that? Like, why are we working on all this other stupid stuff? And I won't this other stupid stuff? And I won't this other stupid stuff? And I won't tell you what he listed off cuz some of tell you what he listed off cuz some of tell you what he listed off cuz some of it was stuff in his laboratory. Um, and it was stuff in his laboratory. Um, and it was stuff in his laboratory. Um, and I said, "Well, that stuff's interesting, I said, "Well, that stuff's interesting, I said, "Well, that stuff's interesting, too." He goes, "But nothing is more too." He goes, "But nothing is more too." He goes, "But nothing is more interesting than why we have less energy interesting than why we have less energy interesting than why we have less energy as we get older, except perhaps why it as we get older, except perhaps why it as we get older, except perhaps why it is that the brain can't change as is that the brain can't change as is that the brain can't change as readily &gt;&gt; and when we're young as opposed to &gt;&gt; and when we're young as opposed to &gt;&gt; and when we're young as opposed to older." you said something very older." you said something very older." you said something very important to uh underscore and that I'd important to uh underscore and that I'd important to uh underscore and that I'd like to get into a bit more which is you like to get into a bit more which is you like to get into a bit more which is you said you know or your partner said um uh said you know or your partner said um uh said you know or your partner said um uh energy is the potential for change and energy is the potential for change and energy is the potential for change and you mentioned emotions they stir us you mentioned emotions they stir us you mentioned emotions they stir us right and that feeling especially right and that feeling especially right and that feeling especially of positive anticipation is so much of positive anticipation is so much of positive anticipation is so much of what we live for in fact the what we live for in fact the what we live for in fact the &gt;&gt; the signature feature of major &gt;&gt; the signature feature of major &gt;&gt; the signature feature of major depression is lack of depression is lack of depression is lack of &gt;&gt; of kind of any idea that there is a &gt;&gt; of kind of any idea that there is a &gt;&gt; of kind of any idea that there is a future worth living into future worth living into future worth living into &gt;&gt; apathy. &gt;&gt; apathy. &gt;&gt; apathy. &gt;&gt; So apathy etc. Whereas vitality and &gt;&gt; So apathy etc. Whereas vitality and &gt;&gt; So apathy etc. Whereas vitality and excitement and everything good about excitement and everything good about excitement and everything good about life is about wanting to know what comes life is about wanting to know what comes life is about wanting to know what comes next. So if we take a um a biohysical to next. So if we take a um a biohysical to next. So if we take a um a biohysical to cellular to psychological set of steps cellular to psychological set of steps cellular to psychological set of steps here we would say that somehow energy is here we would say that somehow energy is here we would say that somehow energy is converted into uh this internal converted into uh this internal converted into uh this internal vibration which we call emotions that vibration which we call emotions that vibration which we call emotions that let us sense physically sense into a let us sense physically sense into a let us sense physically sense into a future &gt;&gt; could be even a negative emotion but &gt;&gt; could be even a negative emotion but &gt;&gt; could be even a negative emotion but that but it still senses into a future that but it still senses into a future that but it still senses into a future and then you give this example very and then you give this example very and then you give this example very dramatic example but dramatic example but dramatic example but believe appropriate of a cadaavver where believe appropriate of a cadaavver where believe appropriate of a cadaavver where all the material is still there right all the material is still there right all the material is still there right after death before it degrades right but after death before it degrades right but after death before it degrades right but it can't move and therefore there is no it can't move and therefore there is no it can't move and therefore there is no future sense future sense future sense &gt;&gt; it's a very a very different way of &gt;&gt; it's a very a very different way of &gt;&gt; it's a very a very different way of thinking about death so thinking about death so thinking about death so &gt;&gt; let's talk about um psychological energy &gt;&gt; let's talk about um psychological energy &gt;&gt; let's talk about um psychological energy and physical energy that we call and physical energy that we call and physical energy that we call vitality um and if you would is a bit of vitality um and if you would is a bit of vitality um and if you would is a bit of a challenge but could you perhaps use a challenge but could you perhaps use a challenge but could you perhaps use that as an opportunity to teach us about that as an opportunity to teach us about that as an opportunity to teach us about these incredible organels that we call these incredible organels that we call these incredible organels that we call mitochondria. &gt;&gt; I use a slide uh often as an opening &gt;&gt; I use a slide uh often as an opening &gt;&gt; I use a slide uh often as an opening slide when I give presentations to slide when I give presentations to slide when I give presentations to academics or non-academics uh which is academics or non-academics uh which is academics or non-academics uh which is kind of a mitoric view of the world, kind of a mitoric view of the world, kind of a mitoric view of the world, &gt;&gt; right? Like at some point we realized &gt;&gt; right? Like at some point we realized &gt;&gt; right? Like at some point we realized that the earth was not the that the earth was not the that the earth was not the center of the world and then we switched center of the world and then we switched center of the world and then we switched over to a different form of a different over to a different form of a different over to a different form of a different you know model of the universe. So my you know model of the universe. So my you know model of the universe. So my sense is we need to do something similar sense is we need to do something similar sense is we need to do something similar for uh in biio medicine. We still have I for uh in biio medicine. We still have I for uh in biio medicine. We still have I think in most people's mind especially think in most people's mind especially think in most people's mind especially the older generations a very gene the older generations a very gene the older generations a very gene centric you know nucleioentric view of centric you know nucleioentric view of centric you know nucleioentric view of biology that the genes are there and biology that the genes are there and biology that the genes are there and then central dogma right the genes drive then central dogma right the genes drive then central dogma right the genes drive RNA drive protein and then drive RNA drive protein and then drive RNA drive protein and then drive phenotype uh and we know that that's not phenotype uh and we know that that's not phenotype uh and we know that that's not the full picture and there's a lot of the full picture and there's a lot of the full picture and there's a lot of end phenotypes for example and end phenotypes for example and end phenotypes for example and genetically identical mice right there genetically identical mice right there genetically identical mice right there are mice that all have the same genome are mice that all have the same genome are mice that all have the same genome and some are like very anxious and some and some are like very anxious and some and some are like very anxious and some are super chill are super chill are super chill it can't be encoded in the gene it can't be encoded in the gene it can't be encoded in the gene somehow. We found recently that's somehow. We found recently that's somehow. We found recently that's actually there differences in actually there differences in actually there differences in mitochondria and part of the reason why mitochondria and part of the reason why mitochondria and part of the reason why these animals behaviorally are different these animals behaviorally are different these animals behaviorally are different maybe half of what half of the varants maybe half of what half of the varants maybe half of what half of the varants half of like the interindividual half of like the interindividual half of like the interindividual differences what makes one mouse super differences what makes one mouse super differences what makes one mouse super chill and the other the brother the chill and the other the brother the chill and the other the brother the sister that is genetically identical uh sister that is genetically identical uh sister that is genetically identical uh very anxious has to do about with very anxious has to do about with very anxious has to do about with energetics in some way. Um so I use energetics in some way. Um so I use energetics in some way. Um so I use this slide to convey this mitoric uh this slide to convey this mitoric uh this slide to convey this mitoric uh perspective if you want to have a copy perspective if you want to have a copy perspective if you want to have a copy and you know show people um I'm happy to and you know show people um I'm happy to and you know show people um I'm happy to share this and one way to understand share this and one way to understand share this and one way to understand this is energy comes into the organism this is energy comes into the organism this is energy comes into the organism as food we eat and we breathe to fuel as food we eat and we breathe to fuel as food we eat and we breathe to fuel our mitochondria right so the reason our mitochondria right so the reason our mitochondria right so the reason you breathe is to bring oxygen into the you breathe is to bring oxygen into the you breathe is to bring oxygen into the body most people know this and then once body most people know this and then once body most people know this and then once oxygen is in your lungs it goes into oxygen is in your lungs it goes into oxygen is in your lungs it goes into your blood and then it goes to the heart your blood and then it goes to the heart your blood and then it goes to the heart and then the heart kind of boom and then the heart kind of boom and then the heart kind of boom distributes this you know across a whole distributes this you know across a whole distributes this you know across a whole organism. Uh and then when oxygen gets organism. Uh and then when oxygen gets organism. Uh and then when oxygen gets you know to your big toe or to your you know to your big toe or to your you know to your big toe or to your muscle or to your neuron and you know muscle or to your neuron and you know muscle or to your neuron and you know the your hippocampus or some brain the your hippocampus or some brain the your hippocampus or some brain region um what happens is the oxygen region um what happens is the oxygen region um what happens is the oxygen enters the cell and then once it's enters the cell and then once it's enters the cell and then once it's inside the cell it looks for inside the cell it looks for inside the cell it looks for mitochondria looks I mean it's attracted mitochondria looks I mean it's attracted mitochondria looks I mean it's attracted by a concentration gradient. So that's by a concentration gradient. So that's by a concentration gradient. So that's the mitochondria is where oxygen is the mitochondria is where oxygen is the mitochondria is where oxygen is consumed. uh and then when mitochondria consumed. uh and then when mitochondria consumed. uh and then when mitochondria consume oxygen they basically create a consume oxygen they basically create a consume oxygen they basically create a downhill slope for oxygen to kind of be downhill slope for oxygen to kind of be downhill slope for oxygen to kind of be attracted to that. So you breathe to attracted to that. So you breathe to attracted to that. So you breathe to bring oxygen to your mitochondria and bring oxygen to your mitochondria and bring oxygen to your mitochondria and you eat to bring electrons into your you eat to bring electrons into your you eat to bring electrons into your mitochondria. And uh what happens there mitochondria. And uh what happens there mitochondria. And uh what happens there is you know this beautiful sequence of is you know this beautiful sequence of is you know this beautiful sequence of a reactions where you have of a reactions where you have of a reactions where you have electrons from that were initially stuck electrons from that were initially stuck electrons from that were initially stuck on food by the plant. You know taking on food by the plant. You know taking on food by the plant. You know taking solar energy to stick electrons onto solar energy to stick electrons onto solar energy to stick electrons onto carbon and then you make hydrocarbons carbon and then you make hydrocarbons carbon and then you make hydrocarbons and then that's you know glucose or and then that's you know glucose or and then that's you know glucose or starch or and then li oils lipids starch or and then li oils lipids starch or and then li oils lipids everything that that's good for good everything that that's good for good everything that that's good for good fuel for mitochondria. those things, the fuel for mitochondria. those things, the fuel for mitochondria. those things, the food and the oxygen converge inside the food and the oxygen converge inside the food and the oxygen converge inside the mitochondria and then finally the uh the mitochondria and then finally the uh the mitochondria and then finally the uh the electrons that were you know ripped off electrons that were you know ripped off electrons that were you know ripped off as CO2 is broken into oxygen and uh as CO2 is broken into oxygen and uh as CO2 is broken into oxygen and uh or reunited in your mitochondria and so or reunited in your mitochondria and so or reunited in your mitochondria and so your mitochondria actually make water uh your mitochondria actually make water uh your mitochondria actually make water uh and then release CO2. So that's and then release CO2. So that's and then release CO2. So that's the they close the life cycle that you the they close the life cycle that you the they close the life cycle that you know we have with photosynthesis. know we have with photosynthesis. know we have with photosynthesis. photosynthesis makes oxygen and food and photosynthesis makes oxygen and food and photosynthesis makes oxygen and food and then our mitochondria brings those two then our mitochondria brings those two then our mitochondria brings those two things together and then they release things together and then they release things together and then they release water and CO2 exactly what plants need. water and CO2 exactly what plants need. water and CO2 exactly what plants need. So it's this beautiful cycle. So when So it's this beautiful cycle. So when So it's this beautiful cycle. So when mitochondria do this uh is basically uh mitochondria do this uh is basically uh mitochondria do this uh is basically uh feeding unpatterned energy into the feeding unpatterned energy into the feeding unpatterned energy into the system and it starts with the system and it starts with the system and it starts with the mitochondria the same way that if you mitochondria the same way that if you mitochondria the same way that if you feed electricity into a mo morse code feed electricity into a mo morse code feed electricity into a mo morse code right like t um you feed electricity right like t um you feed electricity right like t um you feed electricity it's unpatterned energy like food and it's unpatterned energy like food and it's unpatterned energy like food and biochemistry is to your body and then biochemistry is to your body and then biochemistry is to your body and then you by pressing and releasing a little you by pressing and releasing a little you by pressing and releasing a little lever right with a specific pattern what lever right with a specific pattern what lever right with a specific pattern what you're doing is you're patterning you're doing is you're patterning you're doing is you're patterning electricity which means nothing. electricity which means nothing. electricity which means nothing. It's just, you know, raw current. And It's just, you know, raw current. And It's just, you know, raw current. And then you pattern it in something that then you pattern it in something that then you pattern it in something that means something. Short beeps, long means something. Short beeps, long means something. Short beeps, long beeps, and then you can spell stuff. You beeps, and then you can spell stuff. You beeps, and then you can spell stuff. You can communicate information, right? So can communicate information, right? So can communicate information, right? So you're creating information you're creating information you're creating information out of, you know, by patterning in out of, you know, by patterning in out of, you know, by patterning in time, right? By patterning electricity. time, right? By patterning electricity. time, right? By patterning electricity. So mitochondria, the way I see them is So mitochondria, the way I see them is So mitochondria, the way I see them is they're kind of an energy patterning they're kind of an energy patterning they're kind of an energy patterning system. &gt;&gt; And we've called them the mitochondrial &gt;&gt; And we've called them the mitochondrial &gt;&gt; And we've called them the mitochondrial information processing system for that information processing system for that information processing system for that reason. Should we think of them like a reason. Should we think of them like a reason. Should we think of them like a little morse code um lever? I little morse code um lever? I little morse code um lever? I &gt;&gt; I think it's a decent you know analogy &gt;&gt; I think it's a decent you know analogy &gt;&gt; I think it's a decent you know analogy for uh you know part of their behavior, for uh you know part of their behavior, for uh you know part of their behavior, part of what they do fundamentally. They part of what they do fundamentally. They part of what they do fundamentally. They take raw energy and then they pattern take raw energy and then they pattern take raw energy and then they pattern that energy into molecules. that energy into molecules. that energy into molecules. &gt;&gt; This perhaps is why I've heard you say &gt;&gt; This perhaps is why I've heard you say &gt;&gt; This perhaps is why I've heard you say that we should not just think about that we should not just think about that we should not just think about mitochondria as the powerhouse of the mitochondria as the powerhouse of the mitochondria as the powerhouse of the cell generating more ATP. cell generating more ATP. cell generating more ATP. That is true, but it's also true that That is true, but it's also true that That is true, but it's also true that they're controlling the flow of energy they're controlling the flow of energy they're controlling the flow of energy in a very detailed way. in a very detailed way. in a very detailed way. &gt;&gt; Correct. And they're controlling the &gt;&gt; Correct. And they're controlling the &gt;&gt; Correct. And they're controlling the flow of energy, but they're also flow of energy, but they're also flow of energy, but they're also controlling um the transformation of controlling um the transformation of controlling um the transformation of energy, right? The electricity, you energy, right? The electricity, you energy, right? The electricity, you know, can be converted, transformed into know, can be converted, transformed into know, can be converted, transformed into all sorts of different messages, all sorts of different messages, all sorts of different messages, signals, right, with your MOS Morris signals, right, with your MOS Morris signals, right, with your MOS Morris code depending on the needs, depending code depending on the needs, depending code depending on the needs, depending on, you know, the state, depending on on, you know, the state, depending on on, you know, the state, depending on the person pressing, releasing the person pressing, releasing the person pressing, releasing the lever. Um, and sometimes the organism lever. Um, and sometimes the organism lever. Um, and sometimes the organism needs a lot of ATP. If you're a needs a lot of ATP. If you're a needs a lot of ATP. If you're a mitochondrian and you live in the heart mitochondrian and you live in the heart mitochondrian and you live in the heart and your job is to make ATP, a lot of and your job is to make ATP, a lot of and your job is to make ATP, a lot of ATP and then there's side jobs. If ATP and then there's side jobs. If ATP and then there's side jobs. If you're a mitochondrian in the liver, you're a mitochondrian in the liver, you're a mitochondrian in the liver, your job is very different and you're a your job is very different and you're a your job is very different and you're a very different kind of mitochondrian. very different kind of mitochondrian. very different kind of mitochondrian. &gt;&gt; Well, let me ask you this. Uh, I think &gt;&gt; Well, let me ask you this. Uh, I think &gt;&gt; Well, let me ask you this. Uh, I think you just answered the question, but you just answered the question, but you just answered the question, but &gt;&gt; are there different types of &gt;&gt; are there different types of &gt;&gt; are there different types of mitochondria? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. How does a mitochondria in the liver How does a mitochondria in the liver How does a mitochondria in the liver versus in the brain versus in the heart versus in the brain versus in the heart versus in the brain versus in the heart know to take the energy that it's know to take the energy that it's know to take the energy that it's transforming &gt;&gt; and pattern its output so that heart &gt;&gt; and pattern its output so that heart &gt;&gt; and pattern its output so that heart cells can do what heart cells need to do cells can do what heart cells need to do cells can do what heart cells need to do or liver or brain? or liver or brain? or liver or brain? &gt;&gt; Uh this seems like a very important &gt;&gt; Uh this seems like a very important &gt;&gt; Uh this seems like a very important issue. Um issue. Um issue. Um &gt;&gt; is it possible even that the &gt;&gt; is it possible even that the &gt;&gt; is it possible even that the mitochondria and these different tissues mitochondria and these different tissues mitochondria and these different tissues are fundamentally different organels? are fundamentally different organels? are fundamentally different organels? And we should probably define what an And we should probably define what an And we should probably define what an organel is for people. organel is for people. organel is for people. &gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. Organel is the technical &gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. Organel is the technical &gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. Organel is the technical term uh for an organ of the cell. Uh and term uh for an organ of the cell. Uh and term uh for an organ of the cell. Uh and the cell typically is represented as the cell typically is represented as the cell typically is represented as this you know skin and then inside the this you know skin and then inside the this you know skin and then inside the skin is the cytoplasm the big soup. And skin is the cytoplasm the big soup. And skin is the cytoplasm the big soup. And then inside the soup the cytoplasm then inside the soup the cytoplasm then inside the soup the cytoplasm there's a bunch of little organs that there's a bunch of little organs that there's a bunch of little organs that allow the cell to do all sorts of uh allow the cell to do all sorts of uh allow the cell to do all sorts of uh things and perform its activities and things and perform its activities and things and perform its activities and replicate and so on. Mitochondria is one replicate and so on. Mitochondria is one replicate and so on. Mitochondria is one of those organs. uh and their purpose is of those organs. uh and their purpose is of those organs. uh and their purpose is to uh process transform energy. Uh and to uh process transform energy. Uh and to uh process transform energy. Uh and one of the ways in which they one of the ways in which they one of the ways in which they transform energy is taking raw uh energy transform energy is taking raw uh energy transform energy is taking raw uh energy from biochemistry the food you eat from biochemistry the food you eat from biochemistry the food you eat uh empowered by oxygen to you know flow uh empowered by oxygen to you know flow uh empowered by oxygen to you know flow those electrons and then making building those electrons and then making building those electrons and then making building a charge and then powering this a charge and then powering this a charge and then powering this beautiful rotor. Uh some people might beautiful rotor. Uh some people might beautiful rotor. Uh some people might have seen this. It's kind of a rotary, have seen this. It's kind of a rotary, have seen this. It's kind of a rotary, you know, uh engine kind of thing. a you know, uh engine kind of thing. a you know, uh engine kind of thing. a turbine uh and then when the mito when turbine uh and then when the mito when turbine uh and then when the mito when mitochondria build their membrane mitochondria build their membrane mitochondria build their membrane potential to become charged they use potential to become charged they use potential to become charged they use that charge to power the rotation of that charge to power the rotation of that charge to power the rotation of this turbine and then as the turbine this turbine and then as the turbine this turbine and then as the turbine turns it converts ADP into ATP so now turns it converts ADP into ATP so now turns it converts ADP into ATP so now you have conversion of biochemistry into you have conversion of biochemistry into you have conversion of biochemistry into electricity and electrochemical charge electricity and electrochemical charge electricity and electrochemical charge in the mitochondria back into in the mitochondria back into in the mitochondria back into biochemistry ATP what's um in the biochemistry ATP what's um in the biochemistry ATP what's um in the backdrop of all this of course is that backdrop of all this of course is that backdrop of all this of course is that all of this self-organizes during all of this self-organizes during all of this self-organizes during development that yes the genes are the development that yes the genes are the development that yes the genes are the blueprint but This is all built up from blueprint but This is all built up from blueprint but This is all built up from scratch and probably a tangent for scratch and probably a tangent for scratch and probably a tangent for another time. But another time. But another time. But &gt;&gt; so how does a heart cell know to &gt;&gt; so how does a heart cell know to &gt;&gt; so how does a heart cell know to produce &gt;&gt; a lot of ATP versus a liver cell? And of &gt;&gt; a lot of ATP versus a liver cell? And of &gt;&gt; a lot of ATP versus a liver cell? And of course it's coordinated in time with course it's coordinated in time with course it's coordinated in time with sleep and circadian stuff, but how does sleep and circadian stuff, but how does sleep and circadian stuff, but how does it know or does it even know I'm a I'm a it know or does it even know I'm a I'm a it know or does it even know I'm a I'm a mitochondria inside a heart cell and the mitochondria inside a heart cell and the mitochondria inside a heart cell and the amount of energy I need to transform is amount of energy I need to transform is amount of energy I need to transform is X? &gt;&gt; Yeah. How does a mitochondrian right &gt;&gt; Yeah. How does a mitochondrian right &gt;&gt; Yeah. How does a mitochondrian right singular is mitochondrian and multiple singular is mitochondrian and multiple singular is mitochondrian and multiple is mitochondria. Uh how does a is mitochondria. Uh how does a is mitochondria. Uh how does a mitochondrian and a hard cell know that mitochondrian and a hard cell know that mitochondrian and a hard cell know that it needs to be a cardiac mitochondrian it needs to be a cardiac mitochondrian it needs to be a cardiac mitochondrian right? Is that your question? right? Is that your question? right? Is that your question? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is it is it genetically different &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is it is it genetically different &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is it is it genetically different than a mitochondrian from uh the liver? than a mitochondrian from uh the liver? than a mitochondrian from uh the liver? &gt;&gt; No, they're genetically exactly the &gt;&gt; No, they're genetically exactly the &gt;&gt; No, they're genetically exactly the same. And uh and that's another uh kind same. And uh and that's another uh kind same. And uh and that's another uh kind of punch to the gene-based, you of punch to the gene-based, you of punch to the gene-based, you know, model of biology. How could it be know, model of biology. How could it be know, model of biology. How could it be that every cell in your body is that every cell in your body is that every cell in your body is genetically identical? Uh and the genetically identical? Uh and the genetically identical? Uh and the mitochondria have their own genetic mitochondria have their own genetic mitochondria have their own genetic material. You we all have our mom's mitochondria, You we all have our mom's mitochondria, You we all have our mom's mitochondria, which is really beautiful. Again, which is really beautiful. Again, which is really beautiful. Again, &gt;&gt; 100% of our mitochondrial genome is from &gt;&gt; 100% of our mitochondrial genome is from &gt;&gt; 100% of our mitochondrial genome is from mom. Is that true? mom. Is that true? mom. Is that true? &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; And there were a few papers a few years &gt;&gt; And there were a few papers a few years &gt;&gt; And there were a few papers a few years ago that said, "Oh, no, look here. ago that said, "Oh, no, look here. ago that said, "Oh, no, look here. There's this like re this one case, There's this like re this one case, There's this like re this one case, [laughter] this one kid or this, you know, these this one kid or this, you know, these this one kid or this, you know, these two kids that have paternal, you know, two kids that have paternal, you know, two kids that have paternal, you know, father mitochondria." Turns out it was father mitochondria." Turns out it was father mitochondria." Turns out it was like a mistake in the sequencing or like a mistake in the sequencing or like a mistake in the sequencing or &gt;&gt; so mothers are truly always right. &gt;&gt; so mothers are truly always right. &gt;&gt; so mothers are truly always right. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yes. Power to power to mothers. people &gt;&gt; Yes. Power to power to mothers. people &gt;&gt; Yes. Power to power to mothers. people will be thinking and I'm also thinking will be thinking and I'm also thinking will be thinking and I'm also thinking does that mean and of course there are does that mean and of course there are does that mean and of course there are lifestyle issues but does that mean that lifestyle issues but does that mean that lifestyle issues but does that mean that if we were to look at the quoteunquote if we were to look at the quoteunquote if we were to look at the quoteunquote energy levels of mom versus energy levels of mom versus energy levels of mom versus energy levels of dad that what better predicts levels of dad that what better predicts levels of dad that what better predicts the energy levels of a kid is the energy levels of a kid is the energy levels of a kid is the mother's sort of baseline levels of mother's sort of baseline levels of mother's sort of baseline levels of energy at a given age energy at a given age energy at a given age &gt;&gt; I don't know the of studies that have &gt;&gt; I don't know the of studies that have &gt;&gt; I don't know the of studies that have asked that question about like asked that question about like asked that question about like subjective energy or like the energy to subjective energy or like the energy to subjective energy or like the energy to do stuff and uh which we I think we'll do stuff and uh which we I think we'll do stuff and uh which we I think we'll talk more about but uh people have talk more about but uh people have talk more about but uh people have looked at other more uh tractable which looked at other more uh tractable which looked at other more uh tractable which what we do in biio medicine we take what we do in biio medicine we take what we do in biio medicine we take things that we can measure objectively things that we can measure objectively things that we can measure objectively or like you know run on a gel or like you know run on a gel or like you know run on a gel or sequence or you know objectify with a sequence or you know objectify with a sequence or you know objectify with a biioarker in the clinic uh people biioarker in the clinic uh people biioarker in the clinic uh people have looked at longevity right are have looked at longevity right are have looked at longevity right are you more likely to live long if your mom you more likely to live long if your mom you more likely to live long if your mom lived long or if your dad lived long. lived long or if your dad lived long. lived long or if your dad lived long. Turns out the heritability of longevity Turns out the heritability of longevity Turns out the heritability of longevity is more maternal than paternal. is more maternal than paternal. is more maternal than paternal. uh or are you more likely to have a uh or are you more likely to have a uh or are you more likely to have a mental health disorder or to have mental health disorder or to have mental health disorder or to have Parkinson's or Alzheimer's if your mom Parkinson's or Alzheimer's if your mom Parkinson's or Alzheimer's if your mom or your dad had it? Uh some evidence say or your dad had it? Uh some evidence say or your dad had it? Uh some evidence say it's more maternally inherited than it's more maternally inherited than it's more maternally inherited than paternally inherited. paternally inherited. paternally inherited. &gt;&gt; Uh so it could be that part of uh the &gt;&gt; Uh so it could be that part of uh the &gt;&gt; Uh so it could be that part of uh the your ability to live a long healthy life your ability to live a long healthy life your ability to live a long healthy life uh or your risk or your resilience right uh or your risk or your resilience right uh or your risk or your resilience right to those disorders really are conveyed to those disorders really are conveyed to those disorders really are conveyed or carried by mitochondria by your or carried by mitochondria by your or carried by mitochondria by your ability to transform energy. And the ability to transform energy. And the ability to transform energy. And the reason why through evolution the reason why through evolution the reason why through evolution uh unique parental inheritance you get uh unique parental inheritance you get uh unique parental inheritance you get your mitochondria from a single parent your mitochondria from a single parent your mitochondria from a single parent uh has developed most people think is uh has developed most people think is uh has developed most people think is because there needs to be a really close because there needs to be a really close because there needs to be a really close metabolic energetic match between the metabolic energetic match between the metabolic energetic match between the mom and the baby right like the baby mom and the baby right like the baby mom and the baby right like the baby comes out and then if the mom has like a comes out and then if the mom has like a comes out and then if the mom has like a certain type of metabolism and we're all certain type of metabolism and we're all certain type of metabolism and we're all different I hope we talk about like how different I hope we talk about like how different I hope we talk about like how different we are energetically different we are energetically different we are energetically metabolically uh so we're all very metabolically uh so we're all very metabolically uh so we're all very different if the baby that was born was different if the baby that was born was different if the baby that was born was like so metabolically different than the like so metabolically different than the like so metabolically different than the mom, there's a chance that there would mom, there's a chance that there would mom, there's a chance that there would be a mismatch, right? And then the mom be a mismatch, right? And then the mom be a mismatch, right? And then the mom wouldn't be able to support through wouldn't be able to support through wouldn't be able to support through breastfeeding. Historically, that's how breastfeeding. Historically, that's how breastfeeding. Historically, that's how babies survived. Uh, and that would be a babies survived. Uh, and that would be a babies survived. Uh, and that would be a catastrophe. So, you know, it's probably catastrophe. So, you know, it's probably catastrophe. So, you know, it's probably a good uh system to have baby metabolism a good uh system to have baby metabolism a good uh system to have baby metabolism match pretty closely because they have match pretty closely because they have match pretty closely because they have the same mitochondria as the mom to mom the same mitochondria as the mom to mom the same mitochondria as the mom to mom metabolism. Uh, so that's I think a metabolism. Uh, so that's I think a metabolism. Uh, so that's I think a loose hypothesis, but it makes a lot of loose hypothesis, but it makes a lot of loose hypothesis, but it makes a lot of sense. &gt;&gt; It does make a lot of sense. Yeah, every &gt;&gt; It does make a lot of sense. Yeah, every &gt;&gt; It does make a lot of sense. Yeah, every mitochondria you have in your body, like mitochondria you have in your body, like mitochondria you have in your body, like the brain mitochondria, neuron the brain mitochondria, neuron the brain mitochondria, neuron mitochondria, astroite mitochondria, astroite mitochondria, astroite mitochondria, whatever your favorite cell type is, whatever your favorite cell type is, whatever your favorite cell type is, your heart mitochondria, liver your heart mitochondria, liver your heart mitochondria, liver mitochondria, muscle mitochondria, muscle mitochondria, muscle mitochondria, they're very different. And now they're very different. And now they're very different. And now we have a new method. There's a we have a new method. There's a we have a new method. There's a wonderful scientist in her group, Anna wonderful scientist in her group, Anna wonderful scientist in her group, Anna Monzel, who's developed a method to Monzel, who's developed a method to Monzel, who's developed a method to profile different types of mitochondria. profile different types of mitochondria. profile different types of mitochondria. We call this mitotyping. The same way We call this mitotyping. The same way We call this mitotyping. The same way that now in neuroscience or in that now in neuroscience or in that now in neuroscience or in immunology, it makes no sense to talk immunology, it makes no sense to talk immunology, it makes no sense to talk about a brain cell or like an immune about a brain cell or like an immune about a brain cell or like an immune cell, right? cell, right? cell, right? &gt;&gt; If you're a self uh you know respecting &gt;&gt; If you're a self uh you know respecting &gt;&gt; If you're a self uh you know respecting immunologists, you know, your cell types immunologists, you know, your cell types immunologists, you know, your cell types and there's, you know, at least 30 and there's, you know, at least 30 and there's, you know, at least 30 different types. Uh so I think we're at different types. Uh so I think we're at different types. Uh so I think we're at this point in mitochondrial science this point in mitochondrial science this point in mitochondrial science where we need to adopt a similar level where we need to adopt a similar level where we need to adopt a similar level of specificity. There are different of specificity. There are different of specificity. There are different types of mitochondria. We call those types of mitochondria. We call those types of mitochondria. We call those mitoypes. uh and they emerge all of them mitoypes. uh and they emerge all of them mitoypes. uh and they emerge all of them from the same mitoype in the egg right from the same mitoype in the egg right from the same mitoype in the egg right the egg that the mother carries and the egg that the mother carries and the egg that the mother carries and you know releases from the ovary there's you know releases from the ovary there's you know releases from the ovary there's about half a million uh mitochondria in about half a million uh mitochondria in about half a million uh mitochondria in that egg uh and then those mitochondria that egg uh and then those mitochondria that egg uh and then those mitochondria there's a single type of mitochondria in there's a single type of mitochondria in there's a single type of mitochondria in there and then when it's fertilized there and then when it's fertilized there and then when it's fertilized development happens in this beautiful uh development happens in this beautiful uh development happens in this beautiful uh process and through that process as the process and through that process as the process and through that process as the heart starts to form the brain starts to heart starts to form the brain starts to heart starts to form the brain starts to form the muscles start to form the form the muscles start to form the form the muscles start to form the mitochondria differentiate and then you mitochondria differentiate and then you mitochondria differentiate and then you end up with different types of end up with different types of end up with different types of mitochondria that are adapted and mitochondria that are adapted and mitochondria that are adapted and matched to the different demands of matched to the different demands of matched to the different demands of cell types of organs. uh and one way of cell types of organs. uh and one way of cell types of organs. uh and one way we think about this is I think it's uh we think about this is I think it's uh we think about this is I think it's uh it makes a lot of sense to think about it makes a lot of sense to think about it makes a lot of sense to think about mitochondria as social organisms mitochondria as social organisms mitochondria as social organisms &gt;&gt; and there multiple features of &gt;&gt; and there multiple features of &gt;&gt; and there multiple features of mitochondrial biology that obey you know mitochondrial biology that obey you know mitochondrial biology that obey you know what u behavioral social scientists you what u behavioral social scientists you what u behavioral social scientists you know classify as social you know if know classify as social you know if know classify as social you know if you study ants for example there's like you study ants for example there's like you study ants for example there's like a few rules that we know ants are social a few rules that we know ants are social a few rules that we know ants are social creatures because uh they form groups creatures because uh they form groups creatures because uh they form groups right and there are different types they right and there are different types they right and there are different types they divide there's division of labor they divide there's division of labor they divide there's division of labor you have worker ants that, you know, you have worker ants that, you know, you have worker ants that, you know, work really hard and you have a warrior work really hard and you have a warrior work really hard and you have a warrior ants that are like really chubby and ants that are like really chubby and ants that are like really chubby and like they're here to defend the like they're here to defend the like they're here to defend the hive. They like to fight. Yeah. the hive. They like to fight. Yeah. the hive. They like to fight. Yeah. Exactly. So, those two types of ants, Exactly. So, those two types of ants, Exactly. So, those two types of ants, you look at them side by side, there's you look at them side by side, there's you look at them side by side, there's like this little flimsy super like uh like this little flimsy super like uh like this little flimsy super like uh active worker ant and then this like active worker ant and then this like active worker ant and then this like chubby uh warrior ant. Genetically, chubby uh warrior ant. Genetically, chubby uh warrior ant. Genetically, they're identical. they're identical. they're identical. &gt;&gt; They have the same genome. They came as, &gt;&gt; They have the same genome. They came as, &gt;&gt; They have the same genome. They came as, you know, little larae from the, you know, little larae from the, you know, little larae from the, you know, the queen. Uh but their know, the queen. Uh but their know, the queen. Uh but their morphology is super different. behavior morphology is super different. behavior morphology is super different. behavior is very different. Uh but through is very different. Uh but through is very different. Uh but through development there are cues that you know development there are cues that you know development there are cues that you know are um uh applied to the are um uh applied to the are um uh applied to the different larve and then they end up different larve and then they end up different larve and then they end up becoming a worker or a warrior. Uh so becoming a worker or a warrior. Uh so becoming a worker or a warrior. Uh so the same kind of thing happens uh in the same kind of thing happens uh in the same kind of thing happens uh in mitochondria. So mito there are mitochondria. So mito there are mitochondria. So mito there are different types of mitochondria like the different types of mitochondria like the different types of mitochondria like the two types of ants. There's division of two types of ants. There's division of two types of ants. There's division of labor. There's some mitochondria for labor. There's some mitochondria for labor. There's some mitochondria for example in the muscle that are at the example in the muscle that are at the example in the muscle that are at the surface of the muscle like just surface of the muscle like just surface of the muscle like just underneath the saroma the skin of underneath the saroma the skin of underneath the saroma the skin of the muscle cells and then there the muscle cells and then there the muscle cells and then there mitochondria that are inside you where mitochondria that are inside you where mitochondria that are inside you where the actin measin the contractile the actin measin the contractile the actin measin the contractile proteins happen subscar mitochondria and proteins happen subscar mitochondria and proteins happen subscar mitochondria and interophibrillary mitochondria two interophibrillary mitochondria two interophibrillary mitochondria two populations their proteom is different populations their proteom is different populations their proteom is different their molecular composition of their molecular composition of their molecular composition of those different types of mitochondria those different types of mitochondria those different types of mitochondria are different their functions ATP are different their functions ATP are different their functions ATP synthesis reactive oxygen species synthesis reactive oxygen species synthesis reactive oxygen species production their ability to handle production their ability to handle production their ability to handle calcium and release calcium is calcium and release calcium is calcium and release calcium is different. Their morphology is very different. Their morphology is very different. Their morphology is very different. So even within one cell you different. So even within one cell you different. So even within one cell you get this uh division of labor and um uh get this uh division of labor and um uh get this uh division of labor and um uh differentiation of mitochondria and in differentiation of mitochondria and in differentiation of mitochondria and in every cell mitochondria have a life every cell mitochondria have a life every cell mitochondria have a life cycle. New mitochondria are born and old cycle. New mitochondria are born and old cycle. New mitochondria are born and old mitochondria die out uh which is what mitochondria die out uh which is what mitochondria die out uh which is what happens in social creatures. Um and happens in social creatures. Um and happens in social creatures. Um and there's a few other features like this there's a few other features like this there's a few other features like this that I think make mitochondria social that I think make mitochondria social that I think make mitochondria social organisms. And once you start to think organisms. And once you start to think organisms. And once you start to think about mitochondria as social uh about mitochondria as social uh about mitochondria as social uh creatures, then you understand maybe a creatures, then you understand maybe a creatures, then you understand maybe a little better why they need to fuse with little better why they need to fuse with little better why they need to fuse with one another. And if you if you ask one another. And if you if you ask one another. And if you if you ask Google what do mitochondria look like or Google what do mitochondria look like or Google what do mitochondria look like or chat GPT or whatever, uh the it shows chat GPT or whatever, uh the it shows chat GPT or whatever, uh the it shows you always the same kind of images. It's you always the same kind of images. It's you always the same kind of images. It's like a little bean. like a little bean. like a little bean. &gt;&gt; I brought one you brought one as a gift. &gt;&gt; I brought one you brought one as a gift. &gt;&gt; I brought one you brought one as a gift. I at one moment I thought they might be I at one moment I thought they might be I at one moment I thought they might be brass knuckles when you hand first brass knuckles when you hand first brass knuckles when you hand first handed them to me, but I said handed them to me, but I said handed them to me, but I said mitochondrian with the ce of the mitochondrian with the ce of the mitochondrian with the ce of the mitochondria. usually looks like this. mitochondria. usually looks like this. mitochondria. usually looks like this. But you're saying in reality there'd But you're saying in reality there'd But you're saying in reality there'd be many of these connected to closely be many of these connected to closely be many of these connected to closely fused to one another. fused to one another. fused to one another. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, and when they fuse, you get &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, and when they fuse, you get &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, and when they fuse, you get these like bean or kidney shapes or these like bean or kidney shapes or these like bean or kidney shapes or peanut shape, whatever your peanut shape, whatever your peanut shape, whatever your preference is that fuse with one another preference is that fuse with one another preference is that fuse with one another and then they form these beautiful and then they form these beautiful and then they form these beautiful filaments. Uh so, if you're lucky enough filaments. Uh so, if you're lucky enough filaments. Uh so, if you're lucky enough to work in a lab that has one of these to work in a lab that has one of these to work in a lab that has one of these cool microscopes called conffocal cool microscopes called conffocal cool microscopes called conffocal microscope or light sheet microscopy and microscope or light sheet microscopy and microscope or light sheet microscopy and then you can make the mitochondria then you can make the mitochondria then you can make the mitochondria fluorescent. So you put a dye in the fluorescent. So you put a dye in the fluorescent. So you put a dye in the dish and then it's a little fluorescent dish and then it's a little fluorescent dish and then it's a little fluorescent molecule that it goes inside the molecule that it goes inside the molecule that it goes inside the mitochondria. It's attracted by the big mitochondria. It's attracted by the big mitochondria. It's attracted by the big uh charge that mitochondria have uh and uh charge that mitochondria have uh and uh charge that mitochondria have uh and then you turn off the lights, look down then you turn off the lights, look down then you turn off the lights, look down the eyepiece and then you see this the eyepiece and then you see this the eyepiece and then you see this beautiful like filaments, you know, beautiful like filaments, you know, beautiful like filaments, you know, mitochondria moving. They move pretty mitochondria moving. They move pretty mitochondria moving. They move pretty slowly and interestingly they're just at slowly and interestingly they're just at slowly and interestingly they're just at the edge of human perception of like uh the edge of human perception of like uh the edge of human perception of like uh how quickly we can perceive things to how quickly we can perceive things to how quickly we can perceive things to move. So they move like, you know, move. So they move like, you know, move. So they move like, you know, barely fast enough so you can see them barely fast enough so you can see them barely fast enough so you can see them and then they kiss uh and then they kiss uh and then they kiss uh and then confuse completely. then confuse completely. then confuse completely. &gt;&gt; Either you can invite everyone to your &gt;&gt; Either you can invite everyone to your &gt;&gt; Either you can invite everyone to your lab to see this, but that's a lot of lab to see this, but that's a lot of lab to see this, but that's a lot of people. You'd be very busy. We'll put a people. You'd be very busy. We'll put a people. You'd be very busy. We'll put a link to a video of this. link to a video of this. link to a video of this. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; we're building a web page called &gt;&gt; we're building a web page called &gt;&gt; we're building a web page called Mid Life, uh which is to help people, Mid Life, uh which is to help people, Mid Life, uh which is to help people, you know, understand themselves you know, understand themselves you know, understand themselves energetically uh and through, you know, energetically uh and through, you know, energetically uh and through, you know, the beauty of mitochondria. And there the beauty of mitochondria. And there the beauty of mitochondria. And there are all sorts of different types of are all sorts of different types of are all sorts of different types of mitochondria that move differently. And mitochondria that move differently. And mitochondria that move differently. And when the mitochondria are not when the mitochondria are not when the mitochondria are not healthy and if they can't flow and healthy and if they can't flow and healthy and if they can't flow and transform energy properly, they start to transform energy properly, they start to transform energy properly, they start to look really weird. [snorts] It occurred look really weird. [snorts] It occurred look really weird. [snorts] It occurred to me that, you know, for the longest to me that, you know, for the longest to me that, you know, for the longest time, I'm 50 now, so I can say for the time, I'm 50 now, so I can say for the time, I'm 50 now, so I can say for the longest time. For the longest time, we longest time. For the longest time, we longest time. For the longest time, we heard that if we want energy, we need to heard that if we want energy, we need to heard that if we want energy, we need to eat, right? Of course, we need to sleep, eat, right? Of course, we need to sleep, eat, right? Of course, we need to sleep, but we need to eat. So be like and but we need to eat. So be like and but we need to eat. So be like and every kid learns you're consuming energy every kid learns you're consuming energy every kid learns you're consuming energy that so that you fuel your body there that so that you fuel your body there that so that you fuel your body there all these discussions you should eat all these discussions you should eat all these discussions you should eat meat don't eat meat I believe you should meat don't eat meat I believe you should meat don't eat meat I believe you should eat some meat you should eat some eat some meat you should eat some eat some meat you should eat some vegetables some fruit etc I think you vegetables some fruit etc I think you vegetables some fruit etc I think you should be an omnivore some fats yes should be an omnivore some fats yes should be an omnivore some fats yes that's my belief but we all that's my belief but we all that's my belief but we all understood that but then at some point understood that but then at some point understood that but then at some point probably about 10 years ago it became probably about 10 years ago it became probably about 10 years ago it became clear to people that just consuming more clear to people that just consuming more clear to people that just consuming more energy didn't give you more energy it energy didn't give you more energy it energy didn't give you more energy it was an obvious thing but it's now was an obvious thing but it's now was an obvious thing but it's now abundantly clear and based on what abundantly clear and based on what abundantly clear and based on what you're saying, it should be clear to you're saying, it should be clear to you're saying, it should be clear to everyone that the issue is not lack of everyone that the issue is not lack of everyone that the issue is not lack of energy going into the system. energy going into the system. energy going into the system. &gt;&gt; It's that the transformation of energy &gt;&gt; It's that the transformation of energy &gt;&gt; It's that the transformation of energy that occurs in mitochondria somehow is that occurs in mitochondria somehow is that occurs in mitochondria somehow is not happening correctly in people that not happening correctly in people that not happening correctly in people that are obese um or in people that are obese um or in people that are obese um or in people that are eating and feeling lethargic. And of eating and feeling lethargic. And of eating and feeling lethargic. And of course, there's blood sugar, you know, course, there's blood sugar, you know, course, there's blood sugar, you know, aspects to this and we could discuss all aspects to this and we could discuss all aspects to this and we could discuss all of that and we won't because that's not of that and we won't because that's not of that and we won't because that's not the topic for uh for today. But I think the topic for uh for today. But I think the topic for uh for today. But I think if nothing else, if people can just if nothing else, if people can just if nothing else, if people can just understand that they have not just these understand that they have not just these understand that they have not just these powerhouses, but these power plants powerhouses, but these power plants powerhouses, but these power plants within their bodies that are within their bodies that are within their bodies that are transforming the energy and that the transforming the energy and that the transforming the energy and that the mitochondria are central to how the mitochondria are central to how the mitochondria are central to how the energy is transformed and distributed energy is transformed and distributed energy is transformed and distributed &gt;&gt; on an organ byorgan basis. &gt;&gt; on an organ byorgan basis. &gt;&gt; on an organ byorgan basis. I think that would be a helpful concept I think that would be a helpful concept I think that would be a helpful concept for people to get into their mind for people to get into their mind for people to get into their mind because people are talking about because people are talking about because people are talking about mitochondria all the time. People are mitochondria all the time. People are mitochondria all the time. People are talking about and hearing about talking about and hearing about talking about and hearing about nutrition all the time and so often we nutrition all the time and so often we nutrition all the time and so often we just think about calories and you know just think about calories and you know just think about calories and you know everyone knows that you know calories is everyone knows that you know calories is everyone knows that you know calories is a unit of you know heat offput when you a unit of you know heat offput when you a unit of you know heat offput when you burn a given food and we learn this burn a given food and we learn this burn a given food and we learn this stuff but it doesn't transform into good stuff but it doesn't transform into good stuff but it doesn't transform into good health practices health practices health practices &gt;&gt; but I think nowadays people are starting &gt;&gt; but I think nowadays people are starting &gt;&gt; but I think nowadays people are starting to get a sense of how their bodies to get a sense of how their bodies to get a sense of how their bodies work and you're adding a lot of work and you're adding a lot of work and you're adding a lot of important uh detail and aspects to that important uh detail and aspects to that important uh detail and aspects to that today. &gt;&gt; Um so I just want to frame that up. Y &gt;&gt; Um so I just want to frame that up. Y &gt;&gt; Um so I just want to frame that up. Y &gt;&gt; um if you have any reflections on that &gt;&gt; um if you have any reflections on that &gt;&gt; um if you have any reflections on that great if not it was just a point that great if not it was just a point that great if not it was just a point that came to mind that I think it might be came to mind that I think it might be came to mind that I think it might be useful. Yes, it's so important and we useful. Yes, it's so important and we useful. Yes, it's so important and we are energy fundamentally we are the flow are energy fundamentally we are the flow are energy fundamentally we are the flow of energy through this biological of energy through this biological of energy through this biological infrastructure right that we call the infrastructure right that we call the infrastructure right that we call the body but you are not the cells or the body but you are not the cells or the body but you are not the cells or the genes or right that thing you are genes or right that thing you are genes or right that thing you are much more uh that energy that is flowing much more uh that energy that is flowing much more uh that energy that is flowing which is why when the energy stops which is why when the energy stops which is why when the energy stops flowing you are no longer when you die flowing you are no longer when you die flowing you are no longer when you die all the phys physical stuff remains but all the phys physical stuff remains but all the phys physical stuff remains but you no longer have an experience you no longer have an experience you no longer have an experience you no longer exist as a as a person no longer exist as a as a person no longer exist as a as a person &gt;&gt; the way I think about this is rather &gt;&gt; the way I think about this is rather &gt;&gt; the way I think about this is rather than thinking in nouns, think in verbs. than thinking in nouns, think in verbs. than thinking in nouns, think in verbs. &gt;&gt; And I think as biologists when we teach &gt;&gt; And I think as biologists when we teach &gt;&gt; And I think as biologists when we teach biology, you have to teach some nouns, biology, you have to teach some nouns, biology, you have to teach some nouns, some names of things. But if you can get some names of things. But if you can get some names of things. But if you can get people to understand the verbs, as people to understand the verbs, as people to understand the verbs, as concepts, &gt;&gt; it's worth a gazillion nouns. &gt;&gt; it's worth a gazillion nouns. &gt;&gt; it's worth a gazillion nouns. &gt;&gt; And so I think um people thinking about &gt;&gt; And so I think um people thinking about &gt;&gt; And so I think um people thinking about themselves as a verb state themselves as a verb state themselves as a verb state &gt;&gt; of as energy transformation being, it &gt;&gt; of as energy transformation being, it &gt;&gt; of as energy transformation being, it sounds so mystical, but it's not sounds so mystical, but it's not sounds so mystical, but it's not mystical. It's biochemical. it is mystical. It's biochemical. it is mystical. It's biochemical. it is &gt;&gt; uh I think could be useful. Along those &gt;&gt; uh I think could be useful. Along those &gt;&gt; uh I think could be useful. Along those lines, I do want to um talk about this lines, I do want to um talk about this lines, I do want to um talk about this recent paper that you uh published uh recent paper that you uh published uh recent paper that you uh published uh which essentially my understanding is which essentially my understanding is which essentially my understanding is that looked at different brain areas that looked at different brain areas that looked at different brain areas and found that different brain areas and found that different brain areas and found that different brain areas have different concentrations of have different concentrations of have different concentrations of mitochondria. And we know that different mitochondria. And we know that different mitochondria. And we know that different body areas and different organs have body areas and different organs have body areas and different organs have different concentrations of different concentrations of different concentrations of mitochondria. But I heard you say mitochondria. But I heard you say mitochondria. But I heard you say someplace and this is such a beautiful someplace and this is such a beautiful someplace and this is such a beautiful sticky topic as they say that perhaps sticky topic as they say that perhaps sticky topic as they say that perhaps the things we do in life the things we do in life the things we do in life &gt;&gt; maybe lift weights, maybe study biology, &gt;&gt; maybe lift weights, maybe study biology, &gt;&gt; maybe lift weights, maybe study biology, maybe play the piano, maybe some maybe play the piano, maybe some maybe play the piano, maybe some combination of things combination of things combination of things &gt;&gt; will enrich the mitochondria, these &gt;&gt; will enrich the mitochondria, these &gt;&gt; will enrich the mitochondria, these energy transformation sites in energy transformation sites in energy transformation sites in particular organs and areas of our brain particular organs and areas of our brain particular organs and areas of our brain more than others. And so we really more than others. And so we really more than others. And so we really become what we pay attention to. We become what we pay attention to. We become what we pay attention to. We become enhanced for what we do. And that makes enhanced for what we do. And that makes enhanced for what we do. And that makes sense at the level of endurance runners sense at the level of endurance runners sense at the level of endurance runners run and their muscles become and run and their muscles become and run and their muscles become and everything becomes optimized for everything becomes optimized for everything becomes optimized for running. Weightlifterss something else. running. Weightlifterss something else. running. Weightlifterss something else. But in the brain, this gets very But in the brain, this gets very But in the brain, this gets very interesting. This means that if we read interesting. This means that if we read interesting. This means that if we read poetry for instance or study biology poetry for instance or study biology poetry for instance or study biology that the areas and circuits of the brain that the areas and circuits of the brain that the areas and circuits of the brain that are responsible for that in some that are responsible for that in some that are responsible for that in some sense become better at doing that. Mhm. sense become better at doing that. Mhm. sense become better at doing that. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And I think this is a very important &gt;&gt; And I think this is a very important &gt;&gt; And I think this is a very important topic because it really gets to the topic because it really gets to the topic because it really gets to the essence of who we are as individuals essence of who we are as individuals essence of who we are as individuals based on our choices of what to do and based on our choices of what to do and based on our choices of what to do and what not to do. what not to do. what not to do. &gt;&gt; So with that as the backdrop, if you &gt;&gt; So with that as the backdrop, if you &gt;&gt; So with that as the backdrop, if you could tell us about this paper and tell could tell us about this paper and tell could tell us about this paper and tell us about what you think about these us about what you think about these us about what you think about these findings and what they might mean, findings and what they might mean, findings and what they might mean, &gt;&gt; I would love that. &gt;&gt; I would love that. &gt;&gt; I would love that. &gt;&gt; We flow as energetic processes, right? &gt;&gt; We flow as energetic processes, right? &gt;&gt; We flow as energetic processes, right? To to your point like we are To to your point like we are To to your point like we are transformative processes. Like we transformative processes. Like we transformative processes. Like we transform, we flow. We are the energy transform, we flow. We are the energy transform, we flow. We are the energy that flows. And the more you direct that flows. And the more you direct that flows. And the more you direct energy to one area, right? If you go to energy to one area, right? If you go to energy to one area, right? If you go to the gym and you do bicep curls, like the gym and you do bicep curls, like the gym and you do bicep curls, like you're resisting the flow of energy you're resisting the flow of energy you're resisting the flow of energy while you're contracting and then you do while you're contracting and then you do while you're contracting and then you do this a few times and then when you let this a few times and then when you let this a few times and then when you let go, you get like blood flow, right? go, you get like blood flow, right? go, you get like blood flow, right? Energy flow through the system. Uh and Energy flow through the system. Uh and Energy flow through the system. Uh and we know exercise training is a beautiful we know exercise training is a beautiful we know exercise training is a beautiful example. Like if you train to run a example. Like if you train to run a example. Like if you train to run a marathon, for example, you can double marathon, for example, you can double marathon, for example, you can double the number of mitochondria in your the number of mitochondria in your the number of mitochondria in your muscles. Wow. muscles. Wow. muscles. Wow. &gt;&gt; Double, right? And my understanding of &gt;&gt; Double, right? And my understanding of &gt;&gt; Double, right? And my understanding of this is as energy flows through the this is as energy flows through the this is as energy flows through the existing mitochondria you're basically existing mitochondria you're basically existing mitochondria you're basically bringing you know energy into that bringing you know energy into that bringing you know energy into that system and then this uh that the system and then this uh that the system and then this uh that the biochemical energy gets transformed and biochemical energy gets transformed and biochemical energy gets transformed and into molecules into metabolites and then into molecules into metabolites and then into molecules into metabolites and then eventually into proteins and then eventually into proteins and then eventually into proteins and then structure gets created as energy flows structure gets created as energy flows structure gets created as energy flows right so it's the flow of energy first right so it's the flow of energy first right so it's the flow of energy first you resist it that's we call this energy you resist it that's we call this energy you resist it that's we call this energy resistance and then when you let go resistance and then when you let go resistance and then when you let go of the resistance it's that's when we of the resistance it's that's when we of the resistance it's that's when we build. That's when we grow. That's when, build. That's when we grow. That's when, build. That's when we grow. That's when, right, Arnold Schwazer said, um, muscles right, Arnold Schwazer said, um, muscles right, Arnold Schwazer said, um, muscles are torn in the gym. They're fed in the are torn in the gym. They're fed in the are torn in the gym. They're fed in the kitchen and are, um, grown in bed, I kitchen and are, um, grown in bed, I kitchen and are, um, grown in bed, I think, is, think, is, think, is, um, &gt;&gt; in an Austrian accent. &gt;&gt; in an Austrian accent. &gt;&gt; in an Austrian accent. &gt;&gt; Yes. So, um, so yeah, if you direct &gt;&gt; Yes. So, um, so yeah, if you direct &gt;&gt; Yes. So, um, so yeah, if you direct energy towards a muscle, right, then one energy towards a muscle, right, then one energy towards a muscle, right, then one way to direct energy is to resist the way to direct energy is to resist the way to direct energy is to resist the energy flow and then to let go. And energy flow and then to let go. And energy flow and then to let go. And that's what exercise fundamentally is, that's what exercise fundamentally is, that's what exercise fundamentally is, right? You resist the energy flow and right? You resist the energy flow and right? You resist the energy flow and then you let go. When you resist energy then you let go. When you resist energy then you let go. When you resist energy too much, it feels uncomfortable which too much, it feels uncomfortable which too much, it feels uncomfortable which is like the burning pain of and is like the burning pain of and is like the burning pain of and then when you let go is when growth and then when you let go is when growth and then when you let go is when growth and uh you know building can happen. Uh and uh you know building can happen. Uh and uh you know building can happen. Uh and we know the same thing happens like we know the same thing happens like we know the same thing happens like everywhere. This is this is not like a everywhere. This is this is not like a everywhere. This is this is not like a mysterious thing of the muscle and like mysterious thing of the muscle and like mysterious thing of the muscle and like of exercise uh you know physiology. This of exercise uh you know physiology. This of exercise uh you know physiology. This is a fundamental biological principle. is a fundamental biological principle. is a fundamental biological principle. If you flow energy in one area then it If you flow energy in one area then it If you flow energy in one area then it will grow. It will you know get better. will grow. It will you know get better. will grow. It will you know get better. it will get more efficient. And if you it will get more efficient. And if you it will get more efficient. And if you block energy flow to one area like you block energy flow to one area like you block energy flow to one area like you block blood flow for example or you get block blood flow for example or you get block blood flow for example or you get an accident and the nerve gets you know an accident and the nerve gets you know an accident and the nerve gets you know damaged then the muscle doesn't damaged then the muscle doesn't damaged then the muscle doesn't contract anymore you're basically contract anymore you're basically contract anymore you're basically blocking the flow of energy there and blocking the flow of energy there and blocking the flow of energy there and what happens it atrophies right atrophy what happens it atrophies right atrophy what happens it atrophies right atrophy is a normal uh movement of life when is a normal uh movement of life when is a normal uh movement of life when energy flow decreases and if there's energy flow decreases and if there's energy flow decreases and if there's no energy flow really there's no purpose no energy flow really there's no purpose no energy flow really there's no purpose for that structure if you feed if you for that structure if you feed if you for that structure if you feed if you stimulate that structure be it a muscle stimulate that structure be it a muscle stimulate that structure be it a muscle or brain circuit, right? A brain network or brain circuit, right? A brain network or brain circuit, right? A brain network or brain area. Uh then naturally, you or brain area. Uh then naturally, you or brain area. Uh then naturally, you know, that area should uh should know, that area should uh should know, that area should uh should grow and build. Uh and there grow and build. Uh and there grow and build. Uh and there what we know happens in the brain and what we know happens in the brain and what we know happens in the brain and also happens between different organs of also happens between different organs of also happens between different organs of the body is there's kind of a the body is there's kind of a the body is there's kind of a competition for finite energy resources. competition for finite energy resources. competition for finite energy resources. &gt;&gt; Right? What you said earlier like you &gt;&gt; Right? What you said earlier like you &gt;&gt; Right? What you said earlier like you can't just eat more to get more energy. can't just eat more to get more energy. can't just eat more to get more energy. We know now we know very well if you We know now we know very well if you We know now we know very well if you overeat, right? you eat more than your overeat, right? you eat more than your overeat, right? you eat more than your body is actually flowing consuming in body is actually flowing consuming in body is actually flowing consuming in terms of energy transforming you get terms of energy transforming you get terms of energy transforming you get sick like if you can you put on fat sick like if you can you put on fat sick like if you can you put on fat which is a good adaptive which is a good adaptive which is a good adaptive uh coping mechanism to eating too much uh coping mechanism to eating too much uh coping mechanism to eating too much uh but then eventually the systems like uh but then eventually the systems like uh but then eventually the systems like it gets overwhelmed and then that hurts it gets overwhelmed and then that hurts it gets overwhelmed and then that hurts the mitochondria and it hurts you know the mitochondria and it hurts you know the mitochondria and it hurts you know cells to become insulin resistant and so cells to become insulin resistant and so cells to become insulin resistant and so there's all sorts of consequences to there's all sorts of consequences to there's all sorts of consequences to eating too much you cannot eat more to eating too much you cannot eat more to eating too much you cannot eat more to get more energy and that is I think get more energy and that is I think get more energy and that is I think still scientifically a very big mystery, still scientifically a very big mystery, still scientifically a very big mystery, right? That why can't we just ramp up right? That why can't we just ramp up right? That why can't we just ramp up our energy our energy our energy uh consumption, energy transformation uh consumption, energy transformation uh consumption, energy transformation and then like sleep less and you know uh and then like sleep less and you know uh and then like sleep less and you know uh work out 3 hours every day that even work out 3 hours every day that even work out 3 hours every day that even like professional athletes who devote like professional athletes who devote like professional athletes who devote all of their energy to you know building all of their energy to you know building all of their energy to you know building muscle mass, building skills or you know muscle mass, building skills or you know muscle mass, building skills or you know building aptitudes, there's a limit to building aptitudes, there's a limit to building aptitudes, there's a limit to how much you know you can eat. Uh how much you know you can eat. Uh how much you know you can eat. Uh and they're yeah we don't really and they're yeah we don't really and they're yeah we don't really know why that is why there's a limit to know why that is why there's a limit to know why that is why there's a limit to that. And uh so the body operates an that. And uh so the body operates an that. And uh so the body operates an economy of energy. You have x amount of economy of energy. You have x amount of economy of energy. You have x amount of energy. You can push that up, you know, energy. You can push that up, you know, energy. You can push that up, you know, over short periods of time. Like if you over short periods of time. Like if you over short periods of time. Like if you start to work out and you're a start to work out and you're a start to work out and you're a cyclist, you do the to France, right? cyclist, you do the to France, right? cyclist, you do the to France, right? Like three weeks, you're going Like three weeks, you're going Like three weeks, you're going for like five 7,000 calories a day. You for like five 7,000 calories a day. You for like five 7,000 calories a day. You do this for three weeks. There's a do this for three weeks. There's a do this for three weeks. There's a reason why the to France is not four reason why the to France is not four reason why the to France is not four weeks and five weeks, weeks and five weeks, weeks and five weeks, &gt;&gt; right? There there's a cap. And &gt;&gt; right? There there's a cap. And &gt;&gt; right? There there's a cap. And there's beautiful data showing that the there's beautiful data showing that the there's beautiful data showing that the longer the event the athletic event the longer the event the athletic event the longer the event the athletic event the lower the max output per day and if lower the max output per day and if lower the max output per day and if you looked at that curve you know the you looked at that curve you know the you looked at that curve you know the first point max power output you can the first point max power output you can the first point max power output you can develop over 10 seconds is what you see develop over 10 seconds is what you see develop over 10 seconds is what you see in the 100 meter sprint right and then in the 100 meter sprint right and then in the 100 meter sprint right and then you get the uh 400 meters and then you get the uh 400 meters and then you get the uh 400 meters and then it goes down at the very and the to it goes down at the very and the to it goes down at the very and the to France is you know marathon is here to France is you know marathon is here to France is you know marathon is here to France three weeks is here then you get France three weeks is here then you get France three weeks is here then you get like crazy run across America multiple like crazy run across America multiple like crazy run across America multiple weeks and then at the very end nine weeks and then at the very end nine weeks and then at the very end nine months pregnancy and [snorts] it costs energy to grow a and [snorts] it costs energy to grow a and [snorts] it costs energy to grow a human being and uh some of the data human being and uh some of the data human being and uh some of the data suggest that when you grow a human being suggest that when you grow a human being suggest that when you grow a human being for 9 months you're basically operating for 9 months you're basically operating for 9 months you're basically operating at the max of her capacity if you at the max of her capacity if you at the max of her capacity if you integrate over you know a 9-month integrate over you know a 9-month integrate over you know a 9-month period. &gt;&gt; Do pregnant women accumulate more &gt;&gt; Do pregnant women accumulate more &gt;&gt; Do pregnant women accumulate more mitochondria or the energy demands are mitochondria or the energy demands are mitochondria or the energy demands are entirely for the mitochondria of the entirely for the mitochondria of the entirely for the mitochondria of the developing fetus? developing fetus? developing fetus? &gt;&gt; That is a good question. We know certain &gt;&gt; That is a good question. We know certain &gt;&gt; That is a good question. We know certain brain areas grow during pregnancy brain areas grow during pregnancy brain areas grow during pregnancy &gt;&gt; that the brain remodels. Exactly. Uh &gt;&gt; that the brain remodels. Exactly. Uh &gt;&gt; that the brain remodels. Exactly. Uh there are different demands, right? As a there are different demands, right? As a there are different demands, right? As a mother, if you're pregnant now, you need mother, if you're pregnant now, you need mother, if you're pregnant now, you need to start to care about different things. to start to care about different things. to start to care about different things. &gt;&gt; Maybe it's adaptive to start to think &gt;&gt; Maybe it's adaptive to start to think &gt;&gt; Maybe it's adaptive to start to think about the world slightly different way. about the world slightly different way. about the world slightly different way. And it's not just about yourself. And it's not just about yourself. And it's not just about yourself. And &gt;&gt; um so there are certainly and even &gt;&gt; um so there are certainly and even &gt;&gt; um so there are certainly and even long-lasting brain changes happen in long-lasting brain changes happen in long-lasting brain changes happen in the woman's brain. So this economy of the woman's brain. So this economy of the woman's brain. So this economy of energy between organs is likely what energy between organs is likely what energy between organs is likely what explains if you're a young woman and you explains if you're a young woman and you explains if you're a young woman and you exercise a lot, you lose your menes, exercise a lot, you lose your menes, exercise a lot, you lose your menes, right? Aminora, then this is not because right? Aminora, then this is not because right? Aminora, then this is not because the reproductive system is broken or the reproductive system is broken or the reproductive system is broken or because the ovaries are or are sick or because the ovaries are or are sick or because the ovaries are or are sick or something like that. The best something like that. The best something like that. The best explanation we have is there's a short explanation we have is there's a short explanation we have is there's a short shortage of energy. Like you're pushing shortage of energy. Like you're pushing shortage of energy. Like you're pushing and driving all of your energy budget and driving all of your energy budget and driving all of your energy budget towards your working muscles towards your working muscles towards your working muscles towards making more mitochondria in your muscles making more mitochondria in your muscles making more mitochondria in your muscles and there's no more energy to fuel to and there's no more energy to fuel to and there's no more energy to fuel to fuel uh reproduction. I have a to fuel uh reproduction. I have a to fuel uh reproduction. I have a practical question related to this. practical question related to this. practical question related to this. I have always wondered why is it that I have always wondered why is it that I have always wondered why is it that when we're coming down with a cold or a when we're coming down with a cold or a when we're coming down with a cold or a flu or some sort of other infection that flu or some sort of other infection that flu or some sort of other infection that there are a bunch of processes that make there are a bunch of processes that make there are a bunch of processes that make us uh more lethargic and tired and these us uh more lethargic and tired and these us uh more lethargic and tired and these are very adaptive and we know we need to are very adaptive and we know we need to are very adaptive and we know we need to rest. But it's not just about getting rest. But it's not just about getting rest. But it's not just about getting sleep. We actually need to slow our sleep. We actually need to slow our sleep. We actually need to slow our circulation down. We need to rest. circulation down. We need to rest. circulation down. We need to rest. &gt;&gt; And there all these theories, you know, &gt;&gt; And there all these theories, you know, &gt;&gt; And there all these theories, you know, about do you feed or starve a cold or about do you feed or starve a cold or about do you feed or starve a cold or flu. And I covered that in a different flu. And I covered that in a different flu. And I covered that in a different episode. We'll put a link. It's not episode. We'll put a link. It's not episode. We'll put a link. It's not straightforward, but um follow your straightforward, but um follow your straightforward, but um follow your appetite, stay hydrated, keep your appetite, stay hydrated, keep your appetite, stay hydrated, keep your electrolytes up and so forth is the electrolytes up and so forth is the electrolytes up and so forth is the short answer. But is it that the immune short answer. But is it that the immune short answer. But is it that the immune system needs more energy and the body as system needs more energy and the body as system needs more energy and the body as a protective mechanism, as an adaptive a protective mechanism, as an adaptive a protective mechanism, as an adaptive mechanism is saying slow down everything mechanism is saying slow down everything mechanism is saying slow down everything else and devote yourself to uh healing, else and devote yourself to uh healing, else and devote yourself to uh healing, to fighting this infection as opposed to fighting this infection as opposed to fighting this infection as opposed to spending energy even walking up the spending energy even walking up the spending energy even walking up the stairs as much as you typically do stairs as much as you typically do stairs as much as you typically do during a day. Is that the is that the during a day. Is that the is that the during a day. Is that the is that the idea? &gt;&gt; Yep. I think that's the best model we &gt;&gt; Yep. I think that's the best model we &gt;&gt; Yep. I think that's the best model we have. Uh and I had a personal experience have. Uh and I had a personal experience have. Uh and I had a personal experience of this uh over a New Year's a couple of this uh over a New Year's a couple of this uh over a New Year's a couple years ago where I could feel I was, years ago where I could feel I was, years ago where I could feel I was, you know, coming down with something uh you know, coming down with something uh you know, coming down with something uh before the, you know, New Year's dinner. before the, you know, New Year's dinner. before the, you know, New Year's dinner. And so it ended up being a pretty short And so it ended up being a pretty short And so it ended up being a pretty short night. I went to bed early and that night. I went to bed early and that night. I went to bed early and that night was terrible. The next day I was night was terrible. The next day I was night was terrible. The next day I was so uh so off and I was, you know, so uh so off and I was, you know, so uh so off and I was, you know, starting to work on the book Energy starting to work on the book Energy starting to work on the book Energy and then I thought, "Oo, this is such a and then I thought, "Oo, this is such a and then I thought, "Oo, this is such a cool opportunity." Like now I'm a cool opportunity." Like now I'm a cool opportunity." Like now I'm experiencing I'm feeling drained, right? experiencing I'm feeling drained, right? experiencing I'm feeling drained, right? Like I'm in bed, everything hurts. And Like I'm in bed, everything hurts. And Like I'm in bed, everything hurts. And then I thought I should be writing about then I thought I should be writing about then I thought I should be writing about this, right? Like and then I thought this, right? Like and then I thought this, right? Like and then I thought like just the thought of like just the thought of like just the thought of like grabbing my computer then I shouldn't grabbing my computer then I shouldn't grabbing my computer then I shouldn't cost more doesn't cost a lot of energy cost more doesn't cost a lot of energy cost more doesn't cost a lot of energy just like wiggle my fingers on the just like wiggle my fingers on the just like wiggle my fingers on the keyboard. But you know there was no keyboard. But you know there was no keyboard. But you know there was no drive. I stopped caring about stuff that drive. I stopped caring about stuff that drive. I stopped caring about stuff that I usually care about, right? Everyone I usually care about, right? Everyone I usually care about, right? Everyone has experienced this when you're really has experienced this when you're really has experienced this when you're really sick. &gt;&gt; Uh motivation, right? zero. Um, my &gt;&gt; Uh motivation, right? zero. Um, my &gt;&gt; Uh motivation, right? zero. Um, my capacity to be the best human being that capacity to be the best human being that capacity to be the best human being that I am and to be kind that I am and to be kind that I am and to be kind &gt;&gt; a little diminished. &gt;&gt; a little diminished. &gt;&gt; a little diminished. &gt;&gt; Just like [snorts] &gt;&gt; Just like [snorts] &gt;&gt; Just like [snorts] I was just I was just I was just &gt;&gt; trying to survive, you know, &gt;&gt; trying to survive, you know, &gt;&gt; trying to survive, you know, like and what we know in terms of like and what we know in terms of like and what we know in terms of biology and mitochondria and energy that biology and mitochondria and energy that biology and mitochondria and energy that happens when you're fighting something happens when you're fighting something happens when you're fighting something like this, the immune system cost a lot like this, the immune system cost a lot like this, the immune system cost a lot of energy. of energy. of energy. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh so I think the best model &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh so I think the best model &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh so I think the best model interpretation we have of sickness interpretation we have of sickness interpretation we have of sickness behavior is what you were describing the behavior is what you were describing the behavior is what you were describing the technical term is you feel sick right technical term is you feel sick right technical term is you feel sick right and you don't want to move the body you and you don't want to move the body you and you don't want to move the body you feel cold right which then uh forces you feel cold right which then uh forces you feel cold right which then uh forces you to put covers or you know to dress to put covers or you know to dress to put covers or you know to dress to avoid cold environments uh you it avoid cold environments uh you it avoid cold environments uh you it hurts to move your body like to contract hurts to move your body like to contract hurts to move your body like to contract muscles and like the there's alodmia muscles and like the there's alodmia muscles and like the there's alodmia right the sensitiz you become more right the sensitiz you become more right the sensitiz you become more sensitive to pain all of these things uh sensitive to pain all of these things uh sensitive to pain all of these things uh likely exist in service of conserving likely exist in service of conserving likely exist in service of conserving your precious energy budget and even not your precious energy budget and even not your precious energy budget and even not eating right like follow your appetite. eating right like follow your appetite. eating right like follow your appetite. Yes. And and if you know eating Yes. And and if you know eating Yes. And and if you know eating costs energy nothing in biology is free. costs energy nothing in biology is free. costs energy nothing in biology is free. Everything costs something. And if you Everything costs something. And if you Everything costs something. And if you eat food now you need to masticate. You eat food now you need to masticate. You eat food now you need to masticate. You need to like have peristelsis. You need to like have peristelsis. You need to like have peristelsis. You need to have gastric acidification movement to have gastric acidification movement to have gastric acidification movement you know secretreting digestive enzymes you know secretreting digestive enzymes you know secretreting digestive enzymes and maybe some bile. Like there the and maybe some bile. Like there the and maybe some bile. Like there the orchestration of digestion is pretty orchestration of digestion is pretty orchestration of digestion is pretty expensive. It's like 10 15% of your expensive. It's like 10 15% of your expensive. It's like 10 15% of your daily energy budget. So that's a 10 15% daily energy budget. So that's a 10 15% daily energy budget. So that's a 10 15% of your daily energy budget if you're of your daily energy budget if you're of your daily energy budget if you're running like a limit is a lot. By now running like a limit is a lot. By now running like a limit is a lot. By now I'm sure that many of you have heard me I'm sure that many of you have heard me I'm sure that many of you have heard me say that I've been taking AG1 for more say that I've been taking AG1 for more say that I've been taking AG1 for more than a decade. And indeed that's true. than a decade. And indeed that's true. than a decade. And indeed that's true. The reason I started taking AG1 way back The reason I started taking AG1 way back The reason I started taking AG1 way back in 2012 and the reason why I still in 2012 and the reason why I still in 2012 and the reason why I still continue to take it every single day is continue to take it every single day is continue to take it every single day is because AG1 is to my knowledge the because AG1 is to my knowledge the because AG1 is to my knowledge the highest quality and most comprehensive highest quality and most comprehensive highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational nutritional of the foundational nutritional of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. What that supplements on the market. What that supplements on the market. What that means is that it contains not just means is that it contains not just means is that it contains not just vitamins and minerals, but also vitamins and minerals, but also vitamins and minerals, but also probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Just go to claim a special offer. Just go to claim a special offer. Just go to drinka1.com/huberman to get started. You mentioned that if to get started. You mentioned that if to get started. You mentioned that if women exercise beyond a certain women exercise beyond a certain women exercise beyond a certain threshold, uh they stop menrating and threshold, uh they stop menrating and threshold, uh they stop menrating and that it's because there's not enough that it's because there's not enough that it's because there's not enough energy essentially to menrate. One idea energy essentially to menrate. One idea energy essentially to menrate. One idea would be well if you just eat enough would be well if you just eat enough would be well if you just eat enough then you have enough energy. But we have then you have enough energy. But we have then you have enough energy. But we have to think in verb states not absolutes. to think in verb states not absolutes. to think in verb states not absolutes. And so what I'm realizing is that while And so what I'm realizing is that while And so what I'm realizing is that while one needs sufficient energy input in the one needs sufficient energy input in the one needs sufficient energy input in the form of food and this could also be true form of food and this could also be true form of food and this could also be true for the example of being sick, for the example of being sick, for the example of being sick, &gt;&gt; it's necessary but not sufficient &gt;&gt; it's necessary but not sufficient &gt;&gt; it's necessary but not sufficient because the mitochondria are doing two because the mitochondria are doing two because the mitochondria are doing two things. They're transforming that food things. They're transforming that food things. They're transforming that food energy into bodily energy to menrate or energy into bodily energy to menrate or energy into bodily energy to menrate or to move or exercise or think or care to move or exercise or think or care to move or exercise or think or care about a book etc. about a book etc. about a book etc. &gt;&gt; But part of their job is not just to &gt;&gt; But part of their job is not just to &gt;&gt; But part of their job is not just to transform the energy, it's to distribute transform the energy, it's to distribute transform the energy, it's to distribute the energy. And so you really need two the energy. And so you really need two the energy. And so you really need two conditions and you know I'm not a conditions and you know I'm not a conditions and you know I'm not a computer scientist but I know enough computer scientist but I know enough computer scientist but I know enough about programming you know and about programming you know and about programming you know and engineering that you know this concept engineering that you know this concept engineering that you know this concept of an andgate you need sufficient energy of an andgate you need sufficient energy of an andgate you need sufficient energy so coming into the system and you need so coming into the system and you need so coming into the system and you need to be able to distribute that energy to be able to distribute that energy to be able to distribute that energy properly in order for something to occur properly in order for something to occur properly in order for something to occur it's an endgate you need both things it's an endgate you need both things it's an endgate you need both things basically &gt;&gt; so I now and forever going forward will &gt;&gt; so I now and forever going forward will &gt;&gt; so I now and forever going forward will think about mitochondria as not just think about mitochondria as not just think about mitochondria as not just energy production but energy production but energy production but energy distribution organal Yes, distribution organal Yes, distribution organal Yes, &gt;&gt; thanks to the way you described it. And &gt;&gt; thanks to the way you described it. And &gt;&gt; thanks to the way you described it. And now it makes perfect sense as to why now it makes perfect sense as to why now it makes perfect sense as to why when I'm sick, if I'm not hungry, I'm when I'm sick, if I'm not hungry, I'm when I'm sick, if I'm not hungry, I'm not going to force myself to eat, not going to force myself to eat, not going to force myself to eat, provided I have enough body fat stores, provided I have enough body fat stores, provided I have enough body fat stores, you know, I need to eat eventually, but you know, I need to eat eventually, but you know, I need to eat eventually, but whatever weakness or fatigue I feel is whatever weakness or fatigue I feel is whatever weakness or fatigue I feel is probably in that situation where I don't probably in that situation where I don't probably in that situation where I don't have an appetite is probably not a lack have an appetite is probably not a lack have an appetite is probably not a lack of caloric energy driving that fatigue. of caloric energy driving that fatigue. of caloric energy driving that fatigue. It's that my body is saying, you know It's that my body is saying, you know It's that my body is saying, you know what, you're better off just not having what, you're better off just not having what, you're better off just not having me shuttle that food energy through you me shuttle that food energy through you me shuttle that food energy through you so I can shuttle your immune cells to so I can shuttle your immune cells to so I can shuttle your immune cells to the proper place. Exactly. the proper place. Exactly. the proper place. Exactly. &gt;&gt; And this is when people say the body is &gt;&gt; And this is when people say the body is &gt;&gt; And this is when people say the body is smart. There's an intelligence to the smart. There's an intelligence to the smart. There's an intelligence to the system. I think that's true because with system. I think that's true because with system. I think that's true because with our brains, we think, oh no, I'll just our brains, we think, oh no, I'll just our brains, we think, oh no, I'll just cram more energy into you need to eat. cram more energy into you need to eat. cram more energy into you need to eat. You need to No, maybe not. Whereas if I You need to No, maybe not. Whereas if I You need to No, maybe not. Whereas if I do have an appetite, I don't care what do have an appetite, I don't care what do have an appetite, I don't care what people say about feed a cold, starve a people say about feed a cold, starve a people say about feed a cold, starve a flu or feed, you know, starve a flu, flu or feed, you know, starve a flu, flu or feed, you know, starve a flu, feed a cold. I'm just going to do what feed a cold. I'm just going to do what feed a cold. I'm just going to do what my body tells me to. my body tells me to. my body tells me to. &gt;&gt; Yes. And I agree the body is &gt;&gt; Yes. And I agree the body is &gt;&gt; Yes. And I agree the body is wise. Animals who don't have a very wise. Animals who don't have a very wise. Animals who don't have a very other non-human animals like your dogs other non-human animals like your dogs other non-human animals like your dogs uh like they don't have a mind to uh like they don't have a mind to uh like they don't have a mind to distract them from, you know, living in distract them from, you know, living in distract them from, you know, living in alignment with their energetic states. alignment with their energetic states. alignment with their energetic states. &gt;&gt; So when they're sick, the immune system &gt;&gt; So when they're sick, the immune system &gt;&gt; So when they're sick, the immune system just the amount of the part of just the amount of the part of just the amount of the part of your budget that gets consumed by the your budget that gets consumed by the your budget that gets consumed by the immune system, you know, expands, right? immune system, you know, expands, right? immune system, you know, expands, right? So this energy this extra energy needs So this energy this extra energy needs So this energy this extra energy needs to be stolen from somewhere because you to be stolen from somewhere because you to be stolen from somewhere because you can't eat more to have you know infinite can't eat more to have you know infinite can't eat more to have you know infinite energy. Uh so what where's that energy energy. Uh so what where's that energy energy. Uh so what where's that energy coming from? So not contracting your coming from? So not contracting your coming from? So not contracting your muscles because you feel in pain is a muscles because you feel in pain is a muscles because you feel in pain is a good way. Not having to thermmorreulate good way. Not having to thermmorreulate good way. Not having to thermmorreulate because you know cover up another because you know cover up another because you know cover up another way to conserve energy. and then way to conserve energy. and then way to conserve energy. and then stopping to care about stuff like stopping to care about stuff like stopping to care about stuff like becoming asocial and apathic and all of becoming asocial and apathic and all of becoming asocial and apathic and all of those features of sickness behavior or those features of sickness behavior or those features of sickness behavior or energyconserving uh strategies and not eating like if you uh strategies and not eating like if you uh strategies and not eating like if you can have like free 10 15% of your energy can have like free 10 15% of your energy can have like free 10 15% of your energy now you can allocate it to your immune now you can allocate it to your immune now you can allocate it to your immune system that is a very good strategy most system that is a very good strategy most system that is a very good strategy most people walk around with multiple weeks people walk around with multiple weeks people walk around with multiple weeks if not months worth of energy right like if not months worth of energy right like if not months worth of energy right like under the skin and their love handles uh under the skin and their love handles uh under the skin and their love handles uh the record actually for not eating is the record actually for not eating is the record actually for not eating is from this uh Scottish man. 382 days. from this uh Scottish man. 382 days. from this uh Scottish man. 382 days. &gt;&gt; Was he fat when he started? &gt;&gt; Was he fat when he started? &gt;&gt; Was he fat when he started? &gt;&gt; He was very fat. &gt;&gt; He was very fat. &gt;&gt; He was very fat. &gt;&gt; Was he fat when it ended? &gt;&gt; Was he fat when it ended? &gt;&gt; Was he fat when it ended? &gt;&gt; Uh he lost uh how much he lost like 250 &gt;&gt; Uh he lost uh how much he lost like 250 &gt;&gt; Uh he lost uh how much he lost like 250 lbs I think. lbs I think. lbs I think. &gt;&gt; That's all stored sandwiches. &gt;&gt; That's all stored sandwiches. &gt;&gt; That's all stored sandwiches. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So most people can eat can go a &gt;&gt; Yeah. So most people can eat can go a &gt;&gt; Yeah. So most people can eat can go a full month without eating. So and full month without eating. So and full month without eating. So and this maybe goes back to what we talked this maybe goes back to what we talked this maybe goes back to what we talked about earlier like we don't feel energy about earlier like we don't feel energy about earlier like we don't feel energy quantity, right? Like uh if you close quantity, right? Like uh if you close quantity, right? Like uh if you close your eyes and you feel your energy like your eyes and you feel your energy like your eyes and you feel your energy like you don't feel how much fat you have on you don't feel how much fat you have on you don't feel how much fat you have on your body, how much glycogen you have in your body, how much glycogen you have in your body, how much glycogen you have in your liver or you know in your muscles. your liver or you know in your muscles. your liver or you know in your muscles. What you feel is the transformation of What you feel is the transformation of What you feel is the transformation of energy, &gt;&gt; the neural energy. &gt;&gt; the neural energy. &gt;&gt; the neural energy. &gt;&gt; Do you want to do a little experiment? &gt;&gt; Do you want to do a little experiment? &gt;&gt; Do you want to do a little experiment? We can do a little experiment to feel We can do a little experiment to feel We can do a little experiment to feel our energy. our energy. our energy. &gt;&gt; Definitely. &gt;&gt; Definitely. &gt;&gt; Definitely. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. &gt;&gt; By the way, a tenure full professor &gt;&gt; By the way, a tenure full professor &gt;&gt; By the way, a tenure full professor at Columbia School of Medicine just at Columbia School of Medicine just at Columbia School of Medicine just said, "Uh, do you want to do a little said, "Uh, do you want to do a little said, "Uh, do you want to do a little experiment to feel your energy?" and we experiment to feel your energy?" and we experiment to feel your energy?" and we both closed our eyes, which tells you both closed our eyes, which tells you both closed our eyes, which tells you that it's definitely 2025. [laughter] that it's definitely 2025. [laughter] that it's definitely 2025. [laughter] &gt;&gt; You know, the reason &gt;&gt; You know, the reason &gt;&gt; You know, the reason &gt;&gt; good things have happened in the world. &gt;&gt; good things have happened in the world. &gt;&gt; good things have happened in the world. Okay. &gt;&gt; The reason we both closed our eyes and &gt;&gt; The reason we both closed our eyes and &gt;&gt; The reason we both closed our eyes and kind of stopped moving our bodies, kind of stopped moving our bodies, kind of stopped moving our bodies, which is kind of what you do if you want which is kind of what you do if you want which is kind of what you do if you want to meditate or something like this, is to meditate or something like this, is to meditate or something like this, is because it turns off the noise. because it turns off the noise. because it turns off the noise. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Right. And the if you want to survive in &gt;&gt; Right. And the if you want to survive in &gt;&gt; Right. And the if you want to survive in a dangerous physical world, you need to a dangerous physical world, you need to a dangerous physical world, you need to be aware of like stuff that might hurt be aware of like stuff that might hurt be aware of like stuff that might hurt you, right? Or kill you. Um and feeling you, right? Or kill you. Um and feeling you, right? Or kill you. Um and feeling your body like propriception and all of your body like propriception and all of your body like propriception and all of this needs to be very high level. Yeah. this needs to be very high level. Yeah. this needs to be very high level. Yeah. It needs to be prioritized over whatever It needs to be prioritized over whatever It needs to be prioritized over whatever intraceptive you know signal there are. intraceptive you know signal there are. intraceptive you know signal there are. There's some intraceptive signal that's There's some intraceptive signal that's There's some intraceptive signal that's what we'll feel into that you know can what we'll feel into that you know can what we'll feel into that you know can overcome that but just not moving the overcome that but just not moving the overcome that but just not moving the body closing your eyes it kind of helps body closing your eyes it kind of helps body closing your eyes it kind of helps you to tune into your energy and I you to tune into your energy and I you to tune into your energy and I suspect there's a lot of value there. suspect there's a lot of value there. suspect there's a lot of value there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. We'll talk more about some &gt;&gt; Yeah. We'll talk more about some &gt;&gt; Yeah. We'll talk more about some incredible results about meditation and incredible results about meditation and incredible results about meditation and restoration of energy. Um, can the and restoration of energy. Um, can the and restoration of energy. Um, can the audience do this along with us provided audience do this along with us provided audience do this along with us provided they're not driving? they're not driving? they're not driving? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Okay, great. &gt;&gt; Okay, great. &gt;&gt; Okay, great. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh, so to do this, uh, best is you're &gt;&gt; Uh, so to do this, uh, best is you're &gt;&gt; Uh, so to do this, uh, best is you're sitting comfortably and, um, you can sitting comfortably and, um, you can sitting comfortably and, um, you can close your eyes if you want to. I think close your eyes if you want to. I think close your eyes if you want to. I think that helps with the process. We'll that helps with the process. We'll that helps with the process. We'll take one breath in and then, uh, we'll take one breath in and then, uh, we'll take one breath in and then, uh, we'll hold the breath for a little bit. we'll hold the breath for a little bit. we'll hold the breath for a little bit. So, breathing in, [snorts] breathing out, breathing out, breathing out, and you can breathe out all the way, all and you can breathe out all the way, all and you can breathe out all the way, all the way down. And then hold that breath. And for the first few seconds, it's And for the first few seconds, it's And for the first few seconds, it's generally not too uncomfortable. But generally not too uncomfortable. But generally not too uncomfortable. But then as you hold this, feel into your then as you hold this, feel into your then as you hold this, feel into your body, to your belly, into your chest, body, to your belly, into your chest, body, to your belly, into your chest, into your head. What's the effect of not breathing? And What's the effect of not breathing? And What's the effect of not breathing? And then you start to feel maybe this urge then you start to feel maybe this urge then you start to feel maybe this urge to breathe and this desire to bring to breathe and this desire to bring to breathe and this desire to bring oxygen into your body, to your oxygen into your body, to your oxygen into your body, to your mitochondria. And then when you need to, you take a And then when you need to, you take a And then when you need to, you take a breath in. You can open your eyes. If breath in. You can open your eyes. If breath in. You can open your eyes. If you can hold it longer, you do. you can hold it longer, you do. you can hold it longer, you do. Yeah. What did you feel? So when I went Yeah. What did you feel? So when I went Yeah. What did you feel? So when I went to the full exhale and held my breath, to the full exhale and held my breath, to the full exhale and held my breath, &gt;&gt; uh my what we geek speak, what &gt;&gt; uh my what we geek speak, what &gt;&gt; uh my what we geek speak, what neuroscientists call interosception, my neuroscientists call interosception, my neuroscientists call interosception, my perception of things from the skin perception of things from the skin perception of things from the skin inward became more salient and I could inward became more salient and I could inward became more salient and I could feel my heartbeat uh more and more. Um, feel my heartbeat uh more and more. Um, feel my heartbeat uh more and more. Um, and then it didn't speed up, but I could and then it didn't speed up, but I could and then it didn't speed up, but I could just feel my heart beating. I was more just feel my heart beating. I was more just feel my heart beating. I was more aware, excuse me, of my heart beating. aware, excuse me, of my heart beating. aware, excuse me, of my heart beating. And then I, as the impulse to breathe And then I, as the impulse to breathe And then I, as the impulse to breathe started to kick in, started to kick in, started to kick in, uh, you could feel a bit of ramping up uh, you could feel a bit of ramping up uh, you could feel a bit of ramping up of it's not anxiety, but it's a sense of it's not anxiety, but it's a sense of it's not anxiety, but it's a sense of urgency, &gt;&gt; you know, hardwired, fortunately, sense &gt;&gt; you know, hardwired, fortunately, sense &gt;&gt; you know, hardwired, fortunately, sense of urgency. And then with an with an of urgency. And then with an with an of urgency. And then with an with an inhale, there's a relaxation of inhale, there's a relaxation of inhale, there's a relaxation of that sense. Y that sense. Y that sense. Y &gt;&gt; and um there is this sense that uh &gt;&gt; and um there is this sense that uh &gt;&gt; and um there is this sense that uh energy moves out from the center at that energy moves out from the center at that energy moves out from the center at that point like you feel more of your point like you feel more of your point like you feel more of your body &gt;&gt; because I think anytime we don't have &gt;&gt; because I think anytime we don't have &gt;&gt; because I think anytime we don't have air um our brain goes to how do I bring air um our brain goes to how do I bring air um our brain goes to how do I bring air right here right now you're not air right here right now you're not air right here right now you're not thinking heartbeat you're thinking get thinking heartbeat you're thinking get thinking heartbeat you're thinking get air get air get air &gt;&gt; something of that sort &gt;&gt; something of that sort &gt;&gt; something of that sort &gt;&gt; yes I think if you do that and the &gt;&gt; yes I think if you do that and the &gt;&gt; yes I think if you do that and the urgency right the anxiety the stress the urgency right the anxiety the stress the urgency right the anxiety the stress or um this you know it feels dangerous or um this you know it feels dangerous or um this you know it feels dangerous right and And I think to many people right and And I think to many people right and And I think to many people dying by drowning or like suffocation is dying by drowning or like suffocation is dying by drowning or like suffocation is like the one of the worst death. like the one of the worst death. like the one of the worst death. And uh so why is that? Like what is that And uh so why is that? Like what is that And uh so why is that? Like what is that sense of urgency of anxiety? It's CO2 sense of urgency of anxiety? It's CO2 sense of urgency of anxiety? It's CO2 building up in your blood. Right? CO2 is building up in your blood. Right? CO2 is building up in your blood. Right? CO2 is the product that mitochondria release as the product that mitochondria release as the product that mitochondria release as they transform energy. And then when CO2 they transform energy. And then when CO2 they transform energy. And then when CO2 builds up, it means oxygen is getting builds up, it means oxygen is getting builds up, it means oxygen is getting depleted. Right? If oxygen gets depleted. Right? If oxygen gets depleted. Right? If oxygen gets depleted, the electrons from the food depleted, the electrons from the food depleted, the electrons from the food you eat can no longer flow. Right? If you eat can no longer flow. Right? If you eat can no longer flow. Right? If there's no oxygen at the end in your there's no oxygen at the end in your there's no oxygen at the end in your mitochondria to accept the electrons mitochondria to accept the electrons mitochondria to accept the electrons flowing, you stop flowing. So you as a flowing, you stop flowing. So you as a flowing, you stop flowing. So you as a movement of energy are at risk of movement of energy are at risk of movement of energy are at risk of ceasing to exist. Not being able to ceasing to exist. Not being able to ceasing to exist. Not being able to breathe, right? Uh being out of breath breathe, right? Uh being out of breath breathe, right? Uh being out of breath is an existential threat to your is an existential threat to your is an existential threat to your energetic self. Without getting into the energetic self. Without getting into the energetic self. Without getting into the details, I've talked about it on other details, I've talked about it on other details, I've talked about it on other podcasts. I had a scuba diving podcasts. I had a scuba diving podcasts. I had a scuba diving accident a few years ago, 2017. ran accident a few years ago, 2017. ran accident a few years ago, 2017. ran out of air in a out of air in a out of air in a &gt;&gt; in a bad situation to begin with. Um and &gt;&gt; in a bad situation to begin with. Um and &gt;&gt; in a bad situation to begin with. Um and I'll tell you the sense of urgency is I'll tell you the sense of urgency is I'll tell you the sense of urgency is very immediate and um fortunately didn't very immediate and um fortunately didn't very immediate and um fortunately didn't end up with any PTSD from that. It end up with any PTSD from that. It end up with any PTSD from that. It obviously worked out okay. I'm obviously worked out okay. I'm obviously worked out okay. I'm sitting here and talking. But um now sitting here and talking. But um now sitting here and talking. But um now I understand why. And I never did this I understand why. And I never did this I understand why. And I never did this to another kid, nor did anyone ever do to another kid, nor did anyone ever do to another kid, nor did anyone ever do it to me, but there's this joke that it to me, but there's this joke that it to me, but there's this joke that kids play on one another where their kids play on one another where their kids play on one another where their friend is coming up from underwater and friend is coming up from underwater and friend is coming up from underwater and you're ready to take a breath. That's you're ready to take a breath. That's you're ready to take a breath. That's why you come up from underwater. And if why you come up from underwater. And if why you come up from underwater. And if someone holds your head right at that someone holds your head right at that someone holds your head right at that point, even though it's just a m a point, even though it's just a m a point, even though it's just a m a moment, &gt;&gt; the sense of urgency that kicks in &gt;&gt; the sense of urgency that kicks in &gt;&gt; the sense of urgency that kicks in &gt;&gt; is very intense and very fast. &gt;&gt; is very intense and very fast. &gt;&gt; is very intense and very fast. &gt;&gt; Uh which speaks to just how hardwired &gt;&gt; Uh which speaks to just how hardwired &gt;&gt; Uh which speaks to just how hardwired these circuits are because at that point these circuits are because at that point these circuits are because at that point presumably there was enough air to stay presumably there was enough air to stay presumably there was enough air to stay under for another 5 seconds or whatever under for another 5 seconds or whatever under for another 5 seconds or whatever it is. But when we anticipate getting it is. But when we anticipate getting it is. But when we anticipate getting oxygen and we don't, oxygen and we don't, oxygen and we don't, &gt;&gt; there's a big increase in &gt;&gt; there's a big increase in &gt;&gt; there's a big increase in &gt;&gt; stress. energy goes straight to whatever &gt;&gt; stress. energy goes straight to whatever &gt;&gt; stress. energy goes straight to whatever areas of the brain, amydala and whatever areas of the brain, amydala and whatever areas of the brain, amydala and other areas presumably that are like other areas presumably that are like other areas presumably that are like this is a bad situation do anything and this is a bad situation do anything and this is a bad situation do anything and everything becomes about resolving this everything becomes about resolving this everything becomes about resolving this situation. &gt;&gt; Yes. And and that's because we are &gt;&gt; Yes. And and that's because we are &gt;&gt; Yes. And and that's because we are energy. We are the flowing energy energy. We are the flowing energy energy. We are the flowing energy through the system. And if energy uh through the system. And if energy uh through the system. And if energy uh starts to stall, it just feels so starts to stall, it just feels so starts to stall, it just feels so uncomfortable. We have to have evolved uncomfortable. We have to have evolved uncomfortable. We have to have evolved to feel this. If something is making to feel this. If something is making to feel this. If something is making your energy stall, like there's not your energy stall, like there's not your energy stall, like there's not enough oxygen around, you need to get enough oxygen around, you need to get enough oxygen around, you need to get out of there. And you need to have this out of there. And you need to have this out of there. And you need to have this instinct, right, to survive. So, instinct, right, to survive. So, instinct, right, to survive. So, what's trying to survive is not like the what's trying to survive is not like the what's trying to survive is not like the physical body. It's it's the this the physical body. It's it's the this the physical body. It's it's the this flow of energy that's, you know, being flow of energy that's, you know, being flow of energy that's, you know, being threatened, right, from lacking threatened, right, from lacking threatened, right, from lacking oxygen. &gt;&gt; Many times already, you've talked about &gt;&gt; Many times already, you've talked about &gt;&gt; Many times already, you've talked about the flow of energy, and that concept, I the flow of energy, and that concept, I the flow of energy, and that concept, I think it's going to be threaded through think it's going to be threaded through think it's going to be threaded through as we go forward. when you hear about um as we go forward. when you hear about um as we go forward. when you hear about um practices like Tai Chi or when you hear like in like Tai Chi or when you hear like in like Tai Chi or when you hear like in the martial arts where people are taking the martial arts where people are taking the martial arts where people are taking other people's energy and you know other people's energy and you know other people's energy and you know converting and this is a not just a converting and this is a not just a converting and this is a not just a thing of like of iikido but the notion thing of like of iikido but the notion thing of like of iikido but the notion that like if you box you learn that you that like if you box you learn that you that like if you box you learn that you you're not just hitting with your arm you're not just hitting with your arm you're not just hitting with your arm and your shoulder you have to keep your and your shoulder you have to keep your and your shoulder you have to keep your feet planted you're pulling from the feet planted you're pulling from the feet planted you're pulling from the floor in some sense you're transferring floor in some sense you're transferring floor in some sense you're transferring the energy but you're actually pushing the energy but you're actually pushing the energy but you're actually pushing back against the floor and then it's back against the floor and then it's back against the floor and then it's coming up through your body people talk coming up through your body people talk coming up through your body people talk about the fascial slings you know when about the fascial slings you know when about the fascial slings you know when people run there There are a bazillion people run there There are a bazillion people run there There are a bazillion different variations on this, but it's different variations on this, but it's different variations on this, but it's all about this concept of flow of all about this concept of flow of all about this concept of flow of energy. And I find that so much of what energy. And I find that so much of what energy. And I find that so much of what we find incredible when people dance, we find incredible when people dance, we find incredible when people dance, when people uh sing, when people uh do when people uh sing, when people uh do when people uh sing, when people uh do incredible athletic feats or channel incredible athletic feats or channel incredible athletic feats or channel everything they've got into something. everything they've got into something. everything they've got into something. This channeling of energy is the human This channeling of energy is the human This channeling of energy is the human animal deliberately channeling all their animal deliberately channeling all their animal deliberately channeling all their energy in the form of practice into energy in the form of practice into energy in the form of practice into something. In many ways, we love that. something. In many ways, we love that. something. In many ways, we love that. Even though by definition it creates a Even though by definition it creates a Even though by definition it creates a very uh lopsided person and I I'm not very uh lopsided person and I I'm not very uh lopsided person and I I'm not trying to get into the psychology of trying to get into the psychology of trying to get into the psychology of this so much as I want to go back to this so much as I want to go back to this so much as I want to go back to this notion of our brain areas having this notion of our brain areas having this notion of our brain areas having different amounts of mitochondria different amounts of mitochondria different amounts of mitochondria &gt;&gt; probably from birth but then if we play &gt;&gt; probably from birth but then if we play &gt;&gt; probably from birth but then if we play soccer and we like math and uh pottery soccer and we like math and uh pottery soccer and we like math and uh pottery we get a different brain we get a different brain we get a different brain &gt;&gt; than if we like reading and theater and &gt;&gt; than if we like reading and theater and &gt;&gt; than if we like reading and theater and movies and We'll exercise, but we're not movies and We'll exercise, but we're not movies and We'll exercise, but we're not too crazy about it. You know, if we too crazy about it. You know, if we too crazy about it. You know, if we exercise, our brain works better. We've exercise, our brain works better. We've exercise, our brain works better. We've heard, &gt;&gt; but there's also the notion of the &gt;&gt; but there's also the notion of the &gt;&gt; but there's also the notion of the person who just spends all their time person who just spends all their time person who just spends all their time exercising &gt;&gt; and their brain doesn't get better. &gt;&gt; and their brain doesn't get better. &gt;&gt; and their brain doesn't get better. &gt;&gt; I'm being gentle there. &gt;&gt; I'm being gentle there. &gt;&gt; I'm being gentle there. &gt;&gt; And I like exercise and I like thinking. &gt;&gt; And I like exercise and I like thinking. &gt;&gt; And I like exercise and I like thinking. [laughter] So, &gt;&gt; is there a trade-off? &gt;&gt; is there a trade-off? &gt;&gt; is there a trade-off? &gt;&gt; Is there a trade-off? &gt;&gt; Is there a trade-off? &gt;&gt; Is there a trade-off? &gt;&gt; Because I believe in staying fit and &gt;&gt; Because I believe in staying fit and &gt;&gt; Because I believe in staying fit and staying healthy and living a long life, staying healthy and living a long life, staying healthy and living a long life, but most people are not competitive but most people are not competitive but most people are not competitive athletes. Most people don't want to be athletes. Most people don't want to be athletes. Most people don't want to be the strongest person in the gym or the strongest person in the gym or the strongest person in the gym or the best runner. Most people, I believe, and best runner. Most people, I believe, and best runner. Most people, I believe, and I'm one of these, I want to be strong I'm one of these, I want to be strong I'm one of these, I want to be strong enough. I want to have endurance. I want enough. I want to have endurance. I want enough. I want to have endurance. I want to have some speed, but I want to be to have some speed, but I want to be to have some speed, but I want to be able to think. I want my mitochondria able to think. I want my mitochondria able to think. I want my mitochondria balanced across all my systems. My balanced across all my systems. My balanced across all my systems. My girlfriend would say, "Well, you're a girlfriend would say, "Well, you're a girlfriend would say, "Well, you're a Libra. Of course you do." But I'm saying Libra. Of course you do." But I'm saying Libra. Of course you do." But I'm saying I want it because I want to be able to I want it because I want to be able to I want it because I want to be able to lean into a lot of different aspects of lean into a lot of different aspects of lean into a lot of different aspects of life. I don't want to become the life. I don't want to become the life. I don't want to become the atrophied &gt;&gt; in one area and hypertrophied to some &gt;&gt; in one area and hypertrophied to some &gt;&gt; in one area and hypertrophied to some great extent in some other area, human. great extent in some other area, human. great extent in some other area, human. &gt;&gt; Yep. So, what are your thoughts on these &gt;&gt; Yep. So, what are your thoughts on these &gt;&gt; Yep. So, what are your thoughts on these through the lens of the results that you through the lens of the results that you through the lens of the results that you recently published? recently published? recently published? &gt;&gt; Is it a trade-off? I don't think we know &gt;&gt; Is it a trade-off? I don't think we know &gt;&gt; Is it a trade-off? I don't think we know uh exactly, but we did a study recently uh exactly, but we did a study recently uh exactly, but we did a study recently that points to the fact that there might that points to the fact that there might that points to the fact that there might be trade-offs be trade-offs be trade-offs &gt;&gt; between different systems. &gt;&gt; between different systems. &gt;&gt; between different systems. &gt;&gt; Sorry, meattheads. No, I'm just kidding. &gt;&gt; Sorry, meattheads. No, I'm just kidding. &gt;&gt; Sorry, meattheads. No, I'm just kidding. I love I love working out in the gym, I love I love working out in the gym, I love I love working out in the gym, but you have to read too, you know. but you have to read too, you know. but you have to read too, you know. [laughter] &gt;&gt; You know, we tested the hypothesis &gt;&gt; You know, we tested the hypothesis &gt;&gt; You know, we tested the hypothesis that if you have more mitochondria in that if you have more mitochondria in that if you have more mitochondria in your muscles, you also have more in your muscles, you also have more in your muscles, you also have more in your brain and then your heart and then your brain and then your heart and then your brain and then your heart and then your liver and then your skin. And the result liver and then your skin. And the result liver and then your skin. And the result is that's not the case. is that's not the case. is that's not the case. &gt;&gt; And you know, you Andrew, I think you &gt;&gt; And you know, you Andrew, I think you &gt;&gt; And you know, you Andrew, I think you seem to derive a lot of fulfillment. And seem to derive a lot of fulfillment. And seem to derive a lot of fulfillment. And um you know, um you know, um you know, you live up to your full potential when you live up to your full potential when you live up to your full potential when you can do all of these things, right? you can do all of these things, right? you can do all of these things, right? And you're a great communicator. You're And you're a great communicator. You're And you're a great communicator. You're a great integrator. You know, the kind a great integrator. You know, the kind a great integrator. You know, the kind of thinking you do is like this of thinking you do is like this of thinking you do is like this beautiful integrative thinking uh which beautiful integrative thinking uh which beautiful integrative thinking uh which is which might be what has led you to do is which might be what has led you to do is which might be what has led you to do what you do now, right, for with most of what you do now, right, for with most of what you do now, right, for with most of your time because this really taps into your time because this really taps into your time because this really taps into your strengths. It really moves you, I your strengths. It really moves you, I your strengths. It really moves you, I suspect, energetically. I think I enjoy suspect, energetically. I think I enjoy suspect, energetically. I think I enjoy it. You enjoy it. What does that mean? it. You enjoy it. What does that mean? it. You enjoy it. What does that mean? Right? Enjoyment is kind of an emotional Right? Enjoyment is kind of an emotional Right? Enjoyment is kind of an emotional state, an affective state that it's an state, an affective state that it's an state, an affective state that it's an energetic state. We're all different energetic state. We're all different energetic state. We're all different energy transformers, right? Like you energy transformers, right? Like you energy transformers, right? Like you transform energy and you have this transform energy and you have this transform energy and you have this ability to do what you do. Other people ability to do what you do. Other people ability to do what you do. Other people have very different skills, right, and have very different skills, right, and have very different skills, right, and gifts. I think we we're born with gifts. I think we we're born with gifts. I think we we're born with something that uh doesn't seem to be something that uh doesn't seem to be something that uh doesn't seem to be fully just encoded in people's fully just encoded in people's fully just encoded in people's genomes. [laughter] there are genomes. [laughter] there are genomes. [laughter] there are genetically identical twins that have genetically identical twins that have genetically identical twins that have very different aptitudes and you know very different aptitudes and you know very different aptitudes and you know personalities and we don't know where personalities and we don't know where personalities and we don't know where this comes from. Um and then we are this comes from. Um and then we are this comes from. Um and then we are fed we're you know moved and inspired by fed we're you know moved and inspired by fed we're you know moved and inspired by different things and uh when people seem different things and uh when people seem different things and uh when people seem to follow that it appears to bring to follow that it appears to bring to follow that it appears to bring them energy and what this means them energy and what this means them energy and what this means biologically the level of mitochondria I biologically the level of mitochondria I biologically the level of mitochondria I think our research is starting to think our research is starting to think our research is starting to point in a direction that says if you're point in a direction that says if you're point in a direction that says if you're engaged in things that bring you purpose engaged in things that bring you purpose engaged in things that bring you purpose and fulfillment there's another study we and fulfillment there's another study we and fulfillment there's another study we did we asked people our colleagues in did we asked people our colleagues in did we asked people our colleagues in Chicago ask people before they died. How Chicago ask people before they died. How Chicago ask people before they died. How do you how much uh sense of purpose do you how much uh sense of purpose do you how much uh sense of purpose do you have in your life? How meaningful you have in your life? How meaningful you have in your life? How meaningful social connections, well-being, right? social connections, well-being, right? social connections, well-being, right? Uh and then the negative stuff, Uh and then the negative stuff, Uh and then the negative stuff, depression, loneliness, you know, depression, loneliness, you know, depression, loneliness, you know, anxiety, uh and then every year they anxiety, uh and then every year they anxiety, uh and then every year they answered those questionnaires. So, we answered those questionnaires. So, we answered those questionnaires. So, we knew how deep people felt about knew how deep people felt about knew how deep people felt about themselves, about life, about, you know, themselves, about life, about, you know, themselves, about life, about, you know, some greater power, you know, beyond some greater power, you know, beyond some greater power, you know, beyond them. Uh and then they died, gave their them. Uh and then they died, gave their them. Uh and then they died, gave their brain to science. We got a little piece brain to science. We got a little piece brain to science. We got a little piece of brain and now we're measuring the of brain and now we're measuring the of brain and now we're measuring the mitochondria. uh and Cavalyn Trump uh a mitochondria. uh and Cavalyn Trump uh a mitochondria. uh and Cavalyn Trump uh a researcher who works in her group who's researcher who works in her group who's researcher who works in her group who's a bonafide mitochondrial a bonafide mitochondrial a bonafide mitochondrial psychobiologist. So she asked questions psychobiologist. So she asked questions psychobiologist. So she asked questions between the psyche and the and the between the psyche and the and the between the psyche and the and the biology of mitochondria. So she asked biology of mitochondria. So she asked biology of mitochondria. So she asked could it be that how people felt before could it be that how people felt before could it be that how people felt before they died relates to the bitochondria in they died relates to the bitochondria in they died relates to the bitochondria in their brain and the prefrontal cortex their brain and the prefrontal cortex their brain and the prefrontal cortex the DLPFC the dorsalateral prefrontal the DLPFC the dorsalateral prefrontal the DLPFC the dorsalateral prefrontal cortex. And what she found is that cortex. And what she found is that cortex. And what she found is that people who felt more purpose in life and people who felt more purpose in life and people who felt more purpose in life and who felt more connected to others and who felt more connected to others and who felt more connected to others and who felt you know well-being uh for who felt you know well-being uh for who felt you know well-being uh for whatever was bringing them whatever was bringing them whatever was bringing them well-being it seemed like that was well-being it seemed like that was well-being it seemed like that was sufficient to increase the energy sufficient to increase the energy sufficient to increase the energy transformation capacity of the transformation capacity of the transformation capacity of the mitochondria in their brain. So is this mitochondria in their brain. So is this mitochondria in their brain. So is this because of the experiences that you know because of the experiences that you know because of the experiences that you know they're fortunate to have or that they're fortunate to have or that they're fortunate to have or that they're actively fostering in their life they're actively fostering in their life they're actively fostering in their life uh that's actually transforming the uh that's actually transforming the uh that's actually transforming the mitochondria in their brain maybe. Or mitochondria in their brain maybe. Or mitochondria in their brain maybe. Or it's the other way around for some it's the other way around for some it's the other way around for some reason that we don't understand they reason that we don't understand they reason that we don't understand they have more of the energy transformation have more of the energy transformation have more of the energy transformation capacity in their brain mitochondria and capacity in their brain mitochondria and capacity in their brain mitochondria and that is leading them to experience the that is leading them to experience the that is leading them to experience the world as more positive and as more world as more positive and as more world as more positive and as more purposeful and as more meaningful. purposeful and as more meaningful. purposeful and as more meaningful. Right? Animal studies say it probably Right? Animal studies say it probably Right? Animal studies say it probably goes both ways. So if you tweak the goes both ways. So if you tweak the goes both ways. So if you tweak the mitochondria in a rat brain, you can mitochondria in a rat brain, you can mitochondria in a rat brain, you can change the behavior of that animal to change the behavior of that animal to change the behavior of that animal to from more submissive to more dominant or from more submissive to more dominant or from more submissive to more dominant or from more dominant to more submissive. from more dominant to more submissive. from more dominant to more submissive. Beautiful work by Carmen Sandy at EPFL Beautiful work by Carmen Sandy at EPFL Beautiful work by Carmen Sandy at EPFL in Switzerland that showed this. Uh and in Switzerland that showed this. Uh and in Switzerland that showed this. Uh and then the other way around, if you then the other way around, if you then the other way around, if you chronically stress animals, you deprive chronically stress animals, you deprive chronically stress animals, you deprive them of kind of freedom of choosing them of kind of freedom of choosing them of kind of freedom of choosing different, you know, options. So different, you know, options. So different, you know, options. So chronically stressful things actually chronically stressful things actually chronically stressful things actually damage the mitochondria in the brain. damage the mitochondria in the brain. damage the mitochondria in the brain. And there in some brain areas there are And there in some brain areas there are And there in some brain areas there are fewer mitochondria and they don't fewer mitochondria and they don't fewer mitochondria and they don't transform energy as well. So the transform energy as well. So the transform energy as well. So the mitochondria are responsive it seems to mitochondria are responsive it seems to mitochondria are responsive it seems to our states of mind. Uh and that the our states of mind. Uh and that the our states of mind. Uh and that the mitochondria in our brain can also mitochondria in our brain can also mitochondria in our brain can also influence our states of mind. And and if influence our states of mind. And and if influence our states of mind. And and if we want to talk about the philosophy if we want to talk about the philosophy if we want to talk about the philosophy of this thinking about like what's of this thinking about like what's of this thinking about like what's causing what maybe is and you're really causing what maybe is and you're really causing what maybe is and you're really the right question to ask but what's the right question to ask but what's the right question to ask but what's emerging is that's relevant to your emerging is that's relevant to your emerging is that's relevant to your question. There's a clear connection question. There's a clear connection question. There's a clear connection between the subjective experiences that between the subjective experiences that between the subjective experiences that we have that we know from first person we have that we know from first person we have that we know from first person to be meaningful, right? Because that's to be meaningful, right? Because that's to be meaningful, right? Because that's what we have access to uh primarily is what we have access to uh primarily is what we have access to uh primarily is how we feel, how we experience the world how we feel, how we experience the world how we feel, how we experience the world somehow is related to the biology of the somehow is related to the biology of the somehow is related to the biology of the energy transforming units, energy transforming units, energy transforming units, energy processing units in our brain, processing units in our brain, processing units in our brain, &gt;&gt; man. &gt;&gt; man. &gt;&gt; man. &gt;&gt; Uh and maybe also in our immune &gt;&gt; Uh and maybe also in our immune &gt;&gt; Uh and maybe also in our immune system. And so we've done work in immune system. And so we've done work in immune system. And so we've done work in immune cells and in brain tissue. Um, and we're cells and in brain tissue. Um, and we're cells and in brain tissue. Um, and we're currently analyzing mitochondria from currently analyzing mitochondria from currently analyzing mitochondria from 5,000 uh human brain samples. That's 10 5,000 uh human brain samples. That's 10 5,000 uh human brain samples. That's 10 different uh brain and muscle uh different uh brain and muscle uh different uh brain and muscle uh samples from 500 people. samples from 500 people. samples from 500 people. &gt;&gt; Do you have histories on these people as &gt;&gt; Do you have histories on these people as &gt;&gt; Do you have histories on these people as to how much purpose, what they did, how to how much purpose, what they did, how to how much purpose, what they did, how life how much life fulfillment they had. life how much life fulfillment they had. life how much life fulfillment they had. &gt;&gt; I'm so glad that biologists like you &gt;&gt; I'm so glad that biologists like you &gt;&gt; I'm so glad that biologists like you exist. I just want to say that uh not exist. I just want to say that uh not exist. I just want to say that uh not just because you're agreeing to be a just because you're agreeing to be a just because you're agreeing to be a public health educator, but um just it's public health educator, but um just it's public health educator, but um just it's incredible how much things have changed incredible how much things have changed incredible how much things have changed in the last few years in terms of the in the last few years in terms of the in the last few years in terms of the public awareness about biology and public awareness about biology and public awareness about biology and psychology. But I have the genuine psychology. But I have the genuine psychology. But I have the genuine sense that with you doing the kind of sense that with you doing the kind of sense that with you doing the kind of work that you're doing that no longer work that you're doing that no longer work that you're doing that no longer are we going to be talking about the are we going to be talking about the are we going to be talking about the eastern philosophy of energy versus you eastern philosophy of energy versus you eastern philosophy of energy versus you know mitochondria in a laboratory at know mitochondria in a laboratory at know mitochondria in a laboratory at some medical school at an Ivy League some medical school at an Ivy League some medical school at an Ivy League medical school. But you're merging these medical school. But you're merging these medical school. But you're merging these ideas in real data. And I think it's ideas in real data. And I think it's ideas in real data. And I think it's going to bring together ideas that have going to bring together ideas that have going to bring together ideas that have been in cooperation for a long time but been in cooperation for a long time but been in cooperation for a long time but didn't realize it. And I think it's didn't realize it. And I think it's didn't realize it. And I think it's going to transform human health because going to transform human health because going to transform human health because &gt;&gt; if we think about ourselves as energy &gt;&gt; if we think about ourselves as energy &gt;&gt; if we think about ourselves as energy transformation beings, transformation beings, transformation beings, we're going to think pretty carefully we're going to think pretty carefully we're going to think pretty carefully about where we invest our time and about where we invest our time and about where we invest our time and energy and also I do think start to energy and also I do think start to energy and also I do think start to listen to our bodies more when we're listen to our bodies more when we're listen to our bodies more when we're feeling shut down. Like what does that feeling shut down. Like what does that feeling shut down. Like what does that mean? &gt;&gt; You know, uh now we can't respond to &gt;&gt; You know, uh now we can't respond to &gt;&gt; You know, uh now we can't respond to everything as just a well does it give everything as just a well does it give everything as just a well does it give me energy not give me energy because we me energy not give me energy because we me energy not give me energy because we also have to build up some circuits to also have to build up some circuits to also have to build up some circuits to be proficient in life that perhaps be proficient in life that perhaps be proficient in life that perhaps &gt;&gt; are inconvenient for us to build up. &gt;&gt; are inconvenient for us to build up. &gt;&gt; are inconvenient for us to build up. But at the same time, But at the same time, But at the same time, &gt;&gt; I think there's a lot to be gained from &gt;&gt; I think there's a lot to be gained from &gt;&gt; I think there's a lot to be gained from this idea of does something give me this idea of does something give me this idea of does something give me energy. Does this energy. Does this energy. Does this &gt;&gt; I think people uh confuse like drama and &gt;&gt; I think people uh confuse like drama and &gt;&gt; I think people uh confuse like drama and friction with certain people. It's like friction with certain people. It's like friction with certain people. It's like that's energy expenditure. That's not that's energy expenditure. That's not that's energy expenditure. That's not that's not good transformation of that's not good transformation of that's not good transformation of energy. And you hear about this stuff energy. And you hear about this stuff energy. And you hear about this stuff now more in the psychology relationship now more in the psychology relationship now more in the psychology relationship space. People will say, you know, space. People will say, you know, space. People will say, you know, they're not good for my nervous system. they're not good for my nervous system. they're not good for my nervous system. It's so funny how neuroscientists now, It's so funny how neuroscientists now, It's so funny how neuroscientists now, you know, where or I just feel relaxed you know, where or I just feel relaxed you know, where or I just feel relaxed around them or I can sleep next to them around them or I can sleep next to them around them or I can sleep next to them so comfortably. And you know, we kind of so comfortably. And you know, we kind of so comfortably. And you know, we kind of write these things off as like, oh, write these things off as like, oh, write these things off as like, oh, that's cute. That's kind of woo. Uh-uh. that's cute. That's kind of woo. Uh-uh. that's cute. That's kind of woo. Uh-uh. This sounds like real biology if pushed This sounds like real biology if pushed This sounds like real biology if pushed through the lens of what you're telling through the lens of what you're telling through the lens of what you're telling us about mitochondria as energy us about mitochondria as energy us about mitochondria as energy transformation units. transformation units. transformation units. &gt;&gt; Yep. I think everything you just &gt;&gt; Yep. I think everything you just &gt;&gt; Yep. I think everything you just mentioned doesn't make much sense from mentioned doesn't make much sense from mentioned doesn't make much sense from this molecular biology lens that's this molecular biology lens that's this molecular biology lens that's really captured biio medicine, right? really captured biio medicine, right? really captured biio medicine, right? like many years ago, 50 years ago or so, like many years ago, 50 years ago or so, like many years ago, 50 years ago or so, like there was this wave of whoa, there like there was this wave of whoa, there like there was this wave of whoa, there there's DNA that exists and there's, you there's DNA that exists and there's, you there's DNA that exists and there's, you know, proteins, we can sequence stuff. know, proteins, we can sequence stuff. know, proteins, we can sequence stuff. We can measure, you know, uh the We can measure, you know, uh the We can measure, you know, uh the components of a cell and we can look at components of a cell and we can look at components of a cell and we can look at things under the microscope and we can, things under the microscope and we can, things under the microscope and we can, you know, scan the brain and like all of you know, scan the brain and like all of you know, scan the brain and like all of those um assets that we were, you those um assets that we were, you those um assets that we were, you know, all of a sudden able to know, all of a sudden able to know, all of a sudden able to capture. It was really convincing, capture. It was really convincing, capture. It was really convincing, compelling. We built a whole research compelling. We built a whole research compelling. We built a whole research and you know academic science ecosystem and you know academic science ecosystem and you know academic science ecosystem around this and I think as a um by around this and I think as a um by around this and I think as a um by nature this reductionistic framework nature this reductionistic framework nature this reductionistic framework pushed aside the mind right the all pushed aside the mind right the all pushed aside the mind right the all of the subjective experiences you know of the subjective experiences you know of the subjective experiences you know it's in your head or you know whatever it's in your head or you know whatever it's in your head or you know whatever all of this was pushed aside so the all of this was pushed aside so the all of this was pushed aside so the human experience is the most direct way human experience is the most direct way human experience is the most direct way in which you can know whether the in which you can know whether the in which you can know whether the content of your life matches your content of your life matches your content of your life matches your energy right and matches what matters energy right and matches what matters energy right and matches what matters for you and uh and what you really care for you and uh and what you really care for you and uh and what you really care about. Uh so like pushing aside which is about. Uh so like pushing aside which is about. Uh so like pushing aside which is what biio medicine has done pushing what biio medicine has done pushing what biio medicine has done pushing aside the mind and all of those aside the mind and all of those aside the mind and all of those subjective experience I think has been subjective experience I think has been subjective experience I think has been really um damaging to understanding the really um damaging to understanding the really um damaging to understanding the basis of health and understanding what basis of health and understanding what basis of health and understanding what allows some people to be healthy for allows some people to be healthy for allows some people to be healthy for like really long time and to live long like really long time and to live long like really long time and to live long healthy lives and to live you know healthy lives and to live you know healthy lives and to live you know fulfilled lives. um we if we if we fulfilled lives. um we if we if we fulfilled lives. um we if we if we think of ourselves as molecular machines think of ourselves as molecular machines think of ourselves as molecular machines like there's no way we can make sense of like there's no way we can make sense of like there's no way we can make sense of this and then we have consciousness you this and then we have consciousness you this and then we have consciousness you know research that's trying to make know research that's trying to make know research that's trying to make sense of these beautiful uh this sense of these beautiful uh this sense of these beautiful uh this beautiful spectrum of human experience beautiful spectrum of human experience beautiful spectrum of human experience right from like I can't get up in the right from like I can't get up in the right from like I can't get up in the morning like taking a shower is like too morning like taking a shower is like too morning like taking a shower is like too difficult and I'd rather die like this difficult and I'd rather die like this difficult and I'd rather die like this is one end of the spectrum and then the is one end of the spectrum and then the is one end of the spectrum and then the other end is oh my god the world is so other end is oh my god the world is so other end is oh my god the world is so beautiful I'm so grateful I feel beautiful I'm so grateful I feel beautiful I'm so grateful I feel inspired to be a good person um and I inspired to be a good person um and I inspired to be a good person um and I can do good in this world, right? can do good in this world, right? can do good in this world, right? There's and then everything in between There's and then everything in between There's and then everything in between and we're left now we don't have a and we're left now we don't have a and we're left now we don't have a science of this like we've said science of this like we've said science of this like we've said this is not science, right? This is like this is not science, right? This is like this is not science, right? This is like psychology. This is woo stuff and we psychology. This is woo stuff and we psychology. This is woo stuff and we can't access this with biomolecular can't access this with biomolecular can't access this with biomolecular science. And I think it's true. I I'm science. And I think it's true. I I'm science. And I think it's true. I I'm not uh I don't have a lot of hope that not uh I don't have a lot of hope that not uh I don't have a lot of hope that we will make great inroads in fully we will make great inroads in fully we will make great inroads in fully capturing the nature of consciousness, capturing the nature of consciousness, capturing the nature of consciousness, the nature of the human experience, the nature of the human experience, the nature of the human experience, the nature of well-being, of what it means nature of well-being, of what it means nature of well-being, of what it means to be a fulfilled human being that lives to be a fulfilled human being that lives to be a fulfilled human being that lives up to their full potential. I don't up to their full potential. I don't up to their full potential. I don't think at the at this point that we'll think at the at this point that we'll think at the at this point that we'll find answers in molecular biology. But find answers in molecular biology. But find answers in molecular biology. But what I do think is that an energetic what I do think is that an energetic what I do think is that an energetic understanding of life and an energetic understanding of life and an energetic understanding of life and an energetic understanding of ourselves, right? As an understanding of ourselves, right? As an understanding of ourselves, right? As an as a flow of energy, not as a molecules as a flow of energy, not as a molecules as a flow of energy, not as a molecules and the metabolism that support this and the metabolism that support this and the metabolism that support this flow, but as the flow itself. I think flow, but as the flow itself. I think flow, but as the flow itself. I think that is kind of a point of consilience. that is kind of a point of consilience. that is kind of a point of consilience. Energy flow is the lynch pin between Energy flow is the lynch pin between Energy flow is the lynch pin between matter, you know, the stuff of biology matter, you know, the stuff of biology matter, you know, the stuff of biology [laughter] and experiences. Again, we [laughter] and experiences. Again, we [laughter] and experiences. Again, we don't experience energy itself. If we don't experience energy itself. If we don't experience energy itself. If we experience a transformation of energy experience a transformation of energy experience a transformation of energy when energy flows through this metabolic when energy flows through this metabolic when energy flows through this metabolic circuitry that we have, metabolism is circuitry that we have, metabolism is circuitry that we have, metabolism is just an energetic circuitry. Electrons just an energetic circuitry. Electrons just an energetic circuitry. Electrons flowing not as free electrons in a flowing not as free electrons in a flowing not as free electrons in a copper wire but as electrons from food copper wire but as electrons from food copper wire but as electrons from food to oxygen through enzymes. Right? So to oxygen through enzymes. Right? So to oxygen through enzymes. Right? So this thing is a metabolic carbon-based this thing is a metabolic carbon-based this thing is a metabolic carbon-based you know energetic circuit. And when you know energetic circuit. And when you know energetic circuit. And when energy flows through this somehow for energy flows through this somehow for energy flows through this somehow for reasons we don't fully understand it reasons we don't fully understand it reasons we don't fully understand it feels like something right and emotions feels like something right and emotions feels like something right and emotions energy in motion subjective experiences energy in motion subjective experiences energy in motion subjective experiences of feeling inspired and doing good of feeling inspired and doing good of feeling inspired and doing good or feeling terrible wanting to die like or feeling terrible wanting to die like or feeling terrible wanting to die like these states all live and all emerge these states all live and all emerge these states all live and all emerge from the transformation of energy. from the transformation of energy. from the transformation of energy. Energy is kind of that consilience point Energy is kind of that consilience point Energy is kind of that consilience point where we have you know behaviors uh where we have you know behaviors uh where we have you know behaviors uh everything we do in neuro imaging right everything we do in neuro imaging right everything we do in neuro imaging right the EEG whatever when we look at the EEG whatever when we look at the EEG whatever when we look at the brain we're really looking at energy brain we're really looking at energy brain we're really looking at energy patterns if you just change how much patterns if you just change how much patterns if you just change how much energy flows in one region or another energy flows in one region or another energy flows in one region or another you change the anatomy you change the you change the anatomy you change the you change the anatomy you change the biochemistry and then that gets encoded biochemistry and then that gets encoded biochemistry and then that gets encoded if energy flows a certain way or is if energy flows a certain way or is if energy flows a certain way or is patterned a certain way it will change patterned a certain way it will change patterned a certain way it will change how genes are expressed right it will how genes are expressed right it will how genes are expressed right it will change the epiggenome because of change the epiggenome because of change the epiggenome because of metabolites and whatever intermediates metabolites and whatever intermediates metabolites and whatever intermediates are there are there are there &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned that [clears throat] I had elevated that [clears throat] I had elevated that [clears throat] I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. What I to get early access to Function. What I to get early access to Function. What I think has been missing in this whole think has been missing in this whole think has been missing in this whole landscape of health frankly has been landscape of health frankly has been landscape of health frankly has been somebody who understands the different somebody who understands the different somebody who understands the different levels of analysis. Uh a levels of analysis. Uh a levels of analysis. Uh a great neuroscientist at uh now at NYU great neuroscientist at uh now at NYU great neuroscientist at uh now at NYU once told me that a real intellectual once told me that a real intellectual once told me that a real intellectual of which you are is somebody that of which you are is somebody that of which you are is somebody that understands and can communicate understands and can communicate understands and can communicate something at multiple levels of something at multiple levels of something at multiple levels of granularity. That's very important. granularity. That's very important. granularity. That's very important. So I'm very reassured by everything I'm So I'm very reassured by everything I'm So I'm very reassured by everything I'm hearing and where this is taking us. hearing and where this is taking us. hearing and where this is taking us. That takes us to your opening question That takes us to your opening question That takes us to your opening question which is like takes us through which is like takes us through which is like takes us through mitochondria and how that you know mitochondria and how that you know mitochondria and how that you know affects cellular and organ and you know affects cellular and organ and you know affects cellular and organ and you know behaviors. I think what we just touched behaviors. I think what we just touched behaviors. I think what we just touched on here is like mitochondria flowing on here is like mitochondria flowing on here is like mitochondria flowing transforming energy and then that energy transforming energy and then that energy transforming energy and then that energy kind of ripples out kind of ripples out kind of ripples out &gt;&gt; at the level of the cell and their &gt;&gt; at the level of the cell and their &gt;&gt; at the level of the cell and their metabolites that are mitochondria are metabolites that are mitochondria are metabolites that are mitochondria are producing based on the energetic state producing based on the energetic state producing based on the energetic state of the mitochondria. there will be more of the mitochondria. there will be more of the mitochondria. there will be more you know acetyl coa and citrate and uh you know acetyl coa and citrate and uh you know acetyl coa and citrate and uh lactate and alpha ketoglutarate and lactate and alpha ketoglutarate and lactate and alpha ketoglutarate and those are all you know molecular uh those are all you know molecular uh those are all you know molecular uh imprints of an energetic state and then imprints of an energetic state and then imprints of an energetic state and then those molecules carry this energetic those molecules carry this energetic those molecules carry this energetic signature that's in the mitochondria to signature that's in the mitochondria to signature that's in the mitochondria to the nucleus and then boom they get the nucleus and then boom they get the nucleus and then boom they get written down as the epiggenome and now written down as the epiggenome and now written down as the epiggenome and now the cell all of a sudden has this gene the cell all of a sudden has this gene the cell all of a sudden has this gene turned down turned off or this other turned down turned off or this other turned down turned off or this other gene turned on and now the cell is a gene turned on and now the cell is a gene turned on and now the cell is a different kind of cell different kind of cell different kind of cell &gt;&gt; because there was a change at the &gt;&gt; because there was a change at the &gt;&gt; because there was a change at the energetic level in the mitochondri energetic level in the mitochondri energetic level in the mitochondri And then that ripples out. Now the cell, And then that ripples out. Now the cell, And then that ripples out. Now the cell, you know, experiences its environment in you know, experiences its environment in you know, experiences its environment in a certain way energetically, right? That a certain way energetically, right? That a certain way energetically, right? That starts in the mitochondria, ripples out starts in the mitochondria, ripples out starts in the mitochondria, ripples out to the nucleus. Now the nucleus is able to the nucleus. Now the nucleus is able to the nucleus. Now the nucleus is able to make proteins like cytoines. And so to make proteins like cytoines. And so to make proteins like cytoines. And so cytoines in many ways are uh signatures cytoines in many ways are uh signatures cytoines in many ways are uh signatures of an underlying energetic state. So of an underlying energetic state. So of an underlying energetic state. So what we call inflammation, my what we call inflammation, my what we call inflammation, my understanding of inflammation is it's understanding of inflammation is it's understanding of inflammation is it's an energetic state. And in many cases is an energetic state. And in many cases is an energetic state. And in many cases is if the energy doesn't flow freely or you if the energy doesn't flow freely or you if the energy doesn't flow freely or you know with low resistance in the system know with low resistance in the system know with low resistance in the system if you're a cell and either you're if you're a cell and either you're if you're a cell and either you're running out of oxygen right you're running out of oxygen right you're running out of oxygen right you're hypoxic electrons can't flow as a cell hypoxic electrons can't flow as a cell hypoxic electrons can't flow as a cell you know you have this primal experience you know you have this primal experience you know you have this primal experience of what you experienced earlier right of what you experienced earlier right of what you experienced earlier right you're not breathing you're like I you're not breathing you're like I you're not breathing you're like I have to take a breath or I'm going to have to take a breath or I'm going to have to take a breath or I'm going to die &gt;&gt; so if you're a cell and you experience a &gt;&gt; so if you're a cell and you experience a &gt;&gt; so if you're a cell and you experience a version of this a really primal version of this a really primal version of this a really primal version of this you need to do something of this you need to do something of this you need to do something &gt;&gt; so you call out &gt;&gt; so you call out &gt;&gt; so you call out &gt;&gt; you call out you call out for help and &gt;&gt; you call out you call out for help and &gt;&gt; you call out you call out for help and that's where the cytoines come in. that's where the cytoines come in. that's where the cytoines come in. &gt;&gt; Yeah, cytoines are, you know, universal &gt;&gt; Yeah, cytoines are, you know, universal &gt;&gt; Yeah, cytoines are, you know, universal language of cell communication. language of cell communication. language of cell communication. &gt;&gt; Cytoines are not immune. They're they're &gt;&gt; Cytoines are not immune. They're they're &gt;&gt; Cytoines are not immune. They're they're there this you know fundamental way that there this you know fundamental way that there this you know fundamental way that cells have to talk to each other. cells have to talk to each other. cells have to talk to each other. &gt;&gt; Assuming that it is this repeating set &gt;&gt; Assuming that it is this repeating set &gt;&gt; Assuming that it is this repeating set of principles of energetic flow. of principles of energetic flow. of principles of energetic flow. Let's get a little woo for a moment. Let's get a little woo for a moment. Let's get a little woo for a moment. Let's get really woo for a moment. We Let's get really woo for a moment. We Let's get really woo for a moment. We are in California. Uh because I am are in California. Uh because I am are in California. Uh because I am beginning to understand it's grounded in beginning to understand it's grounded in beginning to understand it's grounded in real biology. For instance, people have real biology. For instance, people have real biology. For instance, people have heard of the 27 club. You know, you have heard of the 27 club. You know, you have heard of the 27 club. You know, you have there's this uh it's not a club there's this uh it's not a club there's this uh it's not a club anyone wants to be a part of, which are, anyone wants to be a part of, which are, anyone wants to be a part of, which are, you know, incredible musicians and you know, incredible musicians and you know, incredible musicians and artists who just seem to have this artists who just seem to have this artists who just seem to have this incredible uh talent and intensity and they die at uh talent and intensity and they die at uh talent and intensity and they die at 27. And um you know and there of course And um you know and there of course And um you know and there of course certain things like music and art certain things like music and art certain things like music and art sometimes are you know there's overuse sometimes are you know there's overuse sometimes are you know there's overuse of substances and substances were almost of substances and substances were almost of substances and substances were almost always involved in these various cases. always involved in these various cases. always involved in these various cases. Jim Morrison and Jimmyi Hendris and Jim Morrison and Jimmyi Hendris and Jim Morrison and Jimmyi Hendris and you know Janice Joplain and there are you know Janice Joplain and there are you know Janice Joplain and there are others. I don't know if they're all in others. I don't know if they're all in others. I don't know if they're all in the 27 club but I believe so and there the 27 club but I believe so and there the 27 club but I believe so and there are others. But this idea that for are others. But this idea that for are others. But this idea that for people whose quote unquote flame burns people whose quote unquote flame burns people whose quote unquote flame burns really hot, their intensity, you really hot, their intensity, you really hot, their intensity, you know, their charisma early on, they tend know, their charisma early on, they tend know, their charisma early on, they tend to die young. And if not at 27, there to die young. And if not at 27, there to die young. And if not at 27, there are a lot of examples of this. If you are a lot of examples of this. If you are a lot of examples of this. If you look into these different cases, not the look into these different cases, not the look into these different cases, not the ones I just mentioned, you often find ones I just mentioned, you often find ones I just mentioned, you often find that there was amphetamine use. that there was amphetamine use. that there was amphetamine use. &gt;&gt; And you say, well, like what is &gt;&gt; And you say, well, like what is &gt;&gt; And you say, well, like what is amphetamine and cocaine use really? amphetamine and cocaine use really? amphetamine and cocaine use really? &gt;&gt; Well, it taps into the dopamine system, &gt;&gt; Well, it taps into the dopamine system, &gt;&gt; Well, it taps into the dopamine system, the epinephrine system. This is the epinephrine system. This is the epinephrine system. This is definitely the stuff of energetic definitely the stuff of energetic definitely the stuff of energetic deployment and release and deployment and release and deployment and release and transformation. Like these are not drugs transformation. Like these are not drugs transformation. Like these are not drugs that subdue people. These are drugs that subdue people. These are drugs that subdue people. These are drugs that energize people. energize people. energize people. &gt;&gt; And it's as if really there was a lot &gt;&gt; And it's as if really there was a lot &gt;&gt; And it's as if really there was a lot more life packed into a shorter period more life packed into a shorter period more life packed into a shorter period of time of time of time &gt;&gt; and they die early. Yeah. In a parallel &gt;&gt; and they die early. Yeah. In a parallel &gt;&gt; and they die early. Yeah. In a parallel vein, um I once had a conversation with vein, um I once had a conversation with vein, um I once had a conversation with someone that I understood uh was a child someone that I understood uh was a child someone that I understood uh was a child prodigy and he stopped me at one point prodigy and he stopped me at one point prodigy and he stopped me at one point and he said, "No, former child prodigy." and he said, "No, former child prodigy." and he said, "No, former child prodigy." And I thought, "Okay, we're being, you And I thought, "Okay, we're being, you And I thought, "Okay, we're being, you know, kind of detailed here." But I went know, kind of detailed here." But I went know, kind of detailed here." But I went and started reading about child and started reading about child and started reading about child prodigies. You know, you don't meet many prodigies. You know, you don't meet many prodigies. You know, you don't meet many adults that are brilliant who continue to get are brilliant who continue to get are brilliant who continue to get brilliant their entire life. more and brilliant their entire life. more and brilliant their entire life. more and more and more and more brilliant. In more and more and more brilliant. In more and more and more brilliant. In other words, child prodigies eventually other words, child prodigies eventually other words, child prodigies eventually plateau. They just get there a little plateau. They just get there a little plateau. They just get there a little earlier and in some cases a lot earlier. earlier and in some cases a lot earlier. earlier and in some cases a lot earlier. Have you ever heard of somebody Have you ever heard of somebody Have you ever heard of somebody graduating medical school at 16 and then graduating medical school at 16 and then graduating medical school at 16 and then becoming the best physician in their becoming the best physician in their becoming the best physician in their field, continuing into their 70s and field, continuing into their 70s and field, continuing into their 70s and 80s? No, people caught up. People catch 80s? No, people caught up. People catch 80s? No, people caught up. People catch up to prodigies. And so there's this up to prodigies. And so there's this up to prodigies. And so there's this idea perhaps that, you know, the idea perhaps that, you know, the idea perhaps that, you know, the allocation of energy when it's really allocation of energy when it's really allocation of energy when it's really directed in time and in space to certain directed in time and in space to certain directed in time and in space to certain circuits of the body, we see incredible circuits of the body, we see incredible circuits of the body, we see incredible feats. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And we're like, whoa. But then it &gt;&gt; And we're like, whoa. But then it &gt;&gt; And we're like, whoa. But then it doesn't continue forever. doesn't continue forever. doesn't continue forever. &gt;&gt; And I'm going to bring this around to &gt;&gt; And I'm going to bring this around to &gt;&gt; And I'm going to bring this around to this concept of longevity in a moment, this concept of longevity in a moment, this concept of longevity in a moment, but I'd love your thoughts on that. Mhm. but I'd love your thoughts on that. Mhm. but I'd love your thoughts on that. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And then I'd like to talk about how the &gt;&gt; And then I'd like to talk about how the &gt;&gt; And then I'd like to talk about how the things that all of us can do can keep things that all of us can do can keep things that all of us can do can keep our m mitochondrial reservoir high our m mitochondrial reservoir high our m mitochondrial reservoir high enough so that we can allocate it in enough so that we can allocate it in enough so that we can allocate it in different directions. But I'm just different directions. But I'm just different directions. But I'm just curious your thoughts about people who curious your thoughts about people who curious your thoughts about people who seem to their fire burns really seem to their fire burns really seem to their fire burns really bright and then it goes out early and bright and then it goes out early and bright and then it goes out early and prodigies seem to prodigies seem to prodigies seem to &gt;&gt; channel all their energy and do &gt;&gt; channel all their energy and do &gt;&gt; channel all their energy and do phenomenal things and we're delighted by phenomenal things and we're delighted by phenomenal things and we're delighted by like the you know the little the doctor like the you know the little the doctor like the you know the little the doctor who's 16 or the person who graduated law who's 16 or the person who graduated law who's 16 or the person who graduated law school took the bar at 17 or something. school took the bar at 17 or something. school took the bar at 17 or something. Then you look later and they're doing Then you look later and they're doing Then you look later and they're doing interesting things but they're not interesting things but they're not interesting things but they're not phenomenal later in life. People caught phenomenal later in life. People caught phenomenal later in life. People caught up. There's a parallel in biology up. There's a parallel in biology up. There's a parallel in biology which is how different species develop which is how different species develop which is how different species develop much faster then they reach you know much faster then they reach you know much faster then they reach you know reproductive age much faster and then reproductive age much faster and then reproductive age much faster and then they die much earlier they die much earlier they die much earlier &gt;&gt; much you know earlier like mice for &gt;&gt; much you know earlier like mice for &gt;&gt; much you know earlier like mice for example uh they live like two to three example uh they live like two to three example uh they live like two to three years and they develop really quickly years and they develop really quickly years and they develop really quickly &gt;&gt; um uh so the everything is like &gt;&gt; um uh so the everything is like &gt;&gt; um uh so the everything is like accelerated and there's two beautiful accelerated and there's two beautiful accelerated and there's two beautiful papers one published in nature one papers one published in nature one papers one published in nature one published in science on the same month published in science on the same month published in science on the same month in 2023 uh that I think shed some light in 2023 uh that I think shed some light in 2023 uh that I think shed some light on this They ask what controls the pace on this They ask what controls the pace on this They ask what controls the pace of development of development of development &gt;&gt; in mice and in humans. And so they took &gt;&gt; in mice and in humans. And so they took &gt;&gt; in mice and in humans. And so they took mouse cells, human cells, stem cells, mouse cells, human cells, stem cells, mouse cells, human cells, stem cells, put them in a dish, and then you look put them in a dish, and then you look put them in a dish, and then you look for like the rhythm of development. And for like the rhythm of development. And for like the rhythm of development. And they found that as others had seen they found that as others had seen they found that as others had seen before, the mouse cells, which came from before, the mouse cells, which came from before, the mouse cells, which came from an animal that develops, grows, and dies an animal that develops, grows, and dies an animal that develops, grows, and dies in three years versus human cells, in three years versus human cells, in three years versus human cells, right? an organism that develops, grows, right? an organism that develops, grows, right? an organism that develops, grows, and dies in like 80-ish years uh have and dies in like 80-ish years uh have and dies in like 80-ish years uh have very diff different developmental rates. very diff different developmental rates. very diff different developmental rates. And then they ask what's different And then they ask what's different And then they ask what's different between that? What controls the pace of between that? What controls the pace of between that? What controls the pace of development? And they found that uh the development? And they found that uh the development? And they found that uh the main driver of this and then they did main driver of this and then they did main driver of this and then they did experiments where you can accelerate or experiments where you can accelerate or experiments where you can accelerate or decelerate the pace of development by uh decelerate the pace of development by uh decelerate the pace of development by uh modulating mitochondrial metabolism. And modulating mitochondrial metabolism. And modulating mitochondrial metabolism. And when you say mitochondrial metabolism, when you say mitochondrial metabolism, when you say mitochondrial metabolism, is it fair to go back to the analogy of is it fair to go back to the analogy of is it fair to go back to the analogy of the Morse code thing where the animals the Morse code thing where the animals the Morse code thing where the animals that develop quickly and die earlier? that develop quickly and die earlier? that develop quickly and die earlier? It's like a faster transformation of It's like a faster transformation of It's like a faster transformation of energy. &gt;&gt; Exactly. And and that was regulated by &gt;&gt; Exactly. And and that was regulated by &gt;&gt; Exactly. And and that was regulated by NAD. I think a few people who listen to NAD. I think a few people who listen to NAD. I think a few people who listen to this know about NAD. And so NAD seems to this know about NAD. And so NAD seems to this know about NAD. And so NAD seems to be kind of a dial on, you know, the be kind of a dial on, you know, the be kind of a dial on, you know, the rate at which energy is transformed. rate at which energy is transformed. rate at which energy is transformed. &gt;&gt; So interesting. I um long ago I was &gt;&gt; So interesting. I um long ago I was &gt;&gt; So interesting. I um long ago I was getting frustrated because all the getting frustrated because all the getting frustrated because all the discussions in the longevity space were discussions in the longevity space were discussions in the longevity space were failing to acknowledge I'm a failing to acknowledge I'm a failing to acknowledge I'm a developmental neurobiologist. First, developmental neurobiologist. First, developmental neurobiologist. First, what uh what uh what uh &gt;&gt; that development is the most rapid &gt;&gt; that development is the most rapid &gt;&gt; that development is the most rapid period of aging ever. Look at a kid at period of aging ever. Look at a kid at period of aging ever. Look at a kid at one versus three. That's a lot of aging. one versus three. That's a lot of aging. one versus three. That's a lot of aging. We don't think of it as aging because We don't think of it as aging because We don't think of it as aging because they haven't peaked in terms of their they haven't peaked in terms of their they haven't peaked in terms of their vitality and their maturation yet. Look vitality and their maturation yet. Look vitality and their maturation yet. Look at um somebody before and after puberty. at um somebody before and after puberty. at um somebody before and after puberty. First of all, completely different First of all, completely different First of all, completely different organism of any species, right? organism of any species, right? organism of any species, right? &gt;&gt; Person, different personality, &gt;&gt; Person, different personality, &gt;&gt; Person, different personality, &gt;&gt; much more, but it's probably the &gt;&gt; much more, but it's probably the &gt;&gt; much more, but it's probably the fastest rate of aging we ever undergo. fastest rate of aging we ever undergo. fastest rate of aging we ever undergo. And so, I had this theory that I'd love And so, I had this theory that I'd love And so, I had this theory that I'd love somebody to test. Maybe your lab could somebody to test. Maybe your lab could somebody to test. Maybe your lab could do this. do this. do this. &gt;&gt; Uh, &gt;&gt; Uh, &gt;&gt; Uh, &gt;&gt; if you look at the rate at which people &gt;&gt; if you look at the rate at which people &gt;&gt; if you look at the rate at which people acquire secondary sex characteristics acquire secondary sex characteristics acquire secondary sex characteristics going through puberty, going through puberty, going through puberty, &gt;&gt; typically they acquire one or &gt;&gt; typically they acquire one or &gt;&gt; typically they acquire one or several all at one stage and then it several all at one stage and then it several all at one stage and then it continues. how long the acquisition continues. how long the acquisition continues. how long the acquisition of secondary sex characteristics carries of secondary sex characteristics carries of secondary sex characteristics carries on essentially is a measure of the on essentially is a measure of the on essentially is a measure of the duration of puberty because it reflects duration of puberty because it reflects duration of puberty because it reflects bunch of changes in the hypothalamus. We bunch of changes in the hypothalamus. We bunch of changes in the hypothalamus. We know that and that it cascade out to the know that and that it cascade out to the know that and that it cascade out to the body hormones and so forth. I knew kids body hormones and so forth. I knew kids body hormones and so forth. I knew kids in junior high school who we went in junior high school who we went in junior high school who we went away for a summer. They came back and away for a summer. They came back and away for a summer. They came back and there was a kid on my soccer team. I'm there was a kid on my soccer team. I'm there was a kid on my soccer team. I'm like, "That's a grown man." Like, he had like, "That's a grown man." Like, he had like, "That's a grown man." Like, he had a beard and he But I won't mention who a beard and he But I won't mention who a beard and he But I won't mention who this is. And he was very like muscular this is. And he was very like muscular this is. And he was very like muscular and lean and he'd score like nine and lean and he'd score like nine and lean and he'd score like nine goals every time. He went to the more goals every time. He went to the more goals every time. He went to the more advanced soccer league and stuff. I saw advanced soccer league and stuff. I saw advanced soccer league and stuff. I saw him in my 30s and I was like, "Wow, he him in my 30s and I was like, "Wow, he him in my 30s and I was like, "Wow, he is." And there's no there was no envy or is." And there's no there was no envy or is." And there's no there was no envy or upset about this. Um, you know, shouting upset about this. Um, you know, shouting upset about this. Um, you know, shouting for it or anything. I really like him as for it or anything. I really like him as for it or anything. I really like him as a person. I was like, "Well, he looks a person. I was like, "Well, he looks a person. I was like, "Well, he looks like he's like 45. He had aged much like he's like 45. He had aged much like he's like 45. He had aged much more." And then I knew other people that more." And then I knew other people that more." And then I knew other people that had that they kind of matured more had that they kind of matured more had that they kind of matured more slowly &gt;&gt; and sure lifestyle factors play in here &gt;&gt; and sure lifestyle factors play in here &gt;&gt; and sure lifestyle factors play in here but they were developing in a way as but they were developing in a way as but they were developing in a way as adults where you're like wow they're adults where you're like wow they're adults where you're like wow they're really like taking great care of really like taking great care of really like taking great care of themselves but speaks to this idea first themselves but speaks to this idea first themselves but speaks to this idea first of all that maybe the rate which one of all that maybe the rate which one of all that maybe the rate which one moves through puberty is predictive of moves through puberty is predictive of moves through puberty is predictive of lifespan &gt;&gt; plus or minus some lifestyle factors. Um &gt;&gt; plus or minus some lifestyle factors. Um &gt;&gt; plus or minus some lifestyle factors. Um so what are your thoughts on that? Is it so what are your thoughts on that? Is it so what are your thoughts on that? Is it is it conceivable? is it conceivable? is it conceivable? &gt;&gt; I think it's conceivable. Uh and there's &gt;&gt; I think it's conceivable. Uh and there's &gt;&gt; I think it's conceivable. Uh and there's nice data on energy expenditure. How nice data on energy expenditure. How nice data on energy expenditure. How much body how much energy is the body much body how much energy is the body much body how much energy is the body burning to go through whatever it's burning to go through whatever it's burning to go through whatever it's going through. And again, nothing in going through. And again, nothing in going through. And again, nothing in biology is free. That's kind of one of biology is free. That's kind of one of biology is free. That's kind of one of the basic energetic laws of life. You the basic energetic laws of life. You the basic energetic laws of life. You everything costs energy. And in everything costs energy. And in everything costs energy. And in development, you see when babies are development, you see when babies are development, you see when babies are born, they're a little hypo metabolic. born, they're a little hypo metabolic. born, they're a little hypo metabolic. They don't burn as much energy as like They don't burn as much energy as like They don't burn as much energy as like an adult per, you know, kilogram or an adult per, you know, kilogram or an adult per, you know, kilogram or pounds of body weight. But then within pounds of body weight. But then within pounds of body weight. But then within like a year you see this massive within like a year you see this massive within like a year you see this massive increase in energy expenditure uh and increase in energy expenditure uh and increase in energy expenditure uh and then it kind of peaks around five years then it kind of peaks around five years then it kind of peaks around five years of age when kids are like developing so of age when kids are like developing so of age when kids are like developing so quickly. My son is six years old and quickly. My son is six years old and quickly. My son is six years old and he's learning so much changing all the he's learning so much changing all the he's learning so much changing all the time. Uh so energy expenditure is like time. Uh so energy expenditure is like time. Uh so energy expenditure is like peaks around this time and then by 10 15 peaks around this time and then by 10 15 peaks around this time and then by 10 15 years old it's you know around back down years old it's you know around back down years old it's you know around back down and then by 21ish it's adult and then and then by 21ish it's adult and then and then by 21ish it's adult and then it's a flatline for the rest of the of it's a flatline for the rest of the of it's a flatline for the rest of the of adulthood. Then around like 70 years adulthood. Then around like 70 years adulthood. Then around like 70 years old, you start to see this decline. old, you start to see this decline. old, you start to see this decline. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a myth that metabolism slows &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a myth that metabolism slows &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a myth that metabolism slows as we age. as we age. as we age. &gt;&gt; I mean it's true that if we don't up &gt;&gt; I mean it's true that if we don't up &gt;&gt; I mean it's true that if we don't up keep our muscles and mo movement etc. keep our muscles and mo movement etc. keep our muscles and mo movement etc. breathing. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Um exercise a lot of it is just &gt;&gt; Um exercise a lot of it is just &gt;&gt; Um exercise a lot of it is just breathing. Um as breathing. Um as breathing. Um as &gt;&gt; bringing oxygen to your mitochondria. &gt;&gt; bringing oxygen to your mitochondria. &gt;&gt; bringing oxygen to your mitochondria. &gt;&gt; Well as a friend who's in incredible &gt;&gt; Well as a friend who's in incredible &gt;&gt; Well as a friend who's in incredible shape what once told me I said what's shape what once told me I said what's shape what once told me I said what's your workout regimen? He's in his 60s. your workout regimen? He's in his 60s. your workout regimen? He's in his 60s. He's just in fantastic shape. He says He's just in fantastic shape. He says He's just in fantastic shape. He says I make sure I'm doing something every I make sure I'm doing something every I make sure I'm doing something every single day where I'm breathing hard for single day where I'm breathing hard for single day where I'm breathing hard for one hour. And I said, "What do you do if one hour. And I said, "What do you do if one hour. And I said, "What do you do if you're trapped on a plane?" He's like, you're trapped on a plane?" He's like, you're trapped on a plane?" He's like, "I breathe hard for an hour." [laughter] "I breathe hard for an hour." [laughter] "I breathe hard for an hour." [laughter] Former SEAL team guy. So, they're a Former SEAL team guy. So, they're a Former SEAL team guy. So, they're a little extreme, but you know, he makes a little extreme, but you know, he makes a little extreme, but you know, he makes a good point. But the idea is that we good point. But the idea is that we good point. But the idea is that we understand from this paper published in understand from this paper published in understand from this paper published in science a few years ago that metabolism, science a few years ago that metabolism, science a few years ago that metabolism, basil metabolism doesn't change much as basil metabolism doesn't change much as basil metabolism doesn't change much as we age. We thought, "Oh, my metabolism we age. We thought, "Oh, my metabolism we age. We thought, "Oh, my metabolism slows." It's not true. Once you hit slows." It's not true. Once you hit slows." It's not true. Once you hit adulthood, what once you hit your 20s, adulthood, what once you hit your 20s, adulthood, what once you hit your 20s, your metabolism is not changing much at your metabolism is not changing much at your metabolism is not changing much at all. I think as you pointed out, until all. I think as you pointed out, until all. I think as you pointed out, until one's 80s. one's 80s. one's 80s. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It depends at what level you look &gt;&gt; Yeah. It depends at what level you look &gt;&gt; Yeah. It depends at what level you look at metabolism. If you look at the at metabolism. If you look at the at metabolism. If you look at the cellular level, they're cellular level, they're cellular level, they're &gt;&gt; I'm referring to the caloric basil &gt;&gt; I'm referring to the caloric basil &gt;&gt; I'm referring to the caloric basil caloric need, caloric need, caloric need, &gt;&gt; how much energy you need you should &gt;&gt; how much energy you need you should &gt;&gt; how much energy you need you should consume to consume to consume to &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; minus basil metabolic rate like minus &gt;&gt; minus basil metabolic rate like minus &gt;&gt; minus basil metabolic rate like minus your uh the running the lifting etc that your uh the running the lifting etc that your uh the running the lifting etc that you do. Now of course lifting can add you do. Now of course lifting can add you do. Now of course lifting can add muscle which then raises your basil muscle which then raises your basil muscle which then raises your basil metabolic rate but metabolic rate but metabolic rate but &gt;&gt; just this idea that oh my metabolism is &gt;&gt; just this idea that oh my metabolism is &gt;&gt; just this idea that oh my metabolism is slowing as I age turns out to be slowing as I age turns out to be slowing as I age turns out to be completely false. People have used that completely false. People have used that completely false. People have used that as an opportunity to write off they're as an opportunity to write off they're as an opportunity to write off they're overeating. They're over consuming overeating. They're over consuming overeating. They're over consuming energy in most cases. energy in most cases. energy in most cases. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; We've developed a model called the &gt;&gt; We've developed a model called the &gt;&gt; We've developed a model called the energy conservation model, the brain energy conservation model, the brain energy conservation model, the brain body energy conservation model of aging, body energy conservation model of aging, body energy conservation model of aging, the BEC model. And so we could dive into the BEC model. And so we could dive into the BEC model. And so we could dive into this. Um but I think there's significant this. Um but I think there's significant this. Um but I think there's significant changes that happen in some cells as changes that happen in some cells as changes that happen in some cells as cells age. They start to actually burn cells age. They start to actually burn cells age. They start to actually burn energy faster. When cells become energy faster. When cells become energy faster. When cells become scesscent, they burn energy faster and scesscent, they burn energy faster and scesscent, they burn energy faster and then they're sending signals. I'm then they're sending signals. I'm then they're sending signals. I'm struggling energetically speaking and struggling energetically speaking and struggling energetically speaking and that's what I think inflammaging is. You that's what I think inflammaging is. You that's what I think inflammaging is. You have some cell, not all cells, some have some cell, not all cells, some have some cell, not all cells, some cells in the body, they're kind of over cells in the body, they're kind of over cells in the body, they're kind of over the edge. They're becoming scesscent. the edge. They're becoming scesscent. the edge. They're becoming scesscent. Uh, and then they send signals and those Uh, and then they send signals and those Uh, and then they send signals and those signals are the same signal that we signals are the same signal that we signals are the same signal that we release during sickness behavior. If release during sickness behavior. If release during sickness behavior. If your immune system is like really your immune system is like really your immune system is like really struggling energetically because it's struggling energetically because it's struggling energetically because it's trying to fight off a virus, it's going trying to fight off a virus, it's going trying to fight off a virus, it's going to send those same cytoines. And when to send those same cytoines. And when to send those same cytoines. And when those cytoines reach the brain, the those cytoines reach the brain, the those cytoines reach the brain, the brain says, "Oh [laughter] brain says, "Oh [laughter] brain says, "Oh [laughter] &gt;&gt; we're going to go bankrupt." you know &gt;&gt; we're going to go bankrupt." you know &gt;&gt; we're going to go bankrupt." you know the energy budget is threatened here. the energy budget is threatened here. the energy budget is threatened here. So let's save energy and then you become So let's save energy and then you become So let's save energy and then you become apathic, you become cold, you shrink apathic, you become cold, you shrink apathic, you become cold, you shrink your muscles and those are all good your muscles and those are all good your muscles and those are all good energy saving energy conservation energy saving energy conservation energy saving energy conservation strategies to a viral infection, right? strategies to a viral infection, right? strategies to a viral infection, right? The same thing seems to happen slowly as The same thing seems to happen slowly as The same thing seems to happen slowly as you age if you have those cells that are you age if you have those cells that are you age if you have those cells that are sending those signals. But if you sending those signals. But if you sending those signals. But if you exercise and if you don't eat too much exercise and if you don't eat too much exercise and if you don't eat too much and once in a while you feel hungry and once in a while you feel hungry and once in a while you feel hungry maybe intermittent fasting or like you maybe intermittent fasting or like you maybe intermittent fasting or like you actually now can get rid of those actually now can get rid of those actually now can get rid of those signals of like energetic stress and you signals of like energetic stress and you signals of like energetic stress and you can make the organism more efficient. I can make the organism more efficient. I can make the organism more efficient. I think a significant benefit to exercise think a significant benefit to exercise think a significant benefit to exercise is improving efficiency and then is improving efficiency and then is improving efficiency and then you can you know fight off inflammation. you can you know fight off inflammation. you can you know fight off inflammation. And really what this is you're And really what this is you're And really what this is you're bringing the organisms energy bringing the organisms energy bringing the organisms energy resistance, the cells that are resistance, the cells that are resistance, the cells that are struggling. You're kind of normalizing struggling. You're kind of normalizing struggling. You're kind of normalizing them and then you don't feel like you're them and then you don't feel like you're them and then you don't feel like you're running out of energy. So I think it's a running out of energy. So I think it's a running out of energy. So I think it's a perception problem. perception problem. perception problem. &gt;&gt; So I'm now going to imagine that one of &gt;&gt; So I'm now going to imagine that one of &gt;&gt; So I'm now going to imagine that one of the reasons why we have less energy the reasons why we have less energy the reasons why we have less energy in quotes. Uh in quotes. Uh in quotes. Uh &gt;&gt; we feel less energy. &gt;&gt; we feel less energy. &gt;&gt; we feel less energy. &gt;&gt; We feel less energy. Thank you. As we &gt;&gt; We feel less energy. Thank you. As we &gt;&gt; We feel less energy. Thank you. As we age is because of inflammation in the age is because of inflammation in the age is because of inflammation in the body. um calling more energy to be body. um calling more energy to be body. um calling more energy to be allocated to those cells that are in the allocated to those cells that are in the allocated to those cells that are in the inflamed area and they're consuming more inflamed area and they're consuming more inflamed area and they're consuming more energy. So by reducing inflammation, you energy. So by reducing inflammation, you energy. So by reducing inflammation, you have more energy to allocate to other have more energy to allocate to other have more energy to allocate to other things. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Correct. &gt;&gt; Got it. And so this is very different &gt;&gt; Got it. And so this is very different &gt;&gt; Got it. And so this is very different than how we were talking about at the than how we were talking about at the than how we were talking about at the beginning when I said, you know, my beginning when I said, you know, my beginning when I said, you know, my adviser came up to me, why do we have adviser came up to me, why do we have adviser came up to me, why do we have less energy? I just imagine it was rund less energy? I just imagine it was rund less energy? I just imagine it was rund down of mitochondria. So this is what down of mitochondria. So this is what down of mitochondria. So this is what creates a kind of dynamic tension and creates a kind of dynamic tension and creates a kind of dynamic tension and that's very practical for me and for that's very practical for me and for that's very practical for me and for everybody. For instance, I could run everybody. For instance, I could run everybody. For instance, I could run more to increase the number of more to increase the number of more to increase the number of mitochondria in my body. mitochondria in my body. mitochondria in my body. &gt;&gt; I can sleep a little bit more to offset &gt;&gt; I can sleep a little bit more to offset &gt;&gt; I can sleep a little bit more to offset the inflammation from the running, but the inflammation from the running, but the inflammation from the running, but ultimately I'm playing a game. I have to ultimately I'm playing a game. I have to ultimately I'm playing a game. I have to budget. Am I going to exercise more to budget. Am I going to exercise more to budget. Am I going to exercise more to get more mitochondria so my brain get more mitochondria so my brain get more mitochondria so my brain and body have more energy? I'm also and body have more energy? I'm also and body have more energy? I'm also going to create some inflammation when I going to create some inflammation when I going to create some inflammation when I exercise and that's going to eat up a exercise and that's going to eat up a exercise and that's going to eat up a bunch of energy too. So, it's just like bunch of energy too. So, it's just like bunch of energy too. So, it's just like time or money or anything else. You time or money or anything else. You time or money or anything else. You can't do everything. So, you know, my can't do everything. So, you know, my can't do everything. So, you know, my mindset has always been and I think I'm mindset has always been and I think I'm mindset has always been and I think I'm going to stick with this frankly. going to stick with this frankly. going to stick with this frankly. &gt;&gt; Lift weights three days a week. Do &gt;&gt; Lift weights three days a week. Do &gt;&gt; Lift weights three days a week. Do cardio three days a week. Rest cardio three days a week. Rest cardio three days a week. Rest completely one day a week. do the other completely one day a week. do the other completely one day a week. do the other things like sauna and cold as you see things like sauna and cold as you see things like sauna and cold as you see appropriate, but make darn sure you're appropriate, but make darn sure you're appropriate, but make darn sure you're getting 6 to8 hours of sleep each night. getting 6 to8 hours of sleep each night. getting 6 to8 hours of sleep each night. I've been pretty religious about that I've been pretty religious about that I've been pretty religious about that for a long time. for a long time. for a long time. &gt;&gt; And try to not burn energy on drama or &gt;&gt; And try to not burn energy on drama or &gt;&gt; And try to not burn energy on drama or mind-numbing things. And certainly don't mind-numbing things. And certainly don't mind-numbing things. And certainly don't use any substances that use up a lot of use any substances that use up a lot of use any substances that use up a lot of energy &gt;&gt; excessively. I do drink a lot of &gt;&gt; excessively. I do drink a lot of &gt;&gt; excessively. I do drink a lot of caffeine, but you know, like caffeine, but you know, like caffeine, but you know, like prescription stimulants that I know prescription stimulants that I know prescription stimulants that I know people rely on a lot, like I'll just people rely on a lot, like I'll just people rely on a lot, like I'll just call it out. Modafanil, I've taken it call it out. Modafanil, I've taken it call it out. Modafanil, I've taken it once when sleepd deprived. You feel as once when sleepd deprived. You feel as once when sleepd deprived. You feel as if you slept 8 hours, but you're if you slept 8 hours, but you're if you slept 8 hours, but you're borrowing that energy from someplace. borrowing that energy from someplace. borrowing that energy from someplace. &gt;&gt; And it's not just the crash that happens &gt;&gt; And it's not just the crash that happens &gt;&gt; And it's not just the crash that happens later. It's the long-term effects of later. It's the long-term effects of later. It's the long-term effects of this. And I think this is why people who this. And I think this is why people who this. And I think this is why people who use um empetamines and cocaine and use um empetamines and cocaine and use um empetamines and cocaine and things like that, stimulants, we often things like that, stimulants, we often things like that, stimulants, we often find that sure they die of heart find that sure they die of heart find that sure they die of heart failure. That's very common actually in failure. That's very common actually in failure. That's very common actually in people who use cocaine earlier. We talk people who use cocaine earlier. We talk people who use cocaine earlier. We talk about this, but let's just be direct about this, but let's just be direct about this, but let's just be direct about it. about it. about it. &gt;&gt; They're borrowing energy from the future &gt;&gt; They're borrowing energy from the future &gt;&gt; They're borrowing energy from the future is what you're doing. And so I think I'm is what you're doing. And so I think I'm is what you're doing. And so I think I'm a big fan of people exercising more, a big fan of people exercising more, a big fan of people exercising more, eating better, etc. But at some point, eating better, etc. But at some point, eating better, etc. But at some point, you're increasing inflammation that way you're increasing inflammation that way you're increasing inflammation that way as well. Inflammation as a reframe as well. Inflammation as a reframe as well. Inflammation as a reframe that to me completely changed my that to me completely changed my that to me completely changed my perspective on what inflammation is. perspective on what inflammation is. perspective on what inflammation is. Inflammation is an energetic signal. Inflammation is an energetic signal. Inflammation is an energetic signal. Mhm. &gt;&gt; If you there are cytoines in your in &gt;&gt; If you there are cytoines in your in &gt;&gt; If you there are cytoines in your in your blood, it means somewhere in your blood, it means somewhere in your blood, it means somewhere in your body and that's not true of like all body and that's not true of like all body and that's not true of like all cytoines but the major cytoines that we cytoines but the major cytoines that we cytoines but the major cytoines that we think about like IL6 interlucan 6 it's think about like IL6 interlucan 6 it's think about like IL6 interlucan 6 it's secreted by muscles not during the secreted by muscles not during the secreted by muscles not during the exercise like you're doing your run exercise like you're doing your run exercise like you're doing your run right like let's say you run intensely right like let's say you run intensely right like let's say you run intensely for an hour for two hours IL6 doesn't for an hour for two hours IL6 doesn't for an hour for two hours IL6 doesn't increase it's when you stop exercising increase it's when you stop exercising increase it's when you stop exercising boom you get this beautiful spike of IL6 boom you get this beautiful spike of IL6 boom you get this beautiful spike of IL6 and then you ask where is what is that and then you ask where is what is that and then you ask where is what is that so IL6 is a cytoine right it's a so IL6 is a cytoine right it's a so IL6 is a cytoine right it's a cellular signaling system. Uh, and then cellular signaling system. Uh, and then cellular signaling system. Uh, and then IL6 goes to your fat and then it says we IL6 goes to your fat and then it says we IL6 goes to your fat and then it says we need energy like lipolysis chop out need energy like lipolysis chop out need energy like lipolysis chop out those you know lipids that's stored in those you know lipids that's stored in those you know lipids that's stored in your fat release that in the blood your fat release that in the blood your fat release that in the blood because the liver needs it to make because the liver needs it to make because the liver needs it to make glucose and then the IL6 goes to the glucose and then the IL6 goes to the glucose and then the IL6 goes to the liver as well and then tells the liver as well and then tells the liver as well and then tells the liver make glucose because the muscle is make glucose because the muscle is make glucose because the muscle is depleted right and the IL6 burst after depleted right and the IL6 burst after depleted right and the IL6 burst after exercise is particularly strong if exercise is particularly strong if exercise is particularly strong if you're glycogen depleted right if the you're glycogen depleted right if the you're glycogen depleted right if the muscle is out of its internal muscle is out of its internal muscle is out of its internal &gt;&gt; like after resistance training or &gt;&gt; like after resistance training or &gt;&gt; like after resistance training or sprinting or high intensity training. sprinting or high intensity training. sprinting or high intensity training. &gt;&gt; High intensity. Yes. Uh so then the IL6 &gt;&gt; High intensity. Yes. Uh so then the IL6 &gt;&gt; High intensity. Yes. Uh so then the IL6 then is a signal, right, to mobilize then is a signal, right, to mobilize then is a signal, right, to mobilize energy. It's the muscle's way of telling energy. It's the muscle's way of telling energy. It's the muscle's way of telling the rest of the body, I'm running low on the rest of the body, I'm running low on the rest of the body, I'm running low on energy, right? Please help. And then it energy, right? Please help. And then it energy, right? Please help. And then it recruits the fat. It recruits the liver. recruits the fat. It recruits the liver. recruits the fat. It recruits the liver. And then it sends signal to the brain. And then it sends signal to the brain. And then it sends signal to the brain. The brain has IL6 receptors as well. And The brain has IL6 receptors as well. And The brain has IL6 receptors as well. And it says, you know, feel like crap, like it says, you know, feel like crap, like it says, you know, feel like crap, like you need to recover. Lose your v your you need to recover. Lose your v your you need to recover. Lose your v your vitality, your vigor at least for a vitality, your vigor at least for a vitality, your vigor at least for a little bit. little bit. little bit. &gt;&gt; Uh and rest. And like you know Arnold &gt;&gt; Uh and rest. And like you know Arnold &gt;&gt; Uh and rest. And like you know Arnold said that you become stronger you said that you become stronger you said that you become stronger you make your mitochondria more mitochondria make your mitochondria more mitochondria make your mitochondria more mitochondria and you become fitter not during the and you become fitter not during the and you become fitter not during the exercise it's during the rest period. So exercise it's during the rest period. So exercise it's during the rest period. So so you know the getting sleep 6 to 8 so you know the getting sleep 6 to 8 so you know the getting sleep 6 to 8 hours definitely uh and about stimulants hours definitely uh and about stimulants hours definitely uh and about stimulants like caffeine uh and other uh stimulants like caffeine uh and other uh stimulants like caffeine uh and other uh stimulants what they do is they prevent you from what they do is they prevent you from what they do is they prevent you from feeling energetic stress. Mhm. feeling energetic stress. Mhm. feeling energetic stress. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So if energy is not flowing properly in &gt;&gt; So if energy is not flowing properly in &gt;&gt; So if energy is not flowing properly in your body and you should be sleeping to your body and you should be sleeping to your body and you should be sleeping to kind of decrease that energy resistance kind of decrease that energy resistance kind of decrease that energy resistance uh then those stimulants kind of make uh then those stimulants kind of make uh then those stimulants kind of make you oblivious to those signals. Uh and you oblivious to those signals. Uh and you oblivious to those signals. Uh and now they're clinical trials and which I now they're clinical trials and which I now they're clinical trials and which I think are potentially dangerous that think are potentially dangerous that think are potentially dangerous that are happening where uh those drugs are happening where uh those drugs are happening where uh those drugs are being developed antibbody based uh you being developed antibbody based uh you being developed antibbody based uh you know drugs to prevent the brain from know drugs to prevent the brain from know drugs to prevent the brain from feeling signals of energetic stress in feeling signals of energetic stress in feeling signals of energetic stress in the body. the body. the body. &gt;&gt; That sounds like a terrible idea. Well, &gt;&gt; That sounds like a terrible idea. Well, &gt;&gt; That sounds like a terrible idea. Well, if you think about this simplistically, if you think about this simplistically, if you think about this simplistically, uh, and you know from uh, and you know from uh, and you know from you think the body is a molecular you think the body is a molecular you think the body is a molecular machine, you think here's what's machine, you think here's what's machine, you think here's what's happening when people are sick, they happening when people are sick, they happening when people are sick, they have cancer, right? GDF-15, this growth have cancer, right? GDF-15, this growth have cancer, right? GDF-15, this growth differentiation factor 15, it's which is differentiation factor 15, it's which is differentiation factor 15, it's which is a protein, it's a cytoine. Uh, it's a protein, it's a cytoine. Uh, it's a protein, it's a cytoine. Uh, it's secreted by cells when energy can't flow secreted by cells when energy can't flow secreted by cells when energy can't flow properly in mitochondria. So, if the properly in mitochondria. So, if the properly in mitochondria. So, if the cell is burning energy faster than it cell is burning energy faster than it cell is burning energy faster than it can sustain, can sustain, can sustain, &gt;&gt; uh, it will start to secrete GDF-15. &gt;&gt; uh, it will start to secrete GDF-15. &gt;&gt; uh, it will start to secrete GDF-15. So people with cancer uh who end up So people with cancer uh who end up So people with cancer uh who end up developing cexia right their muscles developing cexia right their muscles developing cexia right their muscles melt away they tend to have very high melt away they tend to have very high melt away they tend to have very high GDF-15 and then GDF-15 can go to the GDF-15 and then GDF-15 can go to the GDF-15 and then GDF-15 can go to the brain and the as far as we know the only brain and the as far as we know the only brain and the as far as we know the only place or as far as the community place or as far as the community place or as far as the community believes the only place where there's a believes the only place where there's a believes the only place where there's a receptor for GDF-15 is in the brain but receptor for GDF-15 is in the brain but receptor for GDF-15 is in the brain but the brain doesn't make GDF-15 is the brain doesn't make GDF-15 is the brain doesn't make GDF-15 is made by every other organ in the body made by every other organ in the body made by every other organ in the body including tumors. Uh so what happens uh including tumors. Uh so what happens uh including tumors. Uh so what happens uh is that people with very high GDF-15 is that people with very high GDF-15 is that people with very high GDF-15 feel terrible and if you actually inject feel terrible and if you actually inject feel terrible and if you actually inject GF-15 into an animal to ask what does it GF-15 into an animal to ask what does it GF-15 into an animal to ask what does it do like what is GDF15 mean if you have a do like what is GDF15 mean if you have a do like what is GDF15 mean if you have a lot of it in your blood. Well animals lot of it in your blood. Well animals lot of it in your blood. Well animals actually puke and it cause you know an actually puke and it cause you know an actually puke and it cause you know an aversive reaction uh visceral malaise is aversive reaction uh visceral malaise is aversive reaction uh visceral malaise is the technical term. So you feel is the technical term. So you feel is the technical term. So you feel like GDF-15 which is produced by like GDF-15 which is produced by like GDF-15 which is produced by cells struggling energetically anywhere cells struggling energetically anywhere cells struggling energetically anywhere in the body signal to the brain and in the body signal to the brain and in the body signal to the brain and makes you feel like We know now makes you feel like We know now makes you feel like We know now also GDF-15 is the trigger for morning also GDF-15 is the trigger for morning also GDF-15 is the trigger for morning sickness uh in pregnancy. So the reason sickness uh in pregnancy. So the reason sickness uh in pregnancy. So the reason you know uh women especially um hyper you know uh women especially um hyper you know uh women especially um hyper emmesis gravitarum HG which is like emmesis gravitarum HG which is like emmesis gravitarum HG which is like terrible women who have this many of terrible women who have this many of terrible women who have this many of them want to terminate their them want to terminate their them want to terminate their pregnancy it's so horrible like if pregnancy it's so horrible like if pregnancy it's so horrible like if GDF-15 rises like 10,000fold there not GDF-15 rises like 10,000fold there not GDF-15 rises like 10,000fold there not many you know hormones that can increase many you know hormones that can increase many you know hormones that can increase that much during pregnancy the placenta that much during pregnancy the placenta that much during pregnancy the placenta sends out GDF 15 maybe to tell the sends out GDF 15 maybe to tell the sends out GDF 15 maybe to tell the mother like chill out reallocate your mother like chill out reallocate your mother like chill out reallocate your energy you're growing something that is energy you're growing something that is energy you're growing something that is costing a lot of energy um so we know costing a lot of energy um so we know costing a lot of energy um so we know GDF 15 does this. So now what GDF 15 does this. So now what GDF 15 does this. So now what pharmaceutical companies have tried to pharmaceutical companies have tried to pharmaceutical companies have tried to do is to say okay let's block GDF-15 do is to say okay let's block GDF-15 do is to say okay let's block GDF-15 signaling so people don't feel like signaling so people don't feel like signaling so people don't feel like Uh and so there's this one trial Uh and so there's this one trial Uh and so there's this one trial that was published in the New England that was published in the New England that was published in the New England journal uh last year and they show as journal uh last year and they show as journal uh last year and they show as expected if you block GDF-15 with a expected if you block GDF-15 with a expected if you block GDF-15 with a monoconal antibbody u people don't feel monoconal antibbody u people don't feel monoconal antibbody u people don't feel as terrible and they eat a little more as terrible and they eat a little more as terrible and they eat a little more and they don't lose as much weight. and they don't lose as much weight. and they don't lose as much weight. Right? So it's basically if you're sick Right? So it's basically if you're sick Right? So it's basically if you're sick in the hospital, you have cancer, you're in the hospital, you have cancer, you're in the hospital, you have cancer, you're getting chemo, you don't want to eat, getting chemo, you don't want to eat, getting chemo, you don't want to eat, right? And energetically, I suspect this right? And energetically, I suspect this right? And energetically, I suspect this is the right thing to do because you're is the right thing to do because you're is the right thing to do because you're saving 10 15% of your energy budget, saving 10 15% of your energy budget, saving 10 15% of your energy budget, reallocating it for to healing reallocating it for to healing reallocating it for to healing processes, your immune system, whatever processes, your immune system, whatever processes, your immune system, whatever the body needs to survive that the body needs to survive that the body needs to survive that challenge. Now you're kind of depriving challenge. Now you're kind of depriving challenge. Now you're kind of depriving the brain of that signal. So people the brain of that signal. So people the brain of that signal. So people actually don't lose as much weight. So actually don't lose as much weight. So actually don't lose as much weight. So then that trial said success. If you then that trial said success. If you then that trial said success. If you look, you know, at the fine print and look, you know, at the fine print and look, you know, at the fine print and you look at the table where they report you look at the table where they report you look at the table where they report mortality, mortality was double in mortality, mortality was double in mortality, mortality was double in people who were receiving the drug, the people who were receiving the drug, the people who were receiving the drug, the trial was not the powered to detect trial was not the powered to detect trial was not the powered to detect mortality as a primary outcome. It was, mortality as a primary outcome. It was, mortality as a primary outcome. It was, you know, powered to detect changes in you know, powered to detect changes in you know, powered to detect changes in body weight. Um so, um so that in body weight. Um so, um so that in body weight. Um so, um so that didn't end up being a main finding. If didn't end up being a main finding. If didn't end up being a main finding. If this is real, right, you're preventing this is real, right, you're preventing this is real, right, you're preventing people from losing weight and they feel people from losing weight and they feel people from losing weight and they feel a little less nauseous, but there are a little less nauseous, but there are a little less nauseous, but there are twice as many people who died during twice as many people who died during twice as many people who died during that trial because the body is smart and that trial because the body is smart and that trial because the body is smart and it knows to not allocate energy to it knows to not allocate energy to it knows to not allocate energy to eating under normal conditions. Normal, eating under normal conditions. Normal, eating under normal conditions. Normal, there's nothing normal about chemo there's nothing normal about chemo there's nothing normal about chemo conditions, but I think you understand conditions, but I think you understand conditions, but I think you understand what I mean. that the body's what I mean. that the body's what I mean. that the body's intuition to not eat is smarter than any intuition to not eat is smarter than any intuition to not eat is smarter than any kind of you know uh molecular uh kind of you know uh molecular uh kind of you know uh molecular uh channery to overcome that signal and channery to overcome that signal and channery to overcome that signal and have you be hungry and you would think have you be hungry and you would think have you be hungry and you would think oh they're getting more nourishment they oh they're getting more nourishment they oh they're getting more nourishment they should more of I thought you were going should more of I thought you were going should more of I thought you were going to tell me that more of them lived you I to tell me that more of them lived you I to tell me that more of them lived you I mean twice as many died and mean twice as many died and mean twice as many died and there recently there's another trial uh there recently there's another trial uh there recently there's another trial uh large scale trial for heart failure uh large scale trial for heart failure uh large scale trial for heart failure uh that looked at this using this antibbody that looked at this using this antibbody that looked at this using this antibbody to block because when the heart to block because when the heart to block because when the heart struggles dilated cardiammyopathy or struggles dilated cardiammyopathy or struggles dilated cardiammyopathy or congestive heart failure energetically congestive heart failure energetically congestive heart failure energetically it's really demanding for the heart to it's really demanding for the heart to it's really demanding for the heart to be pushing against high blood pressure be pushing against high blood pressure be pushing against high blood pressure or to be failing right so there's an or to be failing right so there's an or to be failing right so there's an energetic stress in the heart at that energetic stress in the heart at that energetic stress in the heart at that point GDF-15 goes through the roof so point GDF-15 goes through the roof so point GDF-15 goes through the roof so now people know in cardiology GDF-15 is now people know in cardiology GDF-15 is now people know in cardiology GDF-15 is a really good marker of heart failure a really good marker of heart failure a really good marker of heart failure and then the thinking I think our and then the thinking I think our and then the thinking I think our way of thinking energetically about way of thinking energetically about way of thinking energetically about GDF-15 is a little different than what GDF-15 is a little different than what GDF-15 is a little different than what the rest of I think the field thinks the rest of I think the field thinks the rest of I think the field thinks people see GDF 15 as a marker of people see GDF 15 as a marker of people see GDF 15 as a marker of inflammation And then maybe that's like immune or I And then maybe that's like immune or I And then maybe that's like immune or I think it's a marker of energetic think it's a marker of energetic think it's a marker of energetic stress. The heart is calling out for stress. The heart is calling out for stress. The heart is calling out for help and trying to kind of calm down the help and trying to kind of calm down the help and trying to kind of calm down the rest of the system, right? By signaling rest of the system, right? By signaling rest of the system, right? By signaling onto the brain. onto the brain. onto the brain. &gt;&gt; Turns out uh many more people developed &gt;&gt; Turns out uh many more people developed &gt;&gt; Turns out uh many more people developed uh heart failure and like adverse events uh heart failure and like adverse events uh heart failure and like adverse events uh under the drug. So they stopped the uh under the drug. So they stopped the uh under the drug. So they stopped the trial &gt;&gt; where you block GD15. &gt;&gt; where you block GD15. &gt;&gt; where you block GD15. &gt;&gt; Yes. So if you block the &gt;&gt; Yes. So if you block the &gt;&gt; Yes. So if you block the &gt;&gt; This is the danger of molecular &gt;&gt; This is the danger of molecular &gt;&gt; This is the danger of molecular thinking of everything in terms of thinking of everything in terms of thinking of everything in terms of receptors and ligans like the things receptors and ligans like the things receptors and ligans like the things that plug in. People might not know what that plug in. People might not know what that plug in. People might not know what ligans are things that plug into ligans are things that plug into ligans are things that plug into receptors and activate them. I mean, I receptors and activate them. I mean, I receptors and activate them. I mean, I love modern biology. There's a lot of love modern biology. There's a lot of love modern biology. There's a lot of beautiful things, but the it the beautiful things, but the it the beautiful things, but the it the systemic effects are hard are impossible systemic effects are hard are impossible systemic effects are hard are impossible to predict. I guess that's why you run to predict. I guess that's why you run to predict. I guess that's why you run these trials. these trials. these trials. &gt;&gt; I do have a question as it relates to &gt;&gt; I do have a question as it relates to &gt;&gt; I do have a question as it relates to this uh which is a big theme of your this uh which is a big theme of your this uh which is a big theme of your work, which is about stress. work, which is about stress. work, which is about stress. &gt;&gt; Uh well, I'm sure people are wondering &gt;&gt; Uh well, I'm sure people are wondering &gt;&gt; Uh well, I'm sure people are wondering by now, tell us about the gray hair by now, tell us about the gray hair by now, tell us about the gray hair reversal. So, let's start with that. reversal. So, let's start with that. reversal. So, let's start with that. Let's just get that out of our systems. Let's just get that out of our systems. Let's just get that out of our systems. I will say um uh despite some I will say um uh despite some I will say um uh despite some theories, not that anyone cares that theories, not that anyone cares that theories, not that anyone cares that much. I've never dyed my the hair on my much. I've never dyed my the hair on my much. I've never dyed my the hair on my head, I do have some grays, but the head, I do have some grays, but the head, I do have some grays, but the number of them waxes and waines with how number of them waxes and waines with how number of them waxes and waines with how much sleep I'm getting. It's kind of how much sleep I'm getting. It's kind of how much sleep I'm getting. It's kind of interesting &gt;&gt; perhaps, but my beard's gray, right? And &gt;&gt; perhaps, but my beard's gray, right? And &gt;&gt; perhaps, but my beard's gray, right? And I'll tell you, I'm not sure that all I'll tell you, I'm not sure that all I'll tell you, I'm not sure that all gray can be reversed by just reducing gray can be reversed by just reducing gray can be reversed by just reducing stress, &gt;&gt; correct? &gt;&gt; correct? &gt;&gt; correct? &gt;&gt; Um but I don't dye either my hair or my &gt;&gt; Um but I don't dye either my hair or my &gt;&gt; Um but I don't dye either my hair or my beard, so I'm a I'm a I'm a natural beard, so I'm a I'm a I'm a natural beard, so I'm a I'm a I'm a natural experiment in this. Yeah. experiment in this. Yeah. experiment in this. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um, what's the deal? Can people reverse &gt;&gt; Um, what's the deal? Can people reverse &gt;&gt; Um, what's the deal? Can people reverse the graying of their hair by reducing the graying of their hair by reducing the graying of their hair by reducing their stress? Can people accelerate the their stress? Can people accelerate the their stress? Can people accelerate the graying of their hair by stressing more? graying of their hair by stressing more? graying of their hair by stressing more? &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh, likely both are true. Yes. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh, likely both are true. Yes. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh, likely both are true. Yes. &gt;&gt; Okay. And I think what we discovered is &gt;&gt; Okay. And I think what we discovered is &gt;&gt; Okay. And I think what we discovered is that hair graying at least temporarily that hair graying at least temporarily that hair graying at least temporarily is reversible. And this was surprising is reversible. And this was surprising is reversible. And this was surprising because it goes against this notion that because it goes against this notion that because it goes against this notion that aging is a linear you know uh process aging is a linear you know uh process aging is a linear you know uh process that just happens over time no matter that just happens over time no matter that just happens over time no matter what you do. And here we should know what you do. And here we should know what you do. And here we should know actually a hallmark of aging which is actually a hallmark of aging which is actually a hallmark of aging which is you know depigmentation losing color in you know depigmentation losing color in you know depigmentation losing color in your beard and your hair um is something your beard and your hair um is something your beard and your hair um is something that happens to almost everyone but at that happens to almost everyone but at that happens to almost everyone but at different you know stages of life and different you know stages of life and different you know stages of life and so on and then on the same person and so on and then on the same person and so on and then on the same person and the reason we got into this was that and the reason we got into this was that and the reason we got into this was that uh this felt like the perfect experiment uh this felt like the perfect experiment uh this felt like the perfect experiment like you have every hair on your body is like you have every hair on your body is like you have every hair on your body is about 100,000 hairs on your head uh about 100,000 hairs on your head uh about 100,000 hairs on your head uh every hair has the same genome they're every hair has the same genome they're every hair has the same genome they're all genetically identical twins right all genetically identical twins right all genetically identical twins right and they're all exposed to the same and they're all exposed to the same and they're all exposed to the same exercise regime, the same food, the same exercise regime, the same food, the same exercise regime, the same food, the same stress levels. Uh but yet some hairs go stress levels. Uh but yet some hairs go stress levels. Uh but yet some hairs go gray when you're like late 30s and then gray when you're like late 30s and then gray when you're like late 30s and then some hairs go gray when you're like in some hairs go gray when you're like in some hairs go gray when you're like in your 80s. What the hell's happening? your 80s. What the hell's happening? your 80s. What the hell's happening? Like if I thought if we could figure Like if I thought if we could figure Like if I thought if we could figure this out, the basis for the this out, the basis for the this out, the basis for the heterogeneity, right, the hair to hair heterogeneity, right, the hair to hair heterogeneity, right, the hair to hair heterogeneity, maybe we can understand heterogeneity, maybe we can understand heterogeneity, maybe we can understand why different people age at different why different people age at different why different people age at different rates. &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very clear that there's &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very clear that there's &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very clear that there's no more than 10% of how long you live no more than 10% of how long you live no more than 10% of how long you live that genetically driven. Like the best that genetically driven. Like the best that genetically driven. Like the best studies put this at around 7%. 7% of studies put this at around 7%. 7% of studies put this at around 7%. 7% of longevity is genetically inherited maybe longevity is genetically inherited maybe longevity is genetically inherited maybe and then about 90% is not and then about 90% is not and then about 90% is not &gt;&gt; is lifestyle factors. &gt;&gt; is lifestyle factors. &gt;&gt; is lifestyle factors. &gt;&gt; Lifestyle, you know, food exposures like &gt;&gt; Lifestyle, you know, food exposures like &gt;&gt; Lifestyle, you know, food exposures like whatever is non- genetic. whatever is non- genetic. whatever is non- genetic. &gt;&gt; People will take solace in those &gt;&gt; People will take solace in those &gt;&gt; People will take solace in those numbers. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think those are really &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think those are really &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think those are really powerful numbers. Uh and they surprise powerful numbers. Uh and they surprise powerful numbers. Uh and they surprise me because I learned you know through my me because I learned you know through my me because I learned you know through my uh training education that uh the uh training education that uh the uh training education that uh the majority of how long you live is majority of how long you live is majority of how long you live is you know your parents. And I think this you know your parents. And I think this you know your parents. And I think this is legacy. It's like dogma. Uh it's not is legacy. It's like dogma. Uh it's not is legacy. It's like dogma. Uh it's not science-based. It's dogma from, you science-based. It's dogma from, you science-based. It's dogma from, you know, the human genome project era. know, the human genome project era. know, the human genome project era. Like through the '9s, we were hoping we Like through the '9s, we were hoping we Like through the '9s, we were hoping we would find the gene for cancer, the gene would find the gene for cancer, the gene would find the gene for cancer, the gene for heart failure, the gene for heart failure, the gene for heart failure, the gene for Alzheimer's, the gene for schizophrenia. Alzheimer's, the gene for schizophrenia. Alzheimer's, the gene for schizophrenia. And then the human genome was sequenced And then the human genome was sequenced And then the human genome was sequenced 2001. And then there was like 10 20 2001. And then there was like 10 20 2001. And then there was like 10 20 years of G-W was genomewide association years of G-W was genomewide association years of G-W was genomewide association studies trying to find people who have studies trying to find people who have studies trying to find people who have this disease and trying to find which this disease and trying to find which this disease and trying to find which gene do they have that other people gene do they have that other people gene do they have that other people don't have. Right? those large scale don't have. Right? those large scale don't have. Right? those large scale studies and if the if the human genome studies and if the if the human genome studies and if the if the human genome project and the search for causal genes project and the search for causal genes project and the search for causal genes for common chronic diseases had been an for common chronic diseases had been an for common chronic diseases had been an RCT, it would have failed its primary RCT, it would have failed its primary RCT, it would have failed its primary endpoint. &gt;&gt; I think if we're real about this, the &gt;&gt; I think if we're real about this, the &gt;&gt; I think if we're real about this, the hypothesis was wrong. It was a it the hypothesis was wrong. It was a it the hypothesis was wrong. It was a it was a useful hypothesis like many was a useful hypothesis like many was a useful hypothesis like many hypothesis are. It led us to, you know, hypothesis are. It led us to, you know, hypothesis are. It led us to, you know, learn a bunch and the human genome, the learn a bunch and the human genome, the learn a bunch and the human genome, the sequencing that was such a such a sequencing that was such a such a sequencing that was such a such a driver of progress in biomedical driver of progress in biomedical driver of progress in biomedical science, but it's failed to solve the science, but it's failed to solve the science, but it's failed to solve the big mysteries about why we get the big mysteries about why we get the big mysteries about why we get sick, when we get sick. No genes will sick, when we get sick. No genes will sick, when we get sick. No genes will tell you this. tell you this. tell you this. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I would say the human genome &gt;&gt; Yeah. I would say the human genome &gt;&gt; Yeah. I would say the human genome project like so many things, the brain project like so many things, the brain project like so many things, the brain conneto, uh, proteomes, inflamm but not sufficient. but not sufficient. but not sufficient. &gt;&gt; Correct. We want and need the &gt;&gt; Correct. We want and need the &gt;&gt; Correct. We want and need the information, but it's not sufficient to information, but it's not sufficient to information, but it's not sufficient to demonstrate anything except it's a demonstrate anything except it's a demonstrate anything except it's a hypothesis generating experiment. Yeah, hypothesis generating experiment. Yeah, hypothesis generating experiment. Yeah, &gt;&gt; I know this cuz I sat on grant &gt;&gt; I know this cuz I sat on grant &gt;&gt; I know this cuz I sat on grant panels for a long time and you look at panels for a long time and you look at panels for a long time and you look at these incredible studies like we're these incredible studies like we're these incredible studies like we're going to measure the difference between going to measure the difference between going to measure the difference between this cancer cell and that cancer cell this cancer cell and that cancer cell this cancer cell and that cancer cell and this and it's great, but the and this and it's great, but the and this and it's great, but the information you get is necessary, but information you get is necessary, but information you get is necessary, but it's not conclusive of anything. it's not conclusive of anything. it's not conclusive of anything. &gt;&gt; But it is good work. &gt;&gt; But it is good work. &gt;&gt; But it is good work. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's good. Of course, it's good. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's good. Of course, it's good. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's good. Of course, it's good. there's a lot of really high quality there's a lot of really high quality there's a lot of really high quality science uh that's happening. Uh but I science uh that's happening. Uh but I science uh that's happening. Uh but I think in general academic science has think in general academic science has think in general academic science has kind of lost track with its core kind of lost track with its core kind of lost track with its core purpose. Uh and now we have like an purpose. Uh and now we have like an purpose. Uh and now we have like an incentive system and there's a lot of incentive system and there's a lot of incentive system and there's a lot of forces at play in administrative you forces at play in administrative you forces at play in administrative you know processes that don't serve the know processes that don't serve the know processes that don't serve the primary end goal which is primary end goal which is primary end goal which is &gt;&gt; well it's all getting revised now. So &gt;&gt; well it's all getting revised now. So &gt;&gt; well it's all getting revised now. So [laughter] it's uh for better or worse it's all it's uh for better or worse it's all it's uh for better or worse it's all getting revised. So I see your point. getting revised. So I see your point. getting revised. So I see your point. I'm um uh warmed by the fact that I'm um uh warmed by the fact that I'm um uh warmed by the fact that even though my parents are still alive even though my parents are still alive even though my parents are still alive and are doing well um thank goodness and are doing well um thank goodness and are doing well um thank goodness that only 7% of longevity is dictated by that only 7% of longevity is dictated by that only 7% of longevity is dictated by the genes. Uh so if you have parents the genes. Uh so if you have parents the genes. Uh so if you have parents that lived a long time this also means that lived a long time this also means that lived a long time this also means you got to keep upkeep is important. you got to keep upkeep is important. you got to keep upkeep is important. &gt;&gt; Um but what you do is key. So um so &gt;&gt; Um but what you do is key. So um so &gt;&gt; Um but what you do is key. So um so with respect to look graying hair isn't with respect to look graying hair isn't with respect to look graying hair isn't the most important problem. People can the most important problem. People can the most important problem. People can dye their hair, right, if they want to. dye their hair, right, if they want to. dye their hair, right, if they want to. Uh people can shave their head if Uh people can shave their head if Uh people can shave their head if they're losing hair. Like there are a they're losing hair. Like there are a they're losing hair. Like there are a bunch of ways around this monumental bunch of ways around this monumental bunch of ways around this monumental problem of graying hair. But I think problem of graying hair. But I think problem of graying hair. But I think what it illustrates is really what it illustrates is really what it illustrates is really interesting. So um interesting. So um interesting. So um &gt;&gt; that it's re that it's there's &gt;&gt; that it's re that it's there's &gt;&gt; that it's re that it's there's plasticity. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So could you explain the result? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So could you explain the result? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So could you explain the result? &gt;&gt; So um when we started to think about &gt;&gt; So um when we started to think about &gt;&gt; So um when we started to think about this, we thought what if we found hairs this, we thought what if we found hairs this, we thought what if we found hairs that have like the same hair has two that have like the same hair has two that have like the same hair has two colors, &gt;&gt; right? So you have a piece of a &gt;&gt; right? So you have a piece of a &gt;&gt; right? So you have a piece of a segment of the hair that is dark and segment of the hair that is dark and segment of the hair that is dark and then a segment that is white. And then a segment that is white. And then a segment that is white. And then if you could find a hair that was dark. if you could find a hair that was dark. if you could find a hair that was dark. So the tip So the tip So the tip &gt;&gt; uh the tip of your hair, you know, used &gt;&gt; uh the tip of your hair, you know, used &gt;&gt; uh the tip of your hair, you know, used to be inside the body. Yeah. Just like to be inside the body. Yeah. Just like to be inside the body. Yeah. Just like it's a bit like tree rings, like it's a bit like tree rings, like it's a bit like tree rings, right? If you cut down a tree and you right? If you cut down a tree and you right? If you cut down a tree and you look at the tree rings, you can look at the tree rings, you can look at the tree rings, you can basically go back in time and say, "Oh, basically go back in time and say, "Oh, basically go back in time and say, "Oh, 20 years ago there was a fire here, 20 years ago there was a fire here, 20 years ago there was a fire here, right? And then 45 years ago there was a right? And then 45 years ago there was a right? And then 45 years ago there was a drought and you the tree rings look drought and you the tree rings look drought and you the tree rings look different." And so there's information different." And so there's information different." And so there's information encoded in the structure, right? So we encoded in the structure, right? So we encoded in the structure, right? So we all walk around with kind of a molecular all walk around with kind of a molecular all walk around with kind of a molecular record like a physical timeline of our record like a physical timeline of our record like a physical timeline of our biological history because biological history because biological history because &gt;&gt; stressed relaxed good relationship bad &gt;&gt; stressed relaxed good relationship bad &gt;&gt; stressed relaxed good relationship bad relationship. Yeah. relationship. Yeah. relationship. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So if and hair is grow &gt;&gt; So if and hair is grow &gt;&gt; So if and hair is grow &gt;&gt; writing a grant after the grant. Yeah. &gt;&gt; writing a grant after the grant. Yeah. &gt;&gt; writing a grant after the grant. Yeah. [laughter] &gt;&gt; That was actually part of the data for &gt;&gt; That was actually part of the data for &gt;&gt; That was actually part of the data for that study. I was one of the that study. I was one of the that study. I was one of the participants early on because we became participants early on because we became participants early on because we became interested in this. We found hair that interested in this. We found hair that interested in this. We found hair that were two colored two colors. The tip was were two colored two colors. The tip was were two colored two colors. The tip was dark and then the root was white. And dark and then the root was white. And dark and then the root was white. And then we thought oh if we can like figure then we thought oh if we can like figure then we thought oh if we can like figure out that hair transition and then if you out that hair transition and then if you out that hair transition and then if you measure it and you know how quickly the measure it and you know how quickly the measure it and you know how quickly the hair grow then you can say okay two and hair grow then you can say okay two and hair grow then you can say okay two and a half months ago right and you can look a half months ago right and you can look a half months ago right and you can look at the calendar and say about here this at the calendar and say about here this at the calendar and say about here this hair went from being dark to being white hair went from being dark to being white hair went from being dark to being white what happened in this person's life what happened in this person's life what happened in this person's life right so that was the idea uh and then right so that was the idea uh and then right so that was the idea uh and then uh back then my partner uh went to the uh back then my partner uh went to the uh back then my partner uh went to the bathroom and then she brought back bathroom and then she brought back bathroom and then she brought back like she had very long hair and then you like she had very long hair and then you like she had very long hair and then you could see like clearly the same hair two could see like clearly the same hair two could see like clearly the same hair two different colors it's like aging different colors it's like aging different colors it's like aging hair graying is there's plasticity hair graying is there's plasticity hair graying is there's plasticity here. And then we found hairs where the here. And then we found hairs where the here. And then we found hairs where the hair was white and it went back to the hair was white and it went back to the hair was white and it went back to being dark. And being dark. And being dark. And this was a little confusing. And then we this was a little confusing. And then we this was a little confusing. And then we had one participant who brought a hair, had one participant who brought a hair, had one participant who brought a hair, a young Asian woman, and her hair was so a young Asian woman, and her hair was so a young Asian woman, and her hair was so beautiful. She had like really dark hair beautiful. She had like really dark hair beautiful. She had like really dark hair and then the root was dark and then and then the root was dark and then and then the root was dark and then there was a segment 2 centimeters about there was a segment 2 centimeters about there was a segment 2 centimeters about like almost an inch of white and then like almost an inch of white and then like almost an inch of white and then the rest of the hair was dark again. the rest of the hair was dark again. the rest of the hair was dark again. &gt;&gt; What happened in that 2 centimeters? Did &gt;&gt; What happened in that 2 centimeters? Did &gt;&gt; What happened in that 2 centimeters? Did she exactly? So that became the she exactly? So that became the she exactly? So that became the question. So then we developed we said, question. So then we developed we said, question. So then we developed we said, "Okay, we need to do this quantity." "Okay, we need to do this quantity." "Okay, we need to do this quantity." &gt;&gt; She didn't tell you what had happened. &gt;&gt; She didn't tell you what had happened. &gt;&gt; She didn't tell you what had happened. &gt;&gt; No, no, no. She we were collecting hairs &gt;&gt; No, no, no. She we were collecting hairs &gt;&gt; No, no, no. She we were collecting hairs in Ziploc bags. So now people started to in Ziploc bags. So now people started to in Ziploc bags. So now people started to mail us, you know, ziplockc bags with mail us, you know, ziplockc bags with mail us, you know, ziplockc bags with hair. Um uh and we got some hairs from hair. Um uh and we got some hairs from hair. Um uh and we got some hairs from France, hairs from Canada, from France, hairs from Canada, from France, hairs from Canada, from different places in the US, across body different places in the US, across body different places in the US, across body regions in South Asian, regions in South Asian, regions in South Asian, African-American, you know, uh white. African-American, you know, uh white. African-American, you know, uh white. Uh so it was clearly real. And then Uh so it was clearly real. And then Uh so it was clearly real. And then we said we thought we need to develop an we said we thought we need to develop an we said we thought we need to develop an objective semi-quantitative method to objective semi-quantitative method to objective semi-quantitative method to quantify stress because we quantify now quantify stress because we quantify now quantify stress because we quantify now we bought a scanner you know old we bought a scanner you know old we bought a scanner you know old style like photo digitization system. So style like photo digitization system. So style like photo digitization system. So we bought one of those high-end scanners we bought one of those high-end scanners we bought one of those high-end scanners and then we could iron out like a single and then we could iron out like a single and then we could iron out like a single hair tape it down and then like scan at hair tape it down and then like scan at hair tape it down and then like scan at super high resolution. Uh so then we can super high resolution. Uh so then we can super high resolution. Uh so then we can get like uh a digital readout of the get like uh a digital readout of the get like uh a digital readout of the hair like tree rings and then you could hair like tree rings and then you could hair like tree rings and then you could see okay the hair was dark and there's see okay the hair was dark and there's see okay the hair was dark and there's actually information there's like it actually information there's like it actually information there's like it looks like EEG almost but we're looking looks like EEG almost but we're looking looks like EEG almost but we're looking at hair color and then it lo it lost at hair color and then it lo it lost at hair color and then it lo it lost color so then you can say okay this is color so then you can say okay this is color so then you can say okay this is the point and then we needed something the point and then we needed something the point and then we needed something similar for psychological states right similar for psychological states right similar for psychological states right what happened in this person's life what happened in this person's life what happened in this person's life ideally you would get blood or saliva or ideally you would get blood or saliva or ideally you would get blood or saliva or something else but uh we could go back something else but uh we could go back something else but uh we could go back in time with this and then I sat down in time with this and then I sat down in time with this and then I sat down with this participant and then said, with this participant and then said, with this participant and then said, "Okay, this is now uh and this is a year "Okay, this is now uh and this is a year "Okay, this is now uh and this is a year ago." Uh, and then you can look at your ago." Uh, and then you can look at your ago." Uh, and then you can look at your calendar. What was the most stressful calendar. What was the most stressful calendar. What was the most stressful part of the past year? And then for part of the past year? And then for part of the past year? And then for her, it was, you know, very clear. And her, it was, you know, very clear. And her, it was, you know, very clear. And then what was the least stressful part then what was the least stressful part then what was the least stressful part of the last year? And then people rate of the last year? And then people rate of the last year? And then people rate this there. The yaxis is most stressful this there. The yaxis is most stressful this there. The yaxis is most stressful at the top, least stressful, zero at the top, least stressful, zero at the top, least stressful, zero at the bottom. And then they put the bottom. And then they put the bottom. And then they put points and then connect the dots, right, points and then connect the dots, right, points and then connect the dots, right, with a line. So then you end up with a with a line. So then you end up with a with a line. So then you end up with a line graph of someone's you know recall line graph of someone's you know recall line graph of someone's you know recall of their stress levels anchored in some of their stress levels anchored in some of their stress levels anchored in some you know objective life events. So that you know objective life events. So that you know objective life events. So that was the methodology we use and for her was the methodology we use and for her was the methodology we use and for her [laughter] uh and she had sent us the hair a uh and she had sent us the hair a uh and she had sent us the hair a few months ago and then you know we were few months ago and then you know we were few months ago and then you know we were doing the interview and her profile doing the interview and her profile doing the interview and her profile was so beautiful and she said I was so beautiful and she said I was so beautiful and she said I submitted my thesis she just graduated submitted my thesis she just graduated submitted my thesis she just graduated her PhD uh on the at Stanford actually her PhD uh on the at Stanford actually her PhD uh on the at Stanford actually and then uh she uh you know had a chill and then uh she uh you know had a chill and then uh she uh you know had a chill uh summer and everything was okay then uh summer and everything was okay then uh summer and everything was okay then she had some issues with her boyfriend she had some issues with her boyfriend she had some issues with her boyfriend and they broke up and then she was like and they broke up and then she was like and they broke up and then she was like in crisis what do I do with my life? Do in crisis what do I do with my life? Do in crisis what do I do with my life? Do I, you know, get this job or that job. I, you know, get this job or that job. I, you know, get this job or that job. She had to go to Europe for some family She had to go to Europe for some family She had to go to Europe for some family issues. Uh, and then, um, and then she issues. Uh, and then, um, and then she issues. Uh, and then, um, and then she ended up moving to New York City, ended up moving to New York City, ended up moving to New York City, getting a job, reconnecting with her getting a job, reconnecting with her getting a job, reconnecting with her with her boyfriend, and then life was with her boyfriend, and then life was with her boyfriend, and then life was great. And her graph looked, you know, great. And her graph looked, you know, great. And her graph looked, you know, exactly like this. And, and that period exactly like this. And, and that period exactly like this. And, and that period lasted two months, lasted two months, lasted two months, &gt;&gt; and it mapped to the gray zone. &gt;&gt; and it mapped to the gray zone. &gt;&gt; and it mapped to the gray zone. &gt;&gt; It it mapped &gt;&gt; It it mapped &gt;&gt; It it mapped surprisingly perfectly with the with the surprisingly perfectly with the with the surprisingly perfectly with the with the graying, right, where the hair lost the graying, right, where the hair lost the graying, right, where the hair lost color. So it was the hair the stress color. So it was the hair the stress color. So it was the hair the stress peaked for two months and then came back peaked for two months and then came back peaked for two months and then came back down. She said this these were the most down. She said this these were the most down. She said this these were the most stressful two months of my life. stressful two months of my life. stressful two months of my life. &gt;&gt; Super interesting. Um and the papers &gt;&gt; Super interesting. Um and the papers &gt;&gt; Super interesting. Um and the papers got a lot of press as it as it should got a lot of press as it as it should got a lot of press as it as it should be. I've received about 300 emails since be. I've received about 300 emails since be. I've received about 300 emails since that paper was published. People for that paper was published. People for that paper was published. People for sending me pictures from all over the sending me pictures from all over the sending me pictures from all over the world saying like I found this world saying like I found this world saying like I found this two-colored hair. I thought I was crazy. two-colored hair. I thought I was crazy. two-colored hair. I thought I was crazy. Google this and found your paper. When I Google this and found your paper. When I Google this and found your paper. When I was growing up, my dad told me that he was growing up, my dad told me that he was growing up, my dad told me that he had a cousin who uh worried so much that had a cousin who uh worried so much that had a cousin who uh worried so much that he went to bed one night and woke up and he went to bed one night and woke up and he went to bed one night and woke up and all his hair was on the pillow. And I all his hair was on the pillow. And I all his hair was on the pillow. And I didn't know until I was an adult that didn't know until I was an adult that didn't know until I was an adult that story was designed to get me to that story was designed to get me to that story was designed to get me to stress less [laughter] stress less [laughter] stress less [laughter] and that it wasn't completely true. Um, and that it wasn't completely true. Um, and that it wasn't completely true. Um, but that's hair loss, not graying. But but that's hair loss, not graying. But but that's hair loss, not graying. But is there any graying of hair, beard hair is there any graying of hair, beard hair is there any graying of hair, beard hair or head hair that is just simply related or head hair that is just simply related or head hair that is just simply related to age? Or can we say that any graying to age? Or can we say that any graying to age? Or can we say that any graying of hair that's age associated is likely of hair that's age associated is likely of hair that's age associated is likely to be associated with the increased to be associated with the increased to be associated with the increased inflammation that comes with aging. inflammation that comes with aging. inflammation that comes with aging. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Aka stress. A different kind of stress, &gt;&gt; Aka stress. A different kind of stress, &gt;&gt; Aka stress. A different kind of stress, not psychological stress. not psychological stress. not psychological stress. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Maybe it depends how we define &gt;&gt; Yeah. Maybe it depends how we define &gt;&gt; Yeah. Maybe it depends how we define stress. We define stress as anything stress. We define stress as anything stress. We define stress as anything that costs energy. that costs energy. that costs energy. &gt;&gt; Well, inflammation costs energy. &gt;&gt; Well, inflammation costs energy. &gt;&gt; Well, inflammation costs energy. &gt;&gt; Inflammation costs energy. And making a &gt;&gt; Inflammation costs energy. And making a &gt;&gt; Inflammation costs energy. And making a cytoine costs energy. And if you're a cytoine costs energy. And if you're a cytoine costs energy. And if you're a cell and you have a receptor for a cell and you have a receptor for a cell and you have a receptor for a cytoine and the cytoine dogs, the lian cytoine and the cytoine dogs, the lian cytoine and the cytoine dogs, the lian dogs, that's going to cause energy. It dogs, that's going to cause energy. It dogs, that's going to cause energy. It occurred to me that when based on what occurred to me that when based on what occurred to me that when based on what you've told us that when we're young, we you've told us that when we're young, we you've told us that when we're young, we need a lot of energy and we don't want need a lot of energy and we don't want need a lot of energy and we don't want kids to overeat, but they need energy kids to overeat, but they need energy kids to overeat, but they need energy and their levels of inflammation are and their levels of inflammation are and their levels of inflammation are very low. Have a perfect situation for very low. Have a perfect situation for very low. Have a perfect situation for development. As we get older, we development. As we get older, we development. As we get older, we generally move a bit less or a lot less. generally move a bit less or a lot less. generally move a bit less or a lot less. &gt;&gt; Or a lot less. Yes. But ideally, it's &gt;&gt; Or a lot less. Yes. But ideally, it's &gt;&gt; Or a lot less. Yes. But ideally, it's just a bit less or maybe we move more. just a bit less or maybe we move more. just a bit less or maybe we move more. And in general, people need to eat less. And in general, people need to eat less. And in general, people need to eat less. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Not more as a rule. &gt;&gt; Not more as a rule. &gt;&gt; Not more as a rule. &gt;&gt; Uh, okay. But there are always &gt;&gt; Uh, okay. But there are always &gt;&gt; Uh, okay. But there are always exceptions to that rule. exceptions to that rule. exceptions to that rule. &gt;&gt; But there's a lot more inflammation. So, &gt;&gt; But there's a lot more inflammation. So, &gt;&gt; But there's a lot more inflammation. So, we're actually much more energetically we're actually much more energetically we're actually much more energetically expensive because of inflammation as we expensive because of inflammation as we expensive because of inflammation as we age. &gt;&gt; And I'd be willing to bet that some of &gt;&gt; And I'd be willing to bet that some of &gt;&gt; And I'd be willing to bet that some of the graying of hair is related to the graying of hair is related to the graying of hair is related to the aging inflammation thing. I mean, my aging inflammation thing. I mean, my aging inflammation thing. I mean, my level of stress, who knows what it is level of stress, who knows what it is level of stress, who knows what it is because it's been, you know, jagged line because it's been, you know, jagged line because it's been, you know, jagged line for so many years. I don't know what for so many years. I don't know what for so many years. I don't know what baseline is. I drink caffeine. Like, you baseline is. I drink caffeine. Like, you baseline is. I drink caffeine. Like, you know, like most people, we're masking a know, like most people, we're masking a know, like most people, we're masking a lot of the things that are going on. lot of the things that are going on. lot of the things that are going on. But, &gt;&gt; um, I love the results showing that &gt;&gt; um, I love the results showing that &gt;&gt; um, I love the results showing that increased stress grays hairs increased stress grays hairs increased stress grays hairs &gt;&gt; and reducing stress ungraes hairs. &gt;&gt; and reducing stress ungraes hairs. &gt;&gt; and reducing stress ungraes hairs. &gt;&gt; It's a correlation. &gt;&gt; It's a correlation. &gt;&gt; It's a correlation. &gt;&gt; It's a really It's a correlation, &gt;&gt; It's a really It's a correlation, &gt;&gt; It's a really It's a correlation, but it's a really cool result. I want to but it's a really cool result. I want to but it's a really cool result. I want to talk about restoration and recovery of talk about restoration and recovery of talk about restoration and recovery of energy maybe with the hair graying. energy maybe with the hair graying. energy maybe with the hair graying. I think what connects the hair graying I think what connects the hair graying I think what connects the hair graying with everything else we've talked about with everything else we've talked about with everything else we've talked about &gt;&gt; is the analysis we did of knowing like &gt;&gt; is the analysis we did of knowing like &gt;&gt; is the analysis we did of knowing like molecularly what happened in the when molecularly what happened in the when molecularly what happened in the when this one hair goes gray and then it this one hair goes gray and then it this one hair goes gray and then it recovers its color. recovers its color. recovers its color. &gt;&gt; What's happening energetically? So we &gt;&gt; What's happening energetically? So we &gt;&gt; What's happening energetically? So we took a single hair and cho chopped it took a single hair and cho chopped it took a single hair and cho chopped it into pieces and did proteomics. into pieces and did proteomics. into pieces and did proteomics. &gt;&gt; You have to because you're a molecular &gt;&gt; You have to because you're a molecular &gt;&gt; You have to because you're a molecular biologist, [laughter] right? And I mean biologist, [laughter] right? And I mean biologist, [laughter] right? And I mean mitochondria is our way to tap into you mitochondria is our way to tap into you mitochondria is our way to tap into you know the biology of energy. know the biology of energy. know the biology of energy. &gt;&gt; So then we thought maybe there's &gt;&gt; So then we thought maybe there's &gt;&gt; So then we thought maybe there's something there. And initially I didn't something there. And initially I didn't something there. And initially I didn't think there were mitochondria in the think there were mitochondria in the think there were mitochondria in the hair. Turns out every hair that we walk hair. Turns out every hair that we walk hair. Turns out every hair that we walk around with is loaded with mitochondrial around with is loaded with mitochondrial around with is loaded with mitochondrial DNA. And you know forensic if you find a DNA. And you know forensic if you find a DNA. And you know forensic if you find a hair on a crime scene you can figure out hair on a crime scene you can figure out hair on a crime scene you can figure out who was there. The DNA that gets who was there. The DNA that gets who was there. The DNA that gets sequenced is not the nuclear genome. sequenced is not the nuclear genome. sequenced is not the nuclear genome. It's a mitochondrial genome It's a mitochondrial genome It's a mitochondrial genome &gt;&gt; really. Uh, and because hairs have a &gt;&gt; really. Uh, and because hairs have a &gt;&gt; really. Uh, and because hairs have a very high concentration of mitochondrial very high concentration of mitochondrial very high concentration of mitochondrial DNA. &gt;&gt; See guys, you can't commit a crime &gt;&gt; See guys, you can't commit a crime &gt;&gt; See guys, you can't commit a crime expect to get away with it because if expect to get away with it because if expect to get away with it because if you leave one hair, Martin's lab is you leave one hair, Martin's lab is you leave one hair, Martin's lab is going to going to going to &gt;&gt; We don't sequence it. &gt;&gt; We don't sequence it. &gt;&gt; We don't sequence it. &gt;&gt; We don't do forensics. You don't. What &gt;&gt; We don't do forensics. You don't. What &gt;&gt; We don't do forensics. You don't. What &gt;&gt; the signature, the molecular signature &gt;&gt; the signature, the molecular signature &gt;&gt; the signature, the molecular signature that was the most robust comparing the that was the most robust comparing the that was the most robust comparing the white hair to the dark hair in the same white hair to the dark hair in the same white hair to the dark hair in the same person or comparing white to dark in person or comparing white to dark in person or comparing white to dark in different people was mitochondrial different people was mitochondrial different people was mitochondrial proteins. And I would I did not expect proteins. And I would I did not expect proteins. And I would I did not expect that. And we repeated those experiments that. And we repeated those experiments that. And we repeated those experiments in two different proteomics core. You in two different proteomics core. You in two different proteomics core. You know that there's uh the and the know that there's uh the and the know that there's uh the and the proteomic score hated that experiment proteomic score hated that experiment proteomic score hated that experiment because hair is like notoriously it's because hair is like notoriously it's because hair is like notoriously it's full of keratin, those super high full of keratin, those super high full of keratin, those super high abundance proteins and then they abundance proteins and then they abundance proteins and then they mask every other signal. Uh but we were mask every other signal. Uh but we were mask every other signal. Uh but we were able to kind of get good resolution data able to kind of get good resolution data able to kind of get good resolution data for other non-caratin non-hair proteins for other non-caratin non-hair proteins for other non-caratin non-hair proteins and three mitochondrial proteins were and three mitochondrial proteins were and three mitochondrial proteins were consistently upregulated. there was more consistently upregulated. there was more consistently upregulated. there was more of the mitochondrial energy of the mitochondrial energy of the mitochondrial energy transformation machinery in the gray transformation machinery in the gray transformation machinery in the gray hair compared to the dark hair. hair compared to the dark hair. hair compared to the dark hair. &gt;&gt; Love the direction of that result. I &gt;&gt; Love the direction of that result. I &gt;&gt; Love the direction of that result. I don't love that stress increases don't love that stress increases don't love that stress increases graying, but I love the direction of graying, but I love the direction of graying, but I love the direction of that result because it's yet another that result because it's yet another that result because it's yet another brick on the wall of what you're telling brick on the wall of what you're telling brick on the wall of what you're telling us that stress is an energy requirement. us that stress is an energy requirement. us that stress is an energy requirement. Inflammation associated with aging is an Inflammation associated with aging is an Inflammation associated with aging is an energy requirement. Being sick energy requirement. Being sick energy requirement. Being sick &gt;&gt; creates different energy requirements &gt;&gt; creates different energy requirements &gt;&gt; creates different energy requirements and we need to obey these different and we need to obey these different and we need to obey these different energy requirements. Fascinating. energy requirements. Fascinating. energy requirements. Fascinating. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, in terms of removing or reducing &gt;&gt; So, in terms of removing or reducing &gt;&gt; So, in terms of removing or reducing metabolic demand in order to keep our metabolic demand in order to keep our metabolic demand in order to keep our system going, system going, system going, &gt;&gt; uh, first of course is sleep, &gt;&gt; uh, first of course is sleep, &gt;&gt; uh, first of course is sleep, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Uh, you were telling me earlier before &gt;&gt; Uh, you were telling me earlier before &gt;&gt; Uh, you were telling me earlier before we started recording that during sleep, we started recording that during sleep, we started recording that during sleep, how much does our metabolic uh, needs how much does our metabolic uh, needs how much does our metabolic uh, needs become reduced? become reduced? become reduced? &gt;&gt; Decrease. Yeah. Most people know when &gt;&gt; Decrease. Yeah. Most people know when &gt;&gt; Decrease. Yeah. Most people know when you sleep your heart rate goes down and you sleep your heart rate goes down and you sleep your heart rate goes down and a bunch of your body temperature goes a bunch of your body temperature goes a bunch of your body temperature goes down and uh that uh allows us to go um down and uh that uh allows us to go um down and uh that uh allows us to go um you know to stay alive with 10 15% you know to stay alive with 10 15% you know to stay alive with 10 15% lower energy expenditure and that lower energy expenditure and that lower energy expenditure and that they're different between different they're different between different they're different between different people but you know 10 15% is kind of a people but you know 10 15% is kind of a people but you know 10 15% is kind of a an average of how much energy you're an average of how much energy you're an average of how much energy you're saving by sleeping and that there's a saving by sleeping and that there's a saving by sleeping and that there's a theory of why do you know every why theory of why do you know every why theory of why do you know every why does every animal need to sleep and if does every animal need to sleep and if does every animal need to sleep and if you sleep deprive of a mouse or rat or you sleep deprive of a mouse or rat or you sleep deprive of a mouse or rat or you know an animal they die eventually you know an animal they die eventually you know an animal they die eventually and we know from like severe cases of and we know from like severe cases of and we know from like severe cases of mania and you know bipolar disease mania and you know bipolar disease mania and you know bipolar disease people can die from going without people can die from going without people can die from going without sleep for you know multiple days. Uh um sleep for you know multiple days. Uh um sleep for you know multiple days. Uh um so and that might be one hypothesis to so and that might be one hypothesis to so and that might be one hypothesis to because sleep saves or conserves energy because sleep saves or conserves energy because sleep saves or conserves energy and if you don't go into that state and if you don't go into that state and if you don't go into that state of like torper right almost like h of like torper right almost like h of like torper right almost like h meaning hiber hibernation uh then you meaning hiber hibernation uh then you meaning hiber hibernation uh then you somehow the organism can't sustain somehow the organism can't sustain somehow the organism can't sustain that and I we have some thoughts as to that and I we have some thoughts as to that and I we have some thoughts as to why this is why this is why this is &gt;&gt; I was reading recently about this &gt;&gt; I was reading recently about this &gt;&gt; I was reading recently about this glimpmphatic clearance of waste in the glimpmphatic clearance of waste in the glimpmphatic clearance of waste in the brain that occurs during sleep and uh brain that occurs during sleep and uh brain that occurs during sleep and uh there was an interesting figure in this there was an interesting figure in this there was an interesting figure in this paper showing that Every mammal puts its paper showing that Every mammal puts its paper showing that Every mammal puts its head down during sleep. And there's some head down during sleep. And there's some head down during sleep. And there's some cute pictures of pandas sleeping on cute pictures of pandas sleeping on cute pictures of pandas sleeping on their side. The giraffe apparently puts their side. The giraffe apparently puts their side. The giraffe apparently puts the top of its head down uh in order to the top of its head down uh in order to the top of its head down uh in order to presumably increase lymphatic clearance. presumably increase lymphatic clearance. presumably increase lymphatic clearance. But I could also imagine that resting But I could also imagine that resting But I could also imagine that resting one's head reduces energetic demands. I one's head reduces energetic demands. I one's head reduces energetic demands. I mean, some people can sleep standing up, mean, some people can sleep standing up, mean, some people can sleep standing up, you know, against a pillar or something. you know, against a pillar or something. you know, against a pillar or something. I've done that, fallen asleep like that I've done that, fallen asleep like that I've done that, fallen asleep like that a bit. But in general, sleep is a time a bit. But in general, sleep is a time a bit. But in general, sleep is a time when we want to rest our body and our when we want to rest our body and our when we want to rest our body and our mind. And with the exception of rapid mind. And with the exception of rapid mind. And with the exception of rapid eye movement sleep, when the brain is eye movement sleep, when the brain is eye movement sleep, when the brain is very active, very active, very active, &gt;&gt; sort of a reboot of sorts, periodic &gt;&gt; sort of a reboot of sorts, periodic &gt;&gt; sort of a reboot of sorts, periodic reboot, &gt;&gt; um, &gt;&gt; um, &gt;&gt; um, &gt;&gt; sleep just seems like this beautiful way &gt;&gt; sleep just seems like this beautiful way &gt;&gt; sleep just seems like this beautiful way to allow the mitochondria to either to allow the mitochondria to either to allow the mitochondria to either restore or you just you don't want to restore or you just you don't want to restore or you just you don't want to you can't out eat sleep deprivation you can't out eat sleep deprivation you can't out eat sleep deprivation &gt;&gt; either. No, you can't eat more to get &gt;&gt; either. No, you can't eat more to get &gt;&gt; either. No, you can't eat more to get more energy. more energy. more energy. &gt;&gt; That's very clear. Yeah, that's a very &gt;&gt; That's very clear. Yeah, that's a very &gt;&gt; That's very clear. Yeah, that's a very important statement. Um, important statement. Um, important statement. Um, now I'm long been curious about things now I'm long been curious about things now I'm long been curious about things that people can do in order to either that people can do in order to either that people can do in order to either reduce their sleep need or in I prefer reduce their sleep need or in I prefer reduce their sleep need or in I prefer to refer to it as increasing their to refer to it as increasing their to refer to it as increasing their vitality while waking vitality while waking vitality while waking &gt;&gt; and it is true there are data showing &gt;&gt; and it is true there are data showing &gt;&gt; and it is true there are data showing that people who meditate that people who meditate that people who meditate &gt;&gt; for an hour or so per day or two 20 &gt;&gt; for an hour or so per day or two 20 &gt;&gt; for an hour or so per day or two 20 minute sessions minute sessions minute sessions &gt;&gt; seems to be the most typically used &gt;&gt; seems to be the most typically used &gt;&gt; seems to be the most typically used protocol can fairly dramatically reduce protocol can fairly dramatically reduce protocol can fairly dramatically reduce their sleep need and really you know, go their sleep need and really you know, go their sleep need and really you know, go from like an 8 hour need to a 6-h hour from like an 8 hour need to a 6-h hour from like an 8 hour need to a 6-h hour need with a 40minute investment of need with a 40minute investment of need with a 40minute investment of meditation. What are the data on how meditation. What are the data on how meditation. What are the data on how meditation reduces u mitochondrial meditation reduces u mitochondrial meditation reduces u mitochondrial function and energy use? I want to start function and energy use? I want to start function and energy use? I want to start by saying we don't know what by saying we don't know what by saying we don't know what mitochondria do when we sleep like do mitochondria do when we sleep like do mitochondria do when we sleep like do mitochondria sleep. You lose mitochondria sleep. You lose mitochondria sleep. You lose consciousness and the body you know goes consciousness and the body you know goes consciousness and the body you know goes into this hypom metabolic restorative into this hypom metabolic restorative into this hypom metabolic restorative state and yes there's glimpmphatics and state and yes there's glimpmphatics and state and yes there's glimpmphatics and you know uh garbage you know clear out you know uh garbage you know clear out you know uh garbage you know clear out in the brain which I suspect might in the brain which I suspect might in the brain which I suspect might have an energetic effect. If you have an energetic effect. If you have an energetic effect. If you have garbage in the brain probably the brain garbage in the brain probably the brain garbage in the brain probably the brain becomes less efficient. becomes less efficient. becomes less efficient. &gt;&gt; So it needs to burn more energy to do &gt;&gt; So it needs to burn more energy to do &gt;&gt; So it needs to burn more energy to do the same thing. So maybe the reason why the same thing. So maybe the reason why the same thing. So maybe the reason why the brain clears out stuff and why the brain clears out stuff and why the brain clears out stuff and why that's an important part of sleep is for that's an important part of sleep is for that's an important part of sleep is for an energetic purpose, an energetic purpose, an energetic purpose, &gt;&gt; right? So we just finished an experiment &gt;&gt; right? So we just finished an experiment &gt;&gt; right? So we just finished an experiment uh where we had people come in the lab uh where we had people come in the lab uh where we had people come in the lab for 24 hours, sleep into the lab and for 24 hours, sleep into the lab and for 24 hours, sleep into the lab and Evan Chosen, a student in my lab is Evan Chosen, a student in my lab is Evan Chosen, a student in my lab is analyzing those data and I think for the analyzing those data and I think for the analyzing those data and I think for the first time we'll be able to know what do first time we'll be able to know what do first time we'll be able to know what do mitochondria do when you fall asleep and mitochondria do when you fall asleep and mitochondria do when you fall asleep and you go into this hypomabolic state and you go into this hypomabolic state and you go into this hypomabolic state and you're kind of conserving energy. How is you're kind of conserving energy. How is you're kind of conserving energy. How is energy reallocated? So we see sleep as a energy reallocated? So we see sleep as a energy reallocated? So we see sleep as a two uh arm process. One, it slows some two uh arm process. One, it slows some two uh arm process. One, it slows some things down. things down. things down. &gt;&gt; If the heart beats, you know, 10 times &gt;&gt; If the heart beats, you know, 10 times &gt;&gt; If the heart beats, you know, 10 times less per minute, like that's a lot of less per minute, like that's a lot of less per minute, like that's a lot of energy. Every time the heart contracts, energy. Every time the heart contracts, energy. Every time the heart contracts, right, cy dasily, both contraction, right, cy dasily, both contraction, right, cy dasily, both contraction, relaxation cost energy. And then if you relaxation cost energy. And then if you relaxation cost energy. And then if you do this 10 times less per minute, that do this 10 times less per minute, that do this 10 times less per minute, that is a bunch of energy that can be is a bunch of energy that can be is a bunch of energy that can be reallocated, redistributed. So uh we reallocated, redistributed. So uh we reallocated, redistributed. So uh we suspect that there's three main buckets suspect that there's three main buckets suspect that there's three main buckets of energy expenses that the body of energy expenses that the body of energy expenses that the body needs to sustain you know at some point needs to sustain you know at some point needs to sustain you know at some point in time. One is vital. You need to keep in time. One is vital. You need to keep in time. One is vital. You need to keep your heart beating. It's you know your heart beating. It's you know your heart beating. It's you know your resting heart rate, the brain function, resting heart rate, the brain function, resting heart rate, the brain function, your kidney, you need to be you know your kidney, you need to be you know your kidney, you need to be you know detoxifying, clearing the blood and detoxifying, clearing the blood and detoxifying, clearing the blood and all of your vital organs. That's vital all of your vital organs. That's vital all of your vital organs. That's vital cost. Second is stress cost, right? If cost. Second is stress cost, right? If cost. Second is stress cost, right? If your sympathetic nervous system is your sympathetic nervous system is your sympathetic nervous system is activated because you're uh worrying activated because you're uh worrying activated because you're uh worrying about the future or you know worrying about the future or you know worrying about the future or you know worrying about the past or like you're stressing about the past or like you're stressing about the past or like you're stressing yourself out this costs energy and then yourself out this costs energy and then yourself out this costs energy and then your blood pressure increases that cost your blood pressure increases that cost your blood pressure increases that cost energy. Heart rate increases cost energy. Heart rate increases cost energy. Heart rate increases cost energy. You're sweating a little bit energy. You're sweating a little bit energy. You're sweating a little bit cost energy. Your hair rises you know cost energy. Your hair rises you know cost energy. Your hair rises you know anything that you're doing will anything that you're doing will anything that you're doing will cost energy and then steal that energy cost energy and then steal that energy cost energy and then steal that energy we think from a third bucket which is we think from a third bucket which is we think from a third bucket which is what we call growth maintenance and what we call growth maintenance and what we call growth maintenance and repair GMR. uh and those GMR processes repair GMR. uh and those GMR processes repair GMR. uh and those GMR processes happen at the level of organs, right? happen at the level of organs, right? happen at the level of organs, right? When you have an organ that gets bigger When you have an organ that gets bigger When you have an organ that gets bigger and stronger, for example, after, you and stronger, for example, after, you and stronger, for example, after, you know, weightlifting, uh it can happen at know, weightlifting, uh it can happen at know, weightlifting, uh it can happen at the level of the a cell. If the cell has the level of the a cell. If the cell has the level of the a cell. If the cell has you needs to repair its membrane, needs you needs to repair its membrane, needs you needs to repair its membrane, needs to repair its DNA. This would be growth, to repair its DNA. This would be growth, to repair its DNA. This would be growth, maintenance, and repairing. If you make maintenance, and repairing. If you make maintenance, and repairing. If you make new more mitochondria, mitochondrial new more mitochondria, mitochondrial new more mitochondria, mitochondrial biogenesis after workout, that would be biogenesis after workout, that would be biogenesis after workout, that would be growth, maintenance, and repair. Uh and growth, maintenance, and repair. Uh and growth, maintenance, and repair. Uh and because there's a finite energy budget, because there's a finite energy budget, because there's a finite energy budget, there's an economy of energy that how there's an economy of energy that how there's an economy of energy that how much energy you have needs to be much energy you have needs to be much energy you have needs to be distributed between those vital costs, distributed between those vital costs, distributed between those vital costs, the stress costs and the GMR, growth, the stress costs and the GMR, growth, the stress costs and the GMR, growth, maintenance, repair cost. So if you're maintenance, repair cost. So if you're maintenance, repair cost. So if you're stressing out all the time, we suspect stressing out all the time, we suspect stressing out all the time, we suspect this actually steals energy away from this actually steals energy away from this actually steals energy away from GMR. And then you're not healing, you're GMR. And then you're not healing, you're GMR. And then you're not healing, you're not growing, you're not uh you know, not growing, you're not uh you know, not growing, you're not uh you know, learning maybe. Uh and what sleep might learning maybe. Uh and what sleep might learning maybe. Uh and what sleep might do is actually shut down all of those do is actually shut down all of those do is actually shut down all of those stress processes. When you sleep, heart stress processes. When you sleep, heart stress processes. When you sleep, heart rate variability increases, right? rate variability increases, right? rate variability increases, right? Parasympathetic tone increases. Parasympathetic tone increases. Parasympathetic tone increases. Sympathetic nervous system goes very Sympathetic nervous system goes very Sympathetic nervous system goes very quiet. Uh and then all of the stress quiet. Uh and then all of the stress quiet. Uh and then all of the stress related expenses related expenses related expenses uh then become quiet then that energy uh then become quiet then that energy uh then become quiet then that energy piece of the energy budget can be piece of the energy budget can be piece of the energy budget can be allocated to growth, maintenance and allocated to growth, maintenance and allocated to growth, maintenance and repair. uh and when you meditate uh and repair. uh and when you meditate uh and repair. uh and when you meditate uh and there's this beautiful study that shows there's this beautiful study that shows there's this beautiful study that shows expert meditators uh can go into you expert meditators uh can go into you expert meditators uh can go into you know a deep state where their energy know a deep state where their energy know a deep state where their energy expenditure goes down by 40%. expenditure goes down by 40%. expenditure goes down by 40%. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; So 10 to 15% we said earlier that's how &gt;&gt; So 10 to 15% we said earlier that's how &gt;&gt; So 10 to 15% we said earlier that's how much you can save energy by just much you can save energy by just much you can save energy by just sleeping. Uh meditating it seems and in sleeping. Uh meditating it seems and in sleeping. Uh meditating it seems and in some uh trained people can bring energy some uh trained people can bring energy some uh trained people can bring energy expenditure down by 40%. This is more expenditure down by 40%. This is more expenditure down by 40%. This is more than sleep. So they're able to shut down than sleep. So they're able to shut down than sleep. So they're able to shut down right or quiet down maybe vital right or quiet down maybe vital right or quiet down maybe vital processes like we know the heart rate processes like we know the heart rate processes like we know the heart rate can go down extremely low probably can go down extremely low probably can go down extremely low probably stress processes we know this from stress processes we know this from stress processes we know this from measurements and meditators u and measurements and meditators u and measurements and meditators u and then maybe that energy can be then maybe that energy can be then maybe that energy can be reallocated to growth maintenance and reallocated to growth maintenance and reallocated to growth maintenance and repair. So if you do more of GMR repair. So if you do more of GMR repair. So if you do more of GMR &gt;&gt; and you're waking life because you live &gt;&gt; and you're waking life because you live &gt;&gt; and you're waking life because you live more mindfully and you don't stress more mindfully and you don't stress more mindfully and you don't stress yourself out, think about the future or yourself out, think about the future or yourself out, think about the future or the past or you know about um the past or you know about um the past or you know about um self-related thoughts, [laughter] self-related thoughts, [laughter] self-related thoughts, [laughter] uh then maybe you're you can do more uh then maybe you're you can do more uh then maybe you're you can do more GMR during meditation or during your GMR during meditation or during your GMR during meditation or during your daily life and then you don't need as daily life and then you don't need as daily life and then you don't need as much sleep. If the purpose of sleep is much sleep. If the purpose of sleep is much sleep. If the purpose of sleep is to reallocate energy towards growth, to reallocate energy towards growth, to reallocate energy towards growth, maintenance, and repair, maintenance, and repair, maintenance, and repair, &gt;&gt; it's definitely been my experience. I &gt;&gt; it's definitely been my experience. I &gt;&gt; it's definitely been my experience. I I've talked before on the podcast. I'm a I've talked before on the podcast. I'm a I've talked before on the podcast. I'm a big fan of yoga nidra. big fan of yoga nidra. big fan of yoga nidra. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Or I coined a variation on it non-sleep &gt;&gt; Or I coined a variation on it non-sleep &gt;&gt; Or I coined a variation on it non-sleep deep rest. Uh you it essentially deep rest. Uh you it essentially deep rest. Uh you it essentially consists of lying down consists of lying down consists of lying down &gt;&gt; intentionally staying awake and uh for &gt;&gt; intentionally staying awake and uh for &gt;&gt; intentionally staying awake and uh for 10 to 30 minutes and you do a 10 to 30 minutes and you do a 10 to 30 minutes and you do a progressive bodily relaxation while progressive bodily relaxation while progressive bodily relaxation while keeping your mind awake. The reason it's keeping your mind awake. The reason it's keeping your mind awake. The reason it's useful is twofold. One, you emerge from useful is twofold. One, you emerge from useful is twofold. One, you emerge from it with a ton of energy, mental and it with a ton of energy, mental and it with a ton of energy, mental and physical energy. your vigor is restored physical energy. your vigor is restored physical energy. your vigor is restored even on less sleep. even on less sleep. even on less sleep. &gt;&gt; The other is that it doesn't impede &gt;&gt; The other is that it doesn't impede &gt;&gt; The other is that it doesn't impede &gt;&gt; your ability to sleep at night. If &gt;&gt; your ability to sleep at night. If &gt;&gt; your ability to sleep at night. If anything, it facilitates it. Whereas anything, it facilitates it. Whereas anything, it facilitates it. Whereas naps can often uh create a sleep naps can often uh create a sleep naps can often uh create a sleep inertia. You feel sleepy afterwards. inertia. You feel sleepy afterwards. inertia. You feel sleepy afterwards. Then people drink caffeine and then can Then people drink caffeine and then can Then people drink caffeine and then can that can cause issues or just even make that can cause issues or just even make that can cause issues or just even make it harder to fall and stay asleep at it harder to fall and stay asleep at it harder to fall and stay asleep at night after naps. Whereas non-sleep deep night after naps. Whereas non-sleep deep night after naps. Whereas non-sleep deep rest yoga nijra is very efficient rest yoga nijra is very efficient rest yoga nijra is very efficient this way. The other thing is that I've this way. The other thing is that I've this way. The other thing is that I've been playing with lately um that I found been playing with lately um that I found been playing with lately um that I found to be tremendously useful. I sort of to be tremendously useful. I sort of to be tremendously useful. I sort of joke about this. I was telling my joke about this. I was telling my joke about this. I was telling my girlfriend the other day like um girlfriend the other day like um girlfriend the other day like um we'll just for the hour or so before we'll just for the hour or so before we'll just for the hour or so before sleep to just like listen to music, have sleep to just like listen to music, have sleep to just like listen to music, have the lights dim, just like really relax the lights dim, just like really relax the lights dim, just like really relax &gt;&gt; or maybe the 30 minutes before sleep, &gt;&gt; or maybe the 30 minutes before sleep, &gt;&gt; or maybe the 30 minutes before sleep, just really relax. And it's almost as if just really relax. And it's almost as if just really relax. And it's almost as if I mean you're awake. You're not I mean you're awake. You're not I mean you're awake. You're not asleep. But I noticed that it asleep. But I noticed that it asleep. But I noticed that it dramatically reduces my sleep need. I dramatically reduces my sleep need. I dramatically reduces my sleep need. I wake up from six hours feeling like I wake up from six hours feeling like I wake up from six hours feeling like I got eight got eight got eight &gt;&gt; and I monitor my sleep. And so it's a &gt;&gt; and I monitor my sleep. And so it's a &gt;&gt; and I monitor my sleep. And so it's a pretty robust thing. I suspect it's the pretty robust thing. I suspect it's the pretty robust thing. I suspect it's the slowering of the heart rate before slowering of the heart rate before slowering of the heart rate before sleep. &gt;&gt; I suspect that's what it is because it's &gt;&gt; I suspect that's what it is because it's &gt;&gt; I suspect that's what it is because it's not actual sleep. So, you think it helps not actual sleep. So, you think it helps not actual sleep. So, you think it helps you get into deeper state of sleeps you get into deeper state of sleeps you get into deeper state of sleeps faster or faster or faster or &gt;&gt; I think it's restorative in its own &gt;&gt; I think it's restorative in its own &gt;&gt; I think it's restorative in its own right and it probably helps sleep as right and it probably helps sleep as right and it probably helps sleep as well because it's anti-stress and so, well because it's anti-stress and so, well because it's anti-stress and so, you know, it's hard to tease those you know, it's hard to tease those you know, it's hard to tease those apart. &gt;&gt; But I think um this idea of not just &gt;&gt; But I think um this idea of not just &gt;&gt; But I think um this idea of not just lowering the lights, dimming the lights, lowering the lights, dimming the lights, lowering the lights, dimming the lights, but also um reducing the heart rate as but also um reducing the heart rate as but also um reducing the heart rate as you head into, you know, getting ready you head into, you know, getting ready you head into, you know, getting ready for sleep, you know, brushing your for sleep, you know, brushing your for sleep, you know, brushing your teeth, getting ready for sleep, teeth, getting ready for sleep, teeth, getting ready for sleep, &gt;&gt; you know, and pre-leep activities being &gt;&gt; you know, and pre-leep activities being &gt;&gt; you know, and pre-leep activities being very relaxing. We hear that for the very relaxing. We hear that for the very relaxing. We hear that for the d-stress component. Yeah, d-stress component. Yeah, d-stress component. Yeah, &gt;&gt; but I suspect that the brain is already &gt;&gt; but I suspect that the brain is already &gt;&gt; but I suspect that the brain is already going into a sleeplike state. going into a sleeplike state. going into a sleeplike state. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I suspect that's accurate. And &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I suspect that's accurate. And &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I suspect that's accurate. And um if you're by, um if you're by, um if you're by, you know, um creating that environment you know, um creating that environment you know, um creating that environment and then it allows you to relax, right? and then it allows you to relax, right? and then it allows you to relax, right? What relaxing means basically is you What relaxing means basically is you What relaxing means basically is you decrease the energetic cost of decrease the energetic cost of decrease the energetic cost of sustaining your organism. Uh then sustaining your organism. Uh then sustaining your organism. Uh then lowering heart rate, you know, lowering heart rate, you know, lowering heart rate, you know, lowering cortisol in your blood, norepinephrine, cortisol in your blood, norepinephrine, cortisol in your blood, norepinephrine, you know, catakolamines and the things you know, catakolamines and the things you know, catakolamines and the things that cost a lot of energy. Uh we've done that cost a lot of energy. Uh we've done that cost a lot of energy. Uh we've done experiments in cells in a dish. you give experiments in cells in a dish. you give experiments in cells in a dish. you give cells uh gluccocorticoids like a cells uh gluccocorticoids like a cells uh gluccocorticoids like a cortisol mimedic or norepinephrine cortisol mimedic or norepinephrine cortisol mimedic or norepinephrine &gt;&gt; and then we wanted to know how much &gt;&gt; and then we wanted to know how much &gt;&gt; and then we wanted to know how much energy does it cost right to mount a energy does it cost right to mount a energy does it cost right to mount a stress response like those hormones are stress response like those hormones are stress response like those hormones are not damaging by themselves but if you not damaging by themselves but if you not damaging by themselves but if you give them to cells the those cells go give them to cells the those cells go give them to cells the those cells go into like uh a whole choreographed into like uh a whole choreographed into like uh a whole choreographed respon evolutionary you know ingrained respon evolutionary you know ingrained respon evolutionary you know ingrained response that prepares them for the response that prepares them for the response that prepares them for the future right it's called alostostasis uh future right it's called alostostasis uh future right it's called alostostasis uh and that cost a bunch of energy And we and that cost a bunch of energy And we and that cost a bunch of energy And we found it was about 60%. So the this found it was about 60%. So the this found it was about 60%. So the this doesn't happen you know in human beings doesn't happen you know in human beings doesn't happen you know in human beings but if your energetic metabolic rate but if your energetic metabolic rate but if your energetic metabolic rate increased by 60% increased by 60% increased by 60% &gt;&gt; right with gluccocorticals you'd be in &gt;&gt; right with gluccocorticals you'd be in &gt;&gt; right with gluccocorticals you'd be in big trouble. So it might not be as much big trouble. So it might not be as much big trouble. So it might not be as much in the whole body but we know now that in the whole body but we know now that in the whole body but we know now that &gt;&gt; just a stress hormone on cells you know &gt;&gt; just a stress hormone on cells you know &gt;&gt; just a stress hormone on cells you know in a dish human cells is able to in a dish human cells is able to in a dish human cells is able to increase the energetic cost of life. So increase the energetic cost of life. So increase the energetic cost of life. So it costs energy to worry about it costs energy to worry about it costs energy to worry about stuff. So if you can decrease the level stuff. So if you can decrease the level stuff. So if you can decrease the level of those hormones and decrease a level of those hormones and decrease a level of those hormones and decrease a level of cytoines in your blood inflammation of cytoines in your blood inflammation of cytoines in your blood inflammation uh that's going to save energy and then uh that's going to save energy and then uh that's going to save energy and then yes maybe sleep is more restorative yes maybe sleep is more restorative yes maybe sleep is more restorative and this the sleep study we did there and this the sleep study we did there and this the sleep study we did there are people whose sleep energy are people whose sleep energy are people whose sleep energy expenditure you know drops significantly expenditure you know drops significantly expenditure you know drops significantly like 20%. Other people doesn't does like 20%. Other people doesn't does like 20%. Other people doesn't does doesn't drop you know almost at all. Uh doesn't drop you know almost at all. Uh doesn't drop you know almost at all. Uh in particular people whose mitochondria in particular people whose mitochondria in particular people whose mitochondria don't work very well. Uh so we've been don't work very well. Uh so we've been don't work very well. Uh so we've been so fortunate to work with patients and so fortunate to work with patients and so fortunate to work with patients and uh in the I'm not a physician but uh I'm uh in the I'm not a physician but uh I'm uh in the I'm not a physician but uh I'm in the clinic half day a week to and I in the clinic half day a week to and I in the clinic half day a week to and I see patients that I've followed now for see patients that I've followed now for see patients that I've followed now for about six years who have genetic about six years who have genetic about six years who have genetic mitochondrial diseases. So they're mitochondrial diseases. So they're mitochondrial diseases. So they're pretty rare but have a mutation they're pretty rare but have a mutation they're pretty rare but have a mutation or deletion in the mitochondrial DNA. or deletion in the mitochondrial DNA. or deletion in the mitochondrial DNA. Some of them is in the nucleus nuclear Some of them is in the nucleus nuclear Some of them is in the nucleus nuclear genome but it affects the mitochondrial genome but it affects the mitochondrial genome but it affects the mitochondrial energy transformation capacity. Those energy transformation capacity. Those energy transformation capacity. Those people are always tired fat you know people are always tired fat you know people are always tired fat you know they don't feel well. They avoid they don't feel well. They avoid they don't feel well. They avoid exercise at all cost because it just exercise at all cost because it just exercise at all cost because it just feels so terrible because their feels so terrible because their feels so terrible because their mitochondria have increased resistance mitochondria have increased resistance mitochondria have increased resistance to energy flow. So if you try to push to energy flow. So if you try to push to energy flow. So if you try to push more energy through it's really more energy through it's really more energy through it's really uncomfortable. GDF-15 through the roof. uncomfortable. GDF-15 through the roof. uncomfortable. GDF-15 through the roof. &gt;&gt; Uh the best biioarker of mitochondrial &gt;&gt; Uh the best biioarker of mitochondrial &gt;&gt; Uh the best biioarker of mitochondrial disease is actually GDF-15 which you disease is actually GDF-15 which you disease is actually GDF-15 which you know tells us something about the where know tells us something about the where know tells us something about the where what GDF15 means to the organism. When what GDF15 means to the organism. When what GDF15 means to the organism. When the mitochondria don't work properly, the mitochondria don't work properly, the mitochondria don't work properly, those cells that can't flow energy those cells that can't flow energy those cells that can't flow energy properly send out GDF-15 as a signal. uh properly send out GDF-15 as a signal. uh properly send out GDF-15 as a signal. uh and if you do a sleep study on those and if you do a sleep study on those and if you do a sleep study on those individuals and you look at how well do individuals and you look at how well do individuals and you look at how well do they decrease their energy expenditure they decrease their energy expenditure they decrease their energy expenditure to go into this restorative state the to go into this restorative state the to go into this restorative state the parasympathetic nervous system can't parasympathetic nervous system can't parasympathetic nervous system can't kick in. kick in. kick in. &gt;&gt; So uh some of the biggest difference we &gt;&gt; So uh some of the biggest difference we &gt;&gt; So uh some of the biggest difference we see between mitochondrial disease and see between mitochondrial disease and see between mitochondrial disease and people who have normal healthy spectrum people who have normal healthy spectrum people who have normal healthy spectrum of mitochondria is this inability to of mitochondria is this inability to of mitochondria is this inability to slow down and to go into this slow down and to go into this slow down and to go into this restorative state at night. Uh so that restorative state at night. Uh so that restorative state at night. Uh so that positions mitochondria that positions mitochondria that positions mitochondria in the context of restoration and you in the context of restoration and you in the context of restoration and you know the our ability to heal and uh and know the our ability to heal and uh and know the our ability to heal and uh and the and lifespan in those people is the and lifespan in those people is the and lifespan in those people is decreased by about three decades. decreased by about three decades. decreased by about three decades. As long as we're talking about sleep and As long as we're talking about sleep and As long as we're talking about sleep and meditation and lowering one's heart rate meditation and lowering one's heart rate meditation and lowering one's heart rate before sleep by whatever means, you before sleep by whatever means, you before sleep by whatever means, you know, um we should talk about nutrition know, um we should talk about nutrition know, um we should talk about nutrition and exercise and supplements, dare I and exercise and supplements, dare I and exercise and supplements, dare I say, &gt;&gt; um and prescription drugs, &gt;&gt; um and prescription drugs, &gt;&gt; um and prescription drugs, &gt;&gt; um including the GLPS. &gt;&gt; um including the GLPS. &gt;&gt; um including the GLPS. &gt;&gt; So, I realize you're not a nutrition &gt;&gt; So, I realize you're not a nutrition &gt;&gt; So, I realize you're not a nutrition expert, but expert, but expert, but &gt;&gt; you think about energy. Uh you can't out &gt;&gt; you think about energy. Uh you can't out &gt;&gt; you think about energy. Uh you can't out eat a bad night's sleep. Uh but we all eat a bad night's sleep. Uh but we all eat a bad night's sleep. Uh but we all need nutrition. It when you personally need nutrition. It when you personally need nutrition. It when you personally step back from step back from step back from all the noise around nutrition, what are all the noise around nutrition, what are all the noise around nutrition, what are the key takeaways for you in terms the key takeaways for you in terms the key takeaways for you in terms of how you think about optimizing your of how you think about optimizing your of how you think about optimizing your mitochondrial health and energy flow? mitochondrial health and energy flow? mitochondrial health and energy flow? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think we've gotten things wrong &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think we've gotten things wrong &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think we've gotten things wrong for two main reasons. One is we don't for two main reasons. One is we don't for two main reasons. One is we don't think about the individual. We try to think about the individual. We try to think about the individual. We try to find oneizefitall solutions. carnivore find oneizefitall solutions. carnivore find oneizefitall solutions. carnivore is good or keto is good or high carb is good or keto is good or high carb is good or keto is good or high carb is good or you know meat is bad or right good or you know meat is bad or right good or you know meat is bad or right there all of these variations which uh there all of these variations which uh there all of these variations which uh people feel really strongly about. Uh, people feel really strongly about. Uh, people feel really strongly about. Uh, and this brings us back to like the and this brings us back to like the and this brings us back to like the value of the human experience. Like you value of the human experience. Like you value of the human experience. Like you know for yourself if you try if you know for yourself if you try if you know for yourself if you try if you change your diet and it changes your change your diet and it changes your change your diet and it changes your life like you have vitality you life like you have vitality you life like you have vitality you haven't had in like 20 years and your haven't had in like 20 years and your haven't had in like 20 years and your symptoms inflammation right or is symptoms inflammation right or is symptoms inflammation right or is gone and you have clarity of mind you've gone and you have clarity of mind you've gone and you have clarity of mind you've never had. I've met several people now never had. I've met several people now never had. I've met several people now who've had this kind of lifechanging who've had this kind of lifechanging who've had this kind of lifechanging uh energetic shift happen when they go uh energetic shift happen when they go uh energetic shift happen when they go on a ketogenic diet and when they in on a ketogenic diet and when they in on a ketogenic diet and when they in store, you know, intermittent fasting. store, you know, intermittent fasting. store, you know, intermittent fasting. Life-changing Mhm. Life-changing Mhm. Life-changing Mhm. &gt;&gt; So they know that this is &gt;&gt; So they know that this is &gt;&gt; So they know that this is real, right? And um and then you do an real, right? And um and then you do an real, right? And um and then you do an RCT and [laughter] and then you say, RCT and [laughter] and then you say, RCT and [laughter] and then you say, "Okay, let's test the randomized control "Okay, let's test the randomized control "Okay, let's test the randomized control trial." &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. You do a randomized uh &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. You do a randomized uh &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. You do a randomized uh clinical trial and then what you do clinical trial and then what you do clinical trial and then what you do there is you feed everyone the same there is you feed everyone the same there is you feed everyone the same thing, ketogenic diet or standard diet thing, ketogenic diet or standard diet thing, ketogenic diet or standard diet or whatever, you know, diet as usual. or whatever, you know, diet as usual. or whatever, you know, diet as usual. And then people are on this diet for x And then people are on this diet for x And then people are on this diet for x amount of time, 12 weeks. And then at amount of time, 12 weeks. And then at amount of time, 12 weeks. And then at the end, you compare whatever outcome the end, you compare whatever outcome the end, you compare whatever outcome you determined, you decided was the you determined, you decided was the you determined, you decided was the right outcome. And then you have like right outcome. And then you have like right outcome. And then you have like let's say 50 people here, 50 people let's say 50 people here, 50 people let's say 50 people here, 50 people here. And then you ask, did the here. And then you ask, did the here. And then you ask, did the ketogenic diet improve mental health or ketogenic diet improve mental health or ketogenic diet improve mental health or did it reduce inflammation or right, did it reduce inflammation or right, did it reduce inflammation or right, did it do that? And and then often in RCTs it do that? And and then often in RCTs it do that? And and then often in RCTs for dietary interventions or drugs, what for dietary interventions or drugs, what for dietary interventions or drugs, what you find is not really, maybe a little you find is not really, maybe a little you find is not really, maybe a little bit, right? And then if this the study bit, right? And then if this the study bit, right? And then if this the study was adequately powered and there's like was adequately powered and there's like was adequately powered and there's like an 8% you know shift in your primary an 8% you know shift in your primary an 8% you know shift in your primary outcome then it becomes p less than 0.05 outcome then it becomes p less than 0.05 outcome then it becomes p less than 0.05 the p value the statistically the p value the statistically the p value the statistically the statistical uh you know value here statistical uh you know value here statistical uh you know value here becomes significant and now you say the becomes significant and now you say the becomes significant and now you say the ketogenic diet is effective for this or ketogenic diet is effective for this or ketogenic diet is effective for this or the ketogenic diet does not work you the ketogenic diet does not work you the ketogenic diet does not work you know for eggs. This and this is I know for eggs. This and this is I know for eggs. This and this is I think highly misleading because when you think highly misleading because when you think highly misleading because when you peel the surface of any randomized peel the surface of any randomized peel the surface of any randomized clinical trial, you find that there are clinical trial, you find that there are clinical trial, you find that there are people who were like amazing responders. people who were like amazing responders. people who were like amazing responders. Like there are people whose lives was Like there are people whose lives was Like there are people whose lives was changed truly. Uh and then there are changed truly. Uh and then there are changed truly. Uh and then there are people who didn't change anything. And people who didn't change anything. And people who didn't change anything. And then there are also people who got then there are also people who got then there are also people who got worse. Uh and then you average everyone. worse. Uh and then you average everyone. worse. Uh and then you average everyone. You squish everyone into this average. You squish everyone into this average. You squish everyone into this average. And then the RCT is a statistical And then the RCT is a statistical And then the RCT is a statistical test of averages. Nobody is the average. test of averages. Nobody is the average. test of averages. Nobody is the average. Like no, nobody is actually the average. Like no, nobody is actually the average. Like no, nobody is actually the average. &gt;&gt; Literally. &gt;&gt; Literally. &gt;&gt; Literally. &gt;&gt; Literally. &gt;&gt; Literally. &gt;&gt; Literally. &gt;&gt; And and then uh the ketogenic diet could &gt;&gt; And and then uh the ketogenic diet could &gt;&gt; And and then uh the ketogenic diet could literally save lives and it could cure literally save lives and it could cure literally save lives and it could cure or be like a really solid treatment for or be like a really solid treatment for or be like a really solid treatment for schizophrenia or bipolar or Crohn's schizophrenia or bipolar or Crohn's schizophrenia or bipolar or Crohn's disease or whatever it is uh for like disease or whatever it is uh for like disease or whatever it is uh for like 20% of the population and we'll never 20% of the population and we'll never 20% of the population and we'll never find out find out find out &gt;&gt; just because we have a science of &gt;&gt; just because we have a science of &gt;&gt; just because we have a science of averages. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, a safe self-experimentation &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, a safe self-experimentation &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, a safe self-experimentation is the only solution to this. It's the is the only solution to this. It's the is the only solution to this. It's the only solution. only solution. only solution. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that you there's a clash &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that you there's a clash &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and that you there's a clash here between the value of the human here between the value of the human here between the value of the human experience, right? You know that this experience, right? You know that this experience, right? You know that this thing works for you and that you live at thing works for you and that you live at thing works for you and that you live at a higher level, right? You can fulfill a higher level, right? You can fulfill a higher level, right? You can fulfill your potential. And then you see the your potential. And then you see the your potential. And then you see the science that, you know, the capital S science that, you know, the capital S science that, you know, the capital S science that tells you no, what you science that tells you no, what you science that tells you no, what you think works doesn't work. And then no, think works doesn't work. And then no, think works doesn't work. And then no, but it works for me. And then you have a but it works for me. And then you have a but it works for me. And then you have a white coatwearing person who says no white coatwearing person who says no white coatwearing person who says no I have the authority I can tell you no I have the authority I can tell you no I have the authority I can tell you this RCT shows that it it's not this RCT shows that it it's not this RCT shows that it it's not effective and I think this really is effective and I think this really is effective and I think this really is damaging like this it makes me angry I'm damaging like this it makes me angry I'm damaging like this it makes me angry I'm I feel uncomfortable when I talk I'm I feel uncomfortable when I talk I'm I feel uncomfortable when I talk about this because this is completely about this because this is completely about this because this is completely disregarding the human experience uh you disregarding the human experience uh you disregarding the human experience uh you know and in service of this you know and in service of this you know and in service of this you know framework that doesn't serve the framework that doesn't serve the framework that doesn't serve the individual those the RCT was invented individual those the RCT was invented individual those the RCT was invented for very good reasons and it was for very good reasons and it was for very good reasons and it was it's very useful in some circumstances it's very useful in some circumstances it's very useful in some circumstances like do antibiotics work? Uh should you like do antibiotics work? Uh should you like do antibiotics work? Uh should you know be do doing surgery this way or you know be do doing surgery this way or you know be do doing surgery this way or that way? But when you get to that way? But when you get to that way? But when you get to interventions or treatments that are interventions or treatments that are interventions or treatments that are likely to have highly individualized likely to have highly individualized likely to have highly individualized effects and there are people who respond effects and there are people who respond effects and there are people who respond amazingly to this to that then you end amazingly to this to that then you end amazingly to this to that then you end up disempowering people. So I think up disempowering people. So I think up disempowering people. So I think there's a clash of I know this to be there's a clash of I know this to be there's a clash of I know this to be true from my experience and then I have true from my experience and then I have true from my experience and then I have this person in this position of this person in this position of this person in this position of authority, this scientist or this doctor authority, this scientist or this doctor authority, this scientist or this doctor that says no, this doesn't work because that says no, this doesn't work because that says no, this doesn't work because the RCT showed that it didn't work. Like the RCT showed that it didn't work. Like the RCT showed that it didn't work. Like this is really this breaks trust and um this is really this breaks trust and um this is really this breaks trust and um and so I understand the frustration of and so I understand the frustration of and so I understand the frustration of so many people who've lost confidence in so many people who've lost confidence in so many people who've lost confidence in science and in the medical in science and in the medical in science and in the medical establishment I think for good establishment I think for good establishment I think for good reasons in many cases. Is it fair to say reasons in many cases. Is it fair to say reasons in many cases. Is it fair to say that then there is no that then there is no that then there is no best diet for mitochondria except the best diet for mitochondria except the best diet for mitochondria except the one that's energetically one that's energetically one that's energetically um not excessive not caloric calorically um not excessive not caloric calorically um not excessive not caloric calorically excessive. Yeah. So eating too much for excessive. Yeah. So eating too much for excessive. Yeah. So eating too much for sure damages the whole system uh sure damages the whole system uh sure damages the whole system uh including mitochondria. Um so the including mitochondria. Um so the including mitochondria. Um so the first piece of response to your first piece of response to your first piece of response to your question is because we don't think about question is because we don't think about question is because we don't think about diet in individualized way. We're diet in individualized way. We're diet in individualized way. We're missing the boat on actually finding missing the boat on actually finding missing the boat on actually finding diets that work for different people. So diets that work for different people. So diets that work for different people. So we're working on uh a platform that we're working on uh a platform that we're working on uh a platform that would empower people to get some would empower people to get some would empower people to get some objective readout right of energetically objective readout right of energetically objective readout right of energetically how are they doing and then and then how are they doing and then and then how are they doing and then and then a framework also to you know we can all a framework also to you know we can all a framework also to you know we can all be thinking scientifically about our own be thinking scientifically about our own be thinking scientifically about our own health and about ourselves. And once you health and about ourselves. And once you health and about ourselves. And once you realize you're you know you are the flow realize you're you know you are the flow realize you're you know you are the flow of energy uh that rushes through your of energy uh that rushes through your of energy uh that rushes through your body with different levels of resistance body with different levels of resistance body with different levels of resistance then you can uh think about the food you then you can uh think about the food you then you can uh think about the food you put in your body is actually fueling put in your body is actually fueling put in your body is actually fueling that flow right like you are the that flow right like you are the that flow right like you are the movement of energy and that is movement of energy and that is movement of energy and that is continuously uh fueled by you know what continuously uh fueled by you know what continuously uh fueled by you know what you put in there uh and then the uh by you put in there uh and then the uh by you put in there uh and then the uh by the activity you do and the kind of the activity you do and the kind of the activity you do and the kind of things you engage with. Uh so yes we things you engage with. Uh so yes we things you engage with. Uh so yes we need a framework for this. We're working need a framework for this. We're working need a framework for this. We're working on that. Uh, so that's the on that. Uh, so that's the on that. Uh, so that's the individualized piece, right? There's individualized piece, right? There's individualized piece, right? There's very at this point I'm pretty convinced very at this point I'm pretty convinced very at this point I'm pretty convinced there's no one diet that is a best diet there's no one diet that is a best diet there's no one diet that is a best diet for everyone. I've seen people thrive on for everyone. I've seen people thrive on for everyone. I've seen people thrive on very different diets. uh since we've very different diets. uh since we've very different diets. uh since we've been kind of working on related areas been kind of working on related areas been kind of working on related areas and um and a few years ago I received a and um and a few years ago I received a and um and a few years ago I received a research prize the Bazooki prize in research prize the Bazooki prize in research prize the Bazooki prize in science uh which was so enabling and science uh which was so enabling and science uh which was so enabling and Bazooki group is a family foundation uh Bazooki group is a family foundation uh Bazooki group is a family foundation uh whose their son was diagnosed with whose their son was diagnosed with whose their son was diagnosed with bipolar disease and tried all sorts bipolar disease and tried all sorts bipolar disease and tried all sorts of treatments and drugs that you of treatments and drugs that you of treatments and drugs that you know didn't work very well or and you know didn't work very well or and you know didn't work very well or and you know actually made things worse and so know actually made things worse and so know actually made things worse and so they were on a diagnostic Odyssey and they were on a diagnostic Odyssey and they were on a diagnostic Odyssey and trying to find something for years. And trying to find something for years. And trying to find something for years. And then finally um uh they came across a then finally um uh they came across a then finally um uh they came across a psychiatrist who was using the ketogenic psychiatrist who was using the ketogenic psychiatrist who was using the ketogenic diet as a treatment. And so he went diet as a treatment. And so he went diet as a treatment. And so he went on a ketogenic diet and uh Jan Bazooki on a ketogenic diet and uh Jan Bazooki on a ketogenic diet and uh Jan Bazooki the um the mom um said like I had my the um the mom um said like I had my the um the mom um said like I had my son back like within a few weeks he his son back like within a few weeks he his son back like within a few weeks he his mood you know got stabilized. he was mood you know got stabilized. he was mood you know got stabilized. he was able to sleep and uh he stopped kind of able to sleep and uh he stopped kind of able to sleep and uh he stopped kind of you know cycling between mania and you know cycling between mania and you know cycling between mania and major m depression. Um so for him like major m depression. Um so for him like major m depression. Um so for him like you know that really worked and uh so I you know that really worked and uh so I you know that really worked and uh so I was sensitized to that area of was sensitized to that area of was sensitized to that area of work and research and then dozens of work and research and then dozens of work and research and then dozens of other patients and I've met you know so other patients and I've met you know so other patients and I've met you know so many people now who manage their many people now who manage their many people now who manage their mental health disorder with uh ketogenic mental health disorder with uh ketogenic mental health disorder with uh ketogenic diet and they test you know their diet and they test you know their diet and they test you know their blood ketones to make sure they're still blood ketones to make sure they're still blood ketones to make sure they're still in ketosis and there's now a in ketosis and there's now a in ketosis and there's now a continuous ketone monitor CKM you know continuous ketone monitor CKM you know continuous ketone monitor CKM you know CGM right so you can test your ketones I CGM right so you can test your ketones I CGM right so you can test your ketones I wore one for a month and learned wore one for a month and learned wore one for a month and learned some really interesting things about my some really interesting things about my some really interesting things about my body and about, you know, how body and about, you know, how body and about, you know, how &gt;&gt; Were you ketogenic? &gt;&gt; Were you ketogenic? &gt;&gt; Were you ketogenic? &gt;&gt; Uh, I tried. Uh, &gt;&gt; Uh, I tried. Uh, &gt;&gt; Uh, I tried. Uh, &gt;&gt; did you like it being in keto ketosis? &gt;&gt; did you like it being in keto ketosis? &gt;&gt; did you like it being in keto ketosis? &gt;&gt; I really enjoyed the state of ketosis &gt;&gt; I really enjoyed the state of ketosis &gt;&gt; I really enjoyed the state of ketosis and um and I think there's a reason why and um and I think there's a reason why and um and I think there's a reason why fasting is uh a common practice in every fasting is uh a common practice in every fasting is uh a common practice in every ancient tradition and every religion has ancient tradition and every religion has ancient tradition and every religion has like a fasting component to them. It it like a fasting component to them. It it like a fasting component to them. It it puts the organism in this prohealing puts the organism in this prohealing puts the organism in this prohealing state, right? which is probably why you state, right? which is probably why you state, right? which is probably why you don't eat if you're sick and uh um and don't eat if you're sick and uh um and don't eat if you're sick and uh um and why animals also stop eating when why animals also stop eating when why animals also stop eating when they're when they're unwell. So, it they're when they're unwell. So, it they're when they're unwell. So, it seems to foster, you know, promote seems to foster, you know, promote seems to foster, you know, promote something. Uh and then I had much more, something. Uh and then I had much more, something. Uh and then I had much more, you know, better clarity of mind. Uh and you know, better clarity of mind. Uh and you know, better clarity of mind. Uh and that's what a lot of patients report as that's what a lot of patients report as that's what a lot of patients report as well. Like, well. Like, well. Like, &gt;&gt; did you stay on it? &gt;&gt; did you stay on it? &gt;&gt; did you stay on it? &gt;&gt; No, &gt;&gt; No, &gt;&gt; No, &gt;&gt; it's hard to maintain. &gt;&gt; it's hard to maintain. &gt;&gt; it's hard to maintain. &gt;&gt; It's hard to maintain and I didn't, you &gt;&gt; It's hard to maintain and I didn't, you &gt;&gt; It's hard to maintain and I didn't, you know, feel the need. I missed berries. I know, feel the need. I missed berries. I know, feel the need. I missed berries. I avoid I know I don't handle sugar well. avoid I know I don't handle sugar well. avoid I know I don't handle sugar well. So, I ditched, you know, refined So, I ditched, you know, refined So, I ditched, you know, refined sugars maybe like 20 years ago. Do you sugars maybe like 20 years ago. Do you sugars maybe like 20 years ago. Do you drink alcohol? drink alcohol? drink alcohol? &gt;&gt; I don't. Uh there there's good research. &gt;&gt; I don't. Uh there there's good research. &gt;&gt; I don't. Uh there there's good research. When I saw that study, like, oh my god, When I saw that study, like, oh my god, When I saw that study, like, oh my god, this might be why, you know, I feel like this might be why, you know, I feel like this might be why, you know, I feel like the next day after I have alcohol the next day after I have alcohol the next day after I have alcohol or my sleep is not good or and why or my sleep is not good or and why or my sleep is not good or and why patients with mitochondrial disease like patients with mitochondrial disease like patients with mitochondrial disease like the majority of them are very alcohol the majority of them are very alcohol the majority of them are very alcohol intolerant. Uh and then you know, intolerant. Uh and then you know, intolerant. Uh and then you know, you can make all sorts of theories about you can make all sorts of theories about you can make all sorts of theories about maybe it's like the detoxification maybe it's like the detoxification maybe it's like the detoxification enzyme and their liver like enzyme and their liver like enzyme and their liver like energetically they're on edge, right? energetically they're on edge, right? energetically they're on edge, right? And then if you look at how much energy And then if you look at how much energy And then if you look at how much energy does it cost to get rid of the alcohol, does it cost to get rid of the alcohol, does it cost to get rid of the alcohol, right? It's a toxin. So everything in right? It's a toxin. So everything in right? It's a toxin. So everything in biology costs energy. Nothing is free. A biology costs energy. Nothing is free. A biology costs energy. Nothing is free. A basic [snorts] energetic law of life. Uh basic [snorts] energetic law of life. Uh basic [snorts] energetic law of life. Uh so if you put alcohol in the body, now so if you put alcohol in the body, now so if you put alcohol in the body, now the body has to, you know, spend a the body has to, you know, spend a the body has to, you know, spend a precious portion of its energy budget to precious portion of its energy budget to precious portion of its energy budget to removing alcohol and it disrupts your removing alcohol and it disrupts your removing alcohol and it disrupts your sleep. The data came out recently. This sleep. The data came out recently. This sleep. The data came out recently. This was covered in the uh traditional press. was covered in the uh traditional press. was covered in the uh traditional press. Uh I think you can look it up folks. Uh I think you can look it up folks. Uh I think you can look it up folks. It's a there's something like a 50% It's a there's something like a 50% It's a there's something like a 50% reduction in alcohol uh consumption in reduction in alcohol uh consumption in reduction in alcohol uh consumption in the United States now. I think it's the United States now. I think it's the United States now. I think it's the lowest alcohol consumption in something lowest alcohol consumption in something lowest alcohol consumption in something like 90 years. It's pretty spectacular. like 90 years. It's pretty spectacular. like 90 years. It's pretty spectacular. We did an episode about alcohol a couple We did an episode about alcohol a couple We did an episode about alcohol a couple of years ago. It turned out to be a very of years ago. It turned out to be a very of years ago. It turned out to be a very popular episode. popular episode. popular episode. Uh and there's a you know the argument Uh and there's a you know the argument Uh and there's a you know the argument has been made by me uh but others now as has been made by me uh but others now as has been made by me uh but others now as well that zero is better than any well that zero is better than any well that zero is better than any &gt;&gt; and the upper limit for you know &gt;&gt; and the upper limit for you know &gt;&gt; and the upper limit for you know sustained health is or before you start sustained health is or before you start sustained health is or before you start to run into some issues um is probably to run into some issues um is probably to run into some issues um is probably one or two drinks per week. But this one or two drinks per week. But this one or two drinks per week. But this idea that wine is good for us. Um idea that wine is good for us. Um idea that wine is good for us. Um there's been a reanalysis of that by there's been a reanalysis of that by there's been a reanalysis of that by Keith Humphre and others at Stanford. If Keith Humphre and others at Stanford. If Keith Humphre and others at Stanford. If you look at the way those studies were you look at the way those studies were you look at the way those studies were designed, uh and he's coming on the designed, uh and he's coming on the designed, uh and he's coming on the podcast, so I'm not going to detail it podcast, so I'm not going to detail it podcast, so I'm not going to detail it now. The the way those studies were now. The the way those studies were now. The the way those studies were designed was poor experimental designed was poor experimental designed was poor experimental design. All of it speaks to the fact design. All of it speaks to the fact design. All of it speaks to the fact that zero is better than any. that zero is better than any. that zero is better than any. &gt;&gt; Now, that's not to say people shouldn't &gt;&gt; Now, that's not to say people shouldn't &gt;&gt; Now, that's not to say people shouldn't enjoy a drink every once in a while if enjoy a drink every once in a while if enjoy a drink every once in a while if they want to, but they should know what they want to, but they should know what they want to, but they should know what they're doing. they're doing. they're doing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you willing to sacrifice 10% &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you willing to sacrifice 10% &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you willing to sacrifice 10% of your energy budget, you know, going of your energy budget, you know, going of your energy budget, you know, going towards alcohol detoxification? Can you towards alcohol detoxification? Can you towards alcohol detoxification? Can you spare that at 10%. If if you care about spare that at 10%. If if you care about spare that at 10%. If if you care about that 10% and you want your vitality or that 10% and you want your vitality or that 10% and you want your vitality or then maybe you maybe you don't drink. then maybe you maybe you don't drink. then maybe you maybe you don't drink. &gt;&gt; When I was going to a lot of scientific &gt;&gt; When I was going to a lot of scientific &gt;&gt; When I was going to a lot of scientific meetings, you know, there's a lot of meetings, you know, there's a lot of meetings, you know, there's a lot of drinking that happens at scientific drinking that happens at scientific drinking that happens at scientific meetings. I would uh take solace in the meetings. I would uh take solace in the meetings. I would uh take solace in the fact that a I'm going to sleep fact that a I'm going to sleep fact that a I'm going to sleep relatively early. 11:00 isn't that relatively early. 11:00 isn't that relatively early. 11:00 isn't that early. But I didn't stay out late and I early. But I didn't stay out late and I early. But I didn't stay out late and I wouldn't drink and I'd watch other wouldn't drink and I'd watch other wouldn't drink and I'd watch other people in my field that I was competing people in my field that I was competing people in my field that I was competing with stay out late drinking and some of with stay out late drinking and some of with stay out late drinking and some of them were more senior than I am at them were more senior than I am at them were more senior than I am at bigger labs and I was like I'm going to bigger labs and I was like I'm going to bigger labs and I was like I'm going to take your lunch. [laughter] I'm going to take your lunch. [laughter] I'm going to take your lunch. [laughter] I'm going to take your lunch. take your lunch. take your lunch. Yeah. I'm Yeah. That and I'd recommend Yeah. I'm Yeah. That and I'd recommend Yeah. I'm Yeah. That and I'd recommend that they watch certain Netflix serieses that they watch certain Netflix serieses that they watch certain Netflix serieses because that'll definitely take your because that'll definitely take your because that'll definitely take your competition out. No, I would watch competition out. No, I would watch competition out. No, I would watch people who are in the field of health people who are in the field of health people who are in the field of health and science degrade their health in real and science degrade their health in real and science degrade their health in real time and it was perplexing to me because time and it was perplexing to me because time and it was perplexing to me because the amount of alcohol consumption. the amount of alcohol consumption. the amount of alcohol consumption. Anyway, I'm editorializing now. It's bad Anyway, I'm editorializing now. It's bad Anyway, I'm editorializing now. It's bad for your mitochondria is what I'm for your mitochondria is what I'm for your mitochondria is what I'm getting. &gt;&gt; I think it uh steals a piece of your &gt;&gt; I think it uh steals a piece of your &gt;&gt; I think it uh steals a piece of your energy budget. So whether you want to, energy budget. So whether you want to, energy budget. So whether you want to, you know, allocate that energy, if you know, allocate that energy, if you know, allocate that energy, if you have extra energy to spare, you want to have extra energy to spare, you want to have extra energy to spare, you want to do that. Uh but do that. Uh but do that. Uh but &gt;&gt; that's a good way to think about it. In &gt;&gt; that's a good way to think about it. In &gt;&gt; that's a good way to think about it. In some cases uh let's say you know uh some cases uh let's say you know uh some cases uh let's say you know uh vital processes nothing you can do about vital processes nothing you can do about vital processes nothing you can do about this and as you age probably those this and as you age probably those this and as you age probably those increases stress processes increases stress processes increases stress processes &gt;&gt; right the mind creates most of those at &gt;&gt; right the mind creates most of those at &gt;&gt; right the mind creates most of those at a stress related energetic cost and then a stress related energetic cost and then a stress related energetic cost and then growth maintenance and repair if you're growth maintenance and repair if you're growth maintenance and repair if you're uh for some reason circumstantial or you uh for some reason circumstantial or you uh for some reason circumstantial or you know you have some um we all have know you have some um we all have know you have some um we all have we from our past that we deal with we from our past that we deal with we from our past that we deal with u if this is burning a big chunk of u if this is burning a big chunk of u if this is burning a big chunk of your energy budget right every Hey, you your energy budget right every Hey, you your energy budget right every Hey, you you're a little traumatized or you know you're a little traumatized or you know you're a little traumatized or you know you worry about the future about your you worry about the future about your you worry about the future about your self-image or whatever. If this is self-image or whatever. If this is self-image or whatever. If this is burning let's say 20% 30% of your energy burning let's say 20% 30% of your energy burning let's say 20% 30% of your energy budget and when you drink alcohol that budget and when you drink alcohol that budget and when you drink alcohol that 30% goes to 5%. Right? 30% goes to 5%. Right? 30% goes to 5%. Right? &gt;&gt; Uh you're maybe wasting let's say &gt;&gt; Uh you're maybe wasting let's say &gt;&gt; Uh you're maybe wasting let's say 10% of your budget to detoxifying 10% of your budget to detoxifying 10% of your budget to detoxifying alcohol. But if you're relieving that alcohol. But if you're relieving that alcohol. But if you're relieving that stress, you know, I suspect this is why stress, you know, I suspect this is why stress, you know, I suspect this is why um you know, there are people, you know, um you know, there are people, you know, um you know, there are people, you know, that really like their social drinking that really like their social drinking that really like their social drinking because it relieves kind of a stress because it relieves kind of a stress because it relieves kind of a stress uh energy wastage. uh energy wastage. uh energy wastage. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, makes sense. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, makes sense. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, makes sense. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; No, the stress piece is huge. And &gt;&gt; No, the stress piece is huge. And &gt;&gt; No, the stress piece is huge. And when you you've set up this framework when you you've set up this framework when you you've set up this framework for us, which I really like about for us, which I really like about for us, which I really like about energetic flow as opposed to just energy energetic flow as opposed to just energy energetic flow as opposed to just energy coming into the system as a as a key coming into the system as a as a key coming into the system as a as a key thing to think about and then how we thing to think about and then how we thing to think about and then how we allocate energy at the mitochondrial allocate energy at the mitochondrial allocate energy at the mitochondrial level, but at the decision-m subjective level, but at the decision-m subjective level, but at the decision-m subjective whole person level. Um doing whole person level. Um doing whole person level. Um doing things that bring us a sense of meaning things that bring us a sense of meaning things that bring us a sense of meaning clearly is energy building, not just clearly is energy building, not just clearly is energy building, not just energy expending. Although we can't take energy expending. Although we can't take energy expending. Although we can't take it so far that we're not getting enough it so far that we're not getting enough it so far that we're not getting enough sleep. I mean, you know, there's sleep. I mean, you know, there's sleep. I mean, you know, there's [clears throat] always the [clears throat] always the [clears throat] always the housekeeping that needs to be done of housekeeping that needs to be done of housekeeping that needs to be done of sleep and nutrition, etc. I am curious sleep and nutrition, etc. I am curious sleep and nutrition, etc. I am curious about exercise. about exercise. about exercise. &gt;&gt; You mentioned training for a marathon &gt;&gt; You mentioned training for a marathon &gt;&gt; You mentioned training for a marathon will double the number of mitochondria will double the number of mitochondria will double the number of mitochondria &gt;&gt; at most. Yes. &gt;&gt; at most. Yes. &gt;&gt; at most. Yes. &gt;&gt; But where's the sort of sweet spot &gt;&gt; But where's the sort of sweet spot &gt;&gt; But where's the sort of sweet spot of doing more exercise in order to of doing more exercise in order to of doing more exercise in order to increase mitochondrial density and etc. increase mitochondrial density and etc. increase mitochondrial density and etc. efficiency? Um, but not so much that efficiency? Um, but not so much that efficiency? Um, but not so much that you're robbing mitochondria from other you're robbing mitochondria from other you're robbing mitochondria from other areas of your of your biology that are areas of your of your biology that are areas of your of your biology that are critical. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. Yeah, a good question. Like if &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. Yeah, a good question. Like if &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. Yeah, a good question. Like if you exercise too much and you're a you exercise too much and you're a you exercise too much and you're a healthy a young healthy male, you can healthy a young healthy male, you can healthy a young healthy male, you can actually decrease testosterone level, actually decrease testosterone level, actually decrease testosterone level, right? Like endurance training can shut right? Like endurance training can shut right? Like endurance training can shut down your testosterone production, your down your testosterone production, your down your testosterone production, your reproductive system basically. your reproductive system basically. your reproductive system basically. &gt;&gt; Uh so that there that trade-offs the &gt;&gt; Uh so that there that trade-offs the &gt;&gt; Uh so that there that trade-offs the kind of trade-offs we talked about with kind of trade-offs we talked about with kind of trade-offs we talked about with uh you know young females also applies uh you know young females also applies uh you know young females also applies to males and those kind of ways. to males and those kind of ways. to males and those kind of ways. um where that threshold is I think is um where that threshold is I think is um where that threshold is I think is also highly individualized and um like also highly individualized and um like also highly individualized and um like overtraining syndrome is a very real overtraining syndrome is a very real overtraining syndrome is a very real thing and you know even people who thing and you know even people who thing and you know even people who devote a lot of their life and energy to devote a lot of their life and energy to devote a lot of their life and energy to becoming better athletes like there becoming better athletes like there becoming better athletes like there there's a limit and I used to be a there's a limit and I used to be a there's a limit and I used to be a competitive cyclist and I race kind of competitive cyclist and I race kind of competitive cyclist and I race kind of semi-professionally and in my college semi-professionally and in my college semi-professionally and in my college days and uh and I knew that if I worked days and uh and I knew that if I worked days and uh and I knew that if I worked out if I you know was on the road and I out if I you know was on the road and I out if I you know was on the road and I used to do like intense and long used to do like intense and long used to do like intense and long distance workouts if I was like I distance workouts if I was like I distance workouts if I was like I logged all of my training, you know, how logged all of my training, you know, how logged all of my training, you know, how many hours, kilometers, all of this. Uh many hours, kilometers, all of this. Uh many hours, kilometers, all of this. Uh if I did more than like 20 22 hours a if I did more than like 20 22 hours a if I did more than like 20 22 hours a week on the bike, I would get like week on the bike, I would get like week on the bike, I would get like Achilles tendon that was kind of my Achilles tendon that was kind of my Achilles tendon that was kind of my sweet spot um or my sensitive, you know, sweet spot um or my sensitive, you know, sweet spot um or my sensitive, you know, weak spot or my knee. Um so there was weak spot or my knee. Um so there was weak spot or my knee. Um so there was a limit, right? And and for me that a limit, right? And and for me that a limit, right? And and for me that limit was 20 22 hours. And maybe that's limit was 20 22 hours. And maybe that's limit was 20 22 hours. And maybe that's why I never became a professional why I never became a professional why I never became a professional cyclist. I wanted to at some point cyclist. I wanted to at some point cyclist. I wanted to at some point maybe I'll after undergrad I'll be maybe I'll after undergrad I'll be maybe I'll after undergrad I'll be professional cyclist but you realize you professional cyclist but you realize you professional cyclist but you realize you need to spend a lot of hours on the bike need to spend a lot of hours on the bike need to spend a lot of hours on the bike to do this and my limit was that right to do this and my limit was that right to do this and my limit was that right uh and I did some plyometrics and some uh and I did some plyometrics and some uh and I did some plyometrics and some other you know uh sprint uh building other you know uh sprint uh building other you know uh sprint uh building exercises and I weighed like 10 15 more exercises and I weighed like 10 15 more exercises and I weighed like 10 15 more pounds than I do now. I had I was pounds than I do now. I had I was pounds than I do now. I had I was investing more resources there. Then investing more resources there. Then investing more resources there. Then when I started the PhD, I was more when I started the PhD, I was more when I started the PhD, I was more inspired to, you know, at some point it inspired to, you know, at some point it inspired to, you know, at some point it was like, okay, do I write this paper or was like, okay, do I write this paper or was like, okay, do I write this paper or do I go for a three-hour bike ride and do I go for a three-hour bike ride and do I go for a three-hour bike ride and then spend like three hour recovering, then spend like three hour recovering, then spend like three hour recovering, you know, making amount of great amount you know, making amount of great amount you know, making amount of great amount of food. And so the trade-offs at of food. And so the trade-offs at of food. And so the trade-offs at some point I started to feel like I want some point I started to feel like I want some point I started to feel like I want to put my energy towards, you know, to put my energy towards, you know, to put my energy towards, you know, developing these ideas. And so there was developing these ideas. And so there was developing these ideas. And so there was kind of a trade-off from athletic kind of a trade-off from athletic kind of a trade-off from athletic performance, you know, and muscle performance, you know, and muscle performance, you know, and muscle building towards more intellectual building towards more intellectual building towards more intellectual activities. And that sweet spot, I activities. And that sweet spot, I activities. And that sweet spot, I think, is unique to each person. Uh, and think, is unique to each person. Uh, and think, is unique to each person. Uh, and some people I think use running as a as some people I think use running as a as some people I think use running as a as a as a like a therapy. a as a like a therapy. a as a like a therapy. &gt;&gt; Some people use eating. Some people use &gt;&gt; Some people use eating. Some people use &gt;&gt; Some people use eating. Some people use running. Some people use gambling. Uh, running. Some people use gambling. Uh, running. Some people use gambling. Uh, you know, whatever it is for you. Um, so you know, whatever it is for you. Um, so you know, whatever it is for you. Um, so I don't know that there's kind of a I don't know that there's kind of a I don't know that there's kind of a number of hours, number of miles per number of hours, number of miles per number of hours, number of miles per week, for sure not. Uh, and whether you week, for sure not. Uh, and whether you week, for sure not. Uh, and whether you do something, you know, that inspires do something, you know, that inspires do something, you know, that inspires you or whether you do something and it's you or whether you do something and it's you or whether you do something and it's a it's a grind, like I it's a it's a grind, like I it's a it's a grind, like I think that makes a difference for how think that makes a difference for how think that makes a difference for how much energy you have to do it and how much energy you have to do it and how much energy you have to do it and how much is good for you. much is good for you. much is good for you. &gt;&gt; Uh, I know you spent a lot of time in &gt;&gt; Uh, I know you spent a lot of time in &gt;&gt; Uh, I know you spent a lot of time in the in the gym, uh, Steven Presfield, the in the gym, uh, Steven Presfield, the in the gym, uh, Steven Presfield, who you know, you chatted to, and this who you know, you chatted to, and this who you know, you chatted to, and this concept of resistance, right? Like I concept of resistance, right? Like I concept of resistance, right? Like I think that there there's something there think that there there's something there think that there there's something there that you need to that you need to that you need to &gt;&gt; give the body a certain amount of &gt;&gt; give the body a certain amount of &gt;&gt; give the body a certain amount of resistance &gt;&gt; and that's true physically, but also &gt;&gt; and that's true physically, but also &gt;&gt; and that's true physically, but also true mentally. uh too much resistance true mentally. uh too much resistance true mentally. uh too much resistance crushes you, right? And then it's like crushes you, right? And then it's like crushes you, right? And then it's like too difficult and it's demoralizing too difficult and it's demoralizing too difficult and it's demoralizing and deenergizing. But not enough and deenergizing. But not enough and deenergizing. But not enough resistance is not inspiring like and resistance is not inspiring like and resistance is not inspiring like and then being bored like being and then being bored like being and then being bored like being imprisoned. That might be why, you know, imprisoned. That might be why, you know, imprisoned. That might be why, you know, being in prison is so such a it's a being in prison is so such a it's a being in prison is so such a it's a thing we do to people that who've done thing we do to people that who've done thing we do to people that who've done really bad things because it is it really bad things because it is it really bad things because it is it really crushes a human spirit when they really crushes a human spirit when they really crushes a human spirit when they have nothing to do. And having something have nothing to do. And having something have nothing to do. And having something to do is a bit is kind of exerting to do is a bit is kind of exerting to do is a bit is kind of exerting resistance to the human mind. So having resistance to the human mind. So having resistance to the human mind. So having to I bumping your mind against something to I bumping your mind against something to I bumping your mind against something and that's something academics I think and that's something academics I think and that's something academics I think really typically enjoy having a problem really typically enjoy having a problem really typically enjoy having a problem like being curious about something. like being curious about something. like being curious about something. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Resistance through the lens of &gt;&gt; Yeah. Resistance through the lens of &gt;&gt; Yeah. Resistance through the lens of what we're talking about today is very what we're talking about today is very what we're talking about today is very interesting. I think it's uh worth interesting. I think it's uh worth interesting. I think it's uh worth underscoring it again because we've underscoring it again because we've underscoring it again because we've established you've established let's be established you've established let's be established you've established let's be fair here uh you've established that fair here uh you've established that fair here uh you've established that it's not just about uh mitochondria it's not just about uh mitochondria it's not just about uh mitochondria making ATP and energy that actually making ATP and energy that actually making ATP and energy that actually controlling energy flow controlling energy flow controlling energy flow &gt;&gt; transforming &gt;&gt; transforming &gt;&gt; transforming &gt;&gt; transforming it um all of the Morse code &gt;&gt; transforming it um all of the Morse code &gt;&gt; transforming it um all of the Morse code rate and content and then rate and content and then rate and content and then &gt;&gt; and so there's this allocation piece but &gt;&gt; and so there's this allocation piece but &gt;&gt; and so there's this allocation piece but then there's also this idea that in then there's also this idea that in then there's also this idea that in order to transform energy it has to meet order to transform energy it has to meet order to transform energy it has to meet resistance meet resistance meet resistance you know that and that's where the you know that and that's where the you know that and that's where the transformation occurs. And so perhaps transformation occurs. And so perhaps transformation occurs. And so perhaps the whole concept of getting more the whole concept of getting more the whole concept of getting more vital, getting better, learning, etc. vital, getting better, learning, etc. vital, getting better, learning, etc. It's about that feeling of friction. It's about that feeling of friction. It's about that feeling of friction. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Uh when we when I've done episodes about &gt;&gt; Uh when we when I've done episodes about &gt;&gt; Uh when we when I've done episodes about neuroplasticity, I've tried to really neuroplasticity, I've tried to really neuroplasticity, I've tried to really get into people's minds like get into people's minds like get into people's minds like &gt;&gt; the moment you feel agitation that &gt;&gt; the moment you feel agitation that &gt;&gt; the moment you feel agitation that means the opportunity for plasticity is means the opportunity for plasticity is means the opportunity for plasticity is turning on. Your brain doesn't change if turning on. Your brain doesn't change if turning on. Your brain doesn't change if it if it's in a state like any other it if it's in a state like any other it if it's in a state like any other state. This is unfortunately why state. This is unfortunately why state. This is unfortunately why traumatic experiences are so good at traumatic experiences are so good at traumatic experiences are so good at rewiring the brain because your brain rewiring the brain because your brain rewiring the brain because your brain goes, I'm not used to this much goes, I'm not used to this much goes, I'm not used to this much adrenaline and norepinephrine, something adrenaline and norepinephrine, something adrenaline and norepinephrine, something whatever is happening now is really whatever is happening now is really whatever is happening now is really important and it actually grabs too important and it actually grabs too important and it actually grabs too much. And that's PTSD. It it grabs much. And that's PTSD. It it grabs much. And that's PTSD. It it grabs random events. It's it's a whole thing. random events. It's it's a whole thing. random events. It's it's a whole thing. But for healthy learning, But for healthy learning, But for healthy learning, &gt;&gt; adaptive learning, you have to have the &gt;&gt; adaptive learning, you have to have the &gt;&gt; adaptive learning, you have to have the resistance. If you can do the thing, resistance. If you can do the thing, resistance. If you can do the thing, your brain won't change. If you can do your brain won't change. If you can do your brain won't change. If you can do the thing, your body won't change. And I the thing, your body won't change. And I the thing, your body won't change. And I try and explain this in the context of try and explain this in the context of try and explain this in the context of cognitive stuff, that agitation and of cognitive stuff, that agitation and of cognitive stuff, that agitation and frustration. Like you have to seek that frustration. Like you have to seek that frustration. Like you have to seek that out. You don't want to overdo it. But I out. You don't want to overdo it. But I out. You don't want to overdo it. But I think if I wish they had told me that think if I wish they had told me that think if I wish they had told me that when I was in school, right? I mean, I when I was in school, right? I mean, I when I was in school, right? I mean, I was a pretty avid learner, but it's like was a pretty avid learner, but it's like was a pretty avid learner, but it's like you just want to tell people the moment you just want to tell people the moment you just want to tell people the moment you're frustrated. you're frustrated. you're frustrated. &gt;&gt; Awesome. Like your circuits are &gt;&gt; Awesome. Like your circuits are &gt;&gt; Awesome. Like your circuits are primed to change. primed to change. primed to change. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Anyway, I get very impassionate &gt;&gt; Yeah. Anyway, I get very impassionate &gt;&gt; Yeah. Anyway, I get very impassionate about so because it's how we get better. about so because it's how we get better. about so because it's how we get better. And I think most people feel that they And I think most people feel that they And I think most people feel that they actually errors signal that more and actually errors signal that more and actually errors signal that more and tell your brain you have to change. tell your brain you have to change. tell your brain you have to change. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Just it's just that the change &gt;&gt; Yeah. Just it's just that the change &gt;&gt; Yeah. Just it's just that the change takes time takes time takes time &gt;&gt; and it takes it takes time and it &gt;&gt; and it takes it takes time and it &gt;&gt; and it takes it takes time and it takes energy like the reason change is takes energy like the reason change is takes energy like the reason change is difficult transitions any kind of you difficult transitions any kind of you difficult transitions any kind of you know moving house is one of the most know moving house is one of the most know moving house is one of the most stressful things you know that divorced stressful things you know that divorced stressful things you know that divorced like you know getting divorced or your like you know getting divorced or your like you know getting divorced or your rel changing relationships uh any kind rel changing relationships uh any kind rel changing relationships uh any kind of transition by definition a transition of transition by definition a transition of transition by definition a transition requires change requires change requires change &gt;&gt; which requires energy &gt;&gt; which requires energy &gt;&gt; which requires energy &gt;&gt; and I suspect the reason why uh life &gt;&gt; and I suspect the reason why uh life &gt;&gt; and I suspect the reason why uh life transitions are difficult is because transitions are difficult is because transitions are difficult is because they cost energy and we have a finite they cost energy and we have a finite they cost energy and we have a finite amount of it. Um, so resistance, amount of it. Um, so resistance, amount of it. Um, so resistance, the energy resistance principle is the energy resistance principle is the energy resistance principle is something that we've developed recently something that we've developed recently something that we've developed recently with neuros uh that encapsulates this. with neuros uh that encapsulates this. with neuros uh that encapsulates this. It says like life is resistance. You It says like life is resistance. You It says like life is resistance. You cannot have life if there's no cannot have life if there's no cannot have life if there's no resistance. There's no transformation. resistance. There's no transformation. resistance. There's no transformation. &gt;&gt; You're like a cadaavver. &gt;&gt; You're like a cadaavver. &gt;&gt; You're like a cadaavver. &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. Or you're like a beaming, &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. Or you're like a beaming, &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. Or you're like a beaming, you know, light ray in outer space. you know, light ray in outer space. you know, light ray in outer space. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It just goes on. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It just goes on. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It just goes on. &gt;&gt; It just goes on, goes on. Never &gt;&gt; It just goes on, goes on. Never &gt;&gt; It just goes on, goes on. Never transformed. You know, there's a transformed. You know, there's a transformed. You know, there's a potential for change, but it's there's potential for change, but it's there's potential for change, but it's there's no transformation. It's never going to no transformation. It's never going to no transformation. It's never going to change until it hits resistance. A green change until it hits resistance. A green change until it hits resistance. A green leaf on earth for example. leaf on earth for example. leaf on earth for example. &gt;&gt; I love it. It's it's such an important &gt;&gt; I love it. It's it's such an important &gt;&gt; I love it. It's it's such an important concept. &gt;&gt; And just to I think you think about &gt;&gt; And just to I think you think about &gt;&gt; And just to I think you think about bodybuilding and you know working out bodybuilding and you know working out bodybuilding and you know working out that how the body gets stronger. The way that how the body gets stronger. The way that how the body gets stronger. The way the body gets stronger is by facing the body gets stronger is by facing the body gets stronger is by facing resistance, right? If your muscles get resistance, right? If your muscles get resistance, right? If your muscles get accustomed to a certain weight, if you accustomed to a certain weight, if you accustomed to a certain weight, if you want to grow in strength or in mass, you want to grow in strength or in mass, you want to grow in strength or in mass, you need to go heavier, right? And so it's need to go heavier, right? And so it's need to go heavier, right? And so it's increasing resistance. Same thing if you increasing resistance. Same thing if you increasing resistance. Same thing if you send an astronaut in outer space, their send an astronaut in outer space, their send an astronaut in outer space, their body gets like so weak, their bones like body gets like so weak, their bones like body gets like so weak, their bones like demineralize and their muscles atrophy demineralize and their muscles atrophy demineralize and their muscles atrophy and you know their hearts weaken and you know their hearts weaken and you know their hearts weaken and then they come back onto earth uh then they come back onto earth uh then they come back onto earth uh and then they struggle and that's and then they struggle and that's and then they struggle and that's because when you go out in outer space because when you go out in outer space because when you go out in outer space there's no resistance, right? The there's no resistance, right? The there's no resistance, right? The gravity is you don't feel gravity is you don't feel gravity is you don't feel gravity because you're constantly falling right because you're constantly falling right because you're constantly falling right in orbit and then there's nothing. in orbit and then there's nothing. in orbit and then there's nothing. You're resisting the structure of your You're resisting the structure of your You're resisting the structure of your body. &gt;&gt; They age very fast. &gt;&gt; They age very fast. &gt;&gt; They age very fast. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Astronauts don't &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Astronauts don't &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Astronauts don't farewell. Now they have ways to farewell. Now they have ways to farewell. Now they have ways to compensate for this. compensate for this. compensate for this. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a brief break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a brief break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that offers hundreds of guided meditation offers hundreds of guided meditation offers hundreds of guided meditation programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga nidra sessions, and more. I started nidra sessions, and more. I started nidra sessions, and more. I started practicing meditation when I was about practicing meditation when I was about practicing meditation when I was about 15 years old, and it made a profound 15 years old, and it made a profound 15 years old, and it made a profound impact on my life. And by now, there are impact on my life. And by now, there are impact on my life. And by now, there are thousands of quality peer-reviewed thousands of quality peer-reviewed thousands of quality peer-reviewed studies that emphasize how useful studies that emphasize how useful studies that emphasize how useful mindfulness meditation can be for mindfulness meditation can be for mindfulness meditation can be for improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different meditations to choose from. And those meditations to choose from. And those meditations to choose from. And those meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up with your meditation practice both from with your meditation practice both from with your meditation practice both from the perspective of novelty. You never the perspective of novelty. You never the perspective of novelty. You never get tired of those meditations. There's get tired of those meditations. There's get tired of those meditations. There's always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the effectiveness of meditation. And you can effectiveness of meditation. And you can effectiveness of meditation. And you can always fit meditation into your schedule always fit meditation into your schedule always fit meditation into your schedule even if you only have two or three even if you only have two or three even if you only have two or three minutes per day in which to meditate. I minutes per day in which to meditate. I minutes per day in which to meditate. I also really like doing yoga nidra or also really like doing yoga nidra or also really like doing yoga nidra or what is sometimes called non-sleep deep what is sometimes called non-sleep deep what is sometimes called non-sleep deep rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because it is a great way to restore mental and it is a great way to restore mental and it is a great way to restore mental and physical vigor without the tiredness physical vigor without the tiredness physical vigor without the tiredness that some people experience when they that some people experience when they that some people experience when they wake up from a conventional nap. If wake up from a conventional nap. If wake up from a conventional nap. If you'd like to try the Waking Up app, you'd like to try the Waking Up app, you'd like to try the Waking Up app, please go to wakingup.com/huberman please go to wakingup.com/huberman please go to wakingup.com/huberman where you can access a free 30-day where you can access a free 30-day where you can access a free 30-day trial. Again, that's trial. Again, that's trial. Again, that's wakingup.com/huberman to access a free 30-day trial. I'm to access a free 30-day trial. I'm to access a free 30-day trial. I'm curious what your thoughts are about the curious what your thoughts are about the curious what your thoughts are about the fast emerging space of supplements and fast emerging space of supplements and fast emerging space of supplements and peptides that people are taking to peptides that people are taking to peptides that people are taking to ostensibly improve their mitochondrial ostensibly improve their mitochondrial ostensibly improve their mitochondrial function, health, output, etc. The ones function, health, output, etc. The ones function, health, output, etc. The ones that come to mind are the following just that come to mind are the following just that come to mind are the following just to constrain it a bit because it's a to constrain it a bit because it's a to constrain it a bit because it's a huge space. Um, co-enzyme Q10 a number huge space. Um, co-enzyme Q10 a number huge space. Um, co-enzyme Q10 a number of people including me take. Um, this of people including me take. Um, this of people including me take. Um, this isn't a plug for it. It's just I take isn't a plug for it. It's just I take isn't a plug for it. It's just I take it. I was told that can help my it. I was told that can help my it. I was told that can help my mitochondria. Um, I don't take methylene mitochondria. Um, I don't take methylene mitochondria. Um, I don't take methylene blue. It I'll mention why in a moment. blue. It I'll mention why in a moment. blue. It I'll mention why in a moment. Uh, there are some peptides like SS31 Uh, there are some peptides like SS31 Uh, there are some peptides like SS31 is very becoming very popular now. is very becoming very popular now. is very becoming very popular now. Cocktails of NAD, SS31, Cocktails of NAD, SS31, Cocktails of NAD, SS31, things like this. People are in Oh, things like this. People are in Oh, things like this. People are in Oh, yeah. People are injecting this stuff yeah. People are injecting this stuff yeah. People are injecting this stuff like crazy. Oh, yeah. like crazy. Oh, yeah. like crazy. Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; SS31. &gt;&gt; SS31. &gt;&gt; SS31. &gt;&gt; I guarantee within a radius of one &gt;&gt; I guarantee within a radius of one &gt;&gt; I guarantee within a radius of one mile, there are a lot of SS31 injected. mile, there are a lot of SS31 injected. mile, there are a lot of SS31 injected. We're in Los Angeles, so Oh, yeah. SS31 We're in Los Angeles, so Oh, yeah. SS31 We're in Los Angeles, so Oh, yeah. SS31 um in cocktail with NAD it's very common um in cocktail with NAD it's very common um in cocktail with NAD it's very common there's uh there are a couple others um there's uh there are a couple others um there's uh there are a couple others um slooh slu there's another one all of slooh slu there's another one all of slooh slu there's another one all of this is um MC uh a lot of people are this is um MC uh a lot of people are this is um MC uh a lot of people are injecting these peptides in effort to injecting these peptides in effort to injecting these peptides in effort to improve their mitochondrial function improve their mitochondrial function improve their mitochondrial function would love your thoughts on this don't would love your thoughts on this don't would love your thoughts on this don't worry you're protected no matter what worry you're protected no matter what worry you're protected no matter what direction you answer [laughter] direction you answer [laughter] direction you answer [laughter] &gt;&gt; yeah the term mitochondrial function &gt;&gt; yeah the term mitochondrial function &gt;&gt; yeah the term mitochondrial function mitochondrial dysfunction you know I mitochondrial dysfunction you know I mitochondrial dysfunction you know I think are misnomers because mitochondria think are misnomers because mitochondria think are misnomers because mitochondria have many functions and um so I think have many functions and um so I think have many functions and um so I think that the nomenclature that's more of a that the nomenclature that's more of a that the nomenclature that's more of a maybe a researcher kind of niche kind of maybe a researcher kind of niche kind of maybe a researcher kind of niche kind of thing but I think it's misleading to thing but I think it's misleading to thing but I think it's misleading to talk of mitochondrial dysfunction talk of mitochondrial dysfunction talk of mitochondrial dysfunction because mitochondria transform energy because mitochondria transform energy because mitochondria transform energy and make ATP they make hormones and they and make ATP they make hormones and they and make ATP they make hormones and they make signals and but to your point about make signals and but to your point about make signals and but to your point about supplements you I was a student when supplements you I was a student when supplements you I was a student when SS31 was discovered and I remember the SS31 was discovered and I remember the SS31 was discovered and I remember the person who discovered Hazel Setto uh the person who discovered Hazel Setto uh the person who discovered Hazel Setto uh who discovered SS31 she was presenting who discovered SS31 she was presenting who discovered SS31 she was presenting at meetings and so I've seen the now at meetings and so I've seen the now at meetings and so I've seen the now it was commercialized is you know it was commercialized is you know it was commercialized is you know stealth peptide and then it went on the stealth peptide and then it went on the stealth peptide and then it went on the publicly traded. So um it's not lived up publicly traded. So um it's not lived up publicly traded. So um it's not lived up to its expectation. It was supposed to its expectation. It was supposed to its expectation. It was supposed to be a treatment for mitochondrial disease be a treatment for mitochondrial disease be a treatment for mitochondrial disease and mostly the trials have been and mostly the trials have been and mostly the trials have been negative. Um you know those things we're negative. Um you know those things we're negative. Um you know those things we're trying to tweak the system. I think what trying to tweak the system. I think what trying to tweak the system. I think what we're trying to do with supplements is we're trying to do with supplements is we're trying to do with supplements is to uh optimize tweak the circuitry the to uh optimize tweak the circuitry the to uh optimize tweak the circuitry the you know the metabolic circuitry that we you know the metabolic circuitry that we you know the metabolic circuitry that we have for flowing electrons to oxygen. Uh have for flowing electrons to oxygen. Uh have for flowing electrons to oxygen. Uh in an ideal world and electrons flow in an ideal world and electrons flow in an ideal world and electrons flow from food to oxygen like two poles of a from food to oxygen like two poles of a from food to oxygen like two poles of a battery like a simple circuit with like battery like a simple circuit with like battery like a simple circuit with like just the right amount of resistance just the right amount of resistance just the right amount of resistance &gt;&gt; right too much resistance and then it &gt;&gt; right too much resistance and then it &gt;&gt; right too much resistance and then it feels terrible. It feels like if you feels terrible. It feels like if you feels terrible. It feels like if you hold your breath and you're you feel hold your breath and you're you feel hold your breath and you're you feel like you're going to die. That's too like you're going to die. That's too like you're going to die. That's too much resistance. not enough resistance much resistance. not enough resistance much resistance. not enough resistance feels like you know you're unhinged and feels like you know you're unhinged and feels like you know you're unhinged and uh probably we think that's what mania uh probably we think that's what mania uh probably we think that's what mania is &gt;&gt; right where you feel like there's so &gt;&gt; right where you feel like there's so &gt;&gt; right where you feel like there's so much energy that you it's you can't much energy that you it's you can't much energy that you it's you can't contain it and then you can't sleep and contain it and then you can't sleep and contain it and then you can't sleep and then you can't you know your life kind then you can't you know your life kind then you can't you know your life kind of falls apart of falls apart of falls apart &gt;&gt; ADHD is another good example of that &gt;&gt; ADHD is another good example of that &gt;&gt; ADHD is another good example of that &gt;&gt; that might be so maybe those kind &gt;&gt; that might be so maybe those kind &gt;&gt; that might be so maybe those kind of conditions disorders of the mind of conditions disorders of the mind of conditions disorders of the mind we think are disorders of energy we think are disorders of energy we think are disorders of energy resistance we don't have you know direct resistance we don't have you know direct resistance we don't have you know direct evidence for most of it uh but I think evidence for most of it uh but I think evidence for most of it uh but I think that's um a fairly wellsupported idea that's um a fairly wellsupported idea that's um a fairly wellsupported idea &gt;&gt; uh and supplements in cases when your &gt;&gt; uh and supplements in cases when your &gt;&gt; uh and supplements in cases when your circuitry is, you know, impaired. Uh, circuitry is, you know, impaired. Uh, circuitry is, you know, impaired. Uh, like if you're deficient in cozy Q10, like if you're deficient in cozy Q10, like if you're deficient in cozy Q10, if you take it, you're going to feel it. if you take it, you're going to feel it. if you take it, you're going to feel it. Uh, and if you're deficient in something Uh, and if you're deficient in something Uh, and if you're deficient in something like vitamin B12, there are many parts like vitamin B12, there are many parts like vitamin B12, there are many parts of mitochondria that require uh B of mitochondria that require uh B of mitochondria that require uh B vitamins to flow electrons towards vitamins to flow electrons towards vitamins to flow electrons towards oxygen. So vitamin B deficiency oxygen. So vitamin B deficiency oxygen. So vitamin B deficiency different vitamin B's including NAD different vitamin B's including NAD different vitamin B's including NAD right is uh can really be terrible and right is uh can really be terrible and right is uh can really be terrible and people have chronic fatigue like people have chronic fatigue like people have chronic fatigue like syndromes from vitamin B12 deficiency syndromes from vitamin B12 deficiency syndromes from vitamin B12 deficiency for example uh so in cases of uh where for example uh so in cases of uh where for example uh so in cases of uh where there's a deficiency or you think where there's a deficiency or you think where there's a deficiency or you think there might be a deficiency uh maybe there might be a deficiency uh maybe there might be a deficiency uh maybe supplements can help you know supplements can help you know supplements can help you know paliate those uh my sense is you know paliate those uh my sense is you know paliate those uh my sense is you know we've evolved over very long periods of we've evolved over very long periods of we've evolved over very long periods of time and we're really well optimized time and we're really well optimized time and we're really well optimized uh and the body and the mind are as two uh and the body and the mind are as two uh and the body and the mind are as two expressions of this energy flow kind of expressions of this energy flow kind of expressions of this energy flow kind of can work harmoniously together if we can work harmoniously together if we can work harmoniously together if we bring awareness to it uh and if we keep bring awareness to it uh and if we keep bring awareness to it uh and if we keep energy flowing through exercise through energy flowing through exercise through energy flowing through exercise through not eating too much and uh you know not eating too much and uh you know not eating too much and uh you know being hungry once in a while I think being hungry once in a while I think being hungry once in a while I think there's ways to optimize the system and there's ways to optimize the system and there's ways to optimize the system and there's a lot of people who live long there's a lot of people who live long there's a lot of people who live long healthy fulfilling lives and they get healthy fulfilling lives and they get healthy fulfilling lives and they get sick once in a while but they recover uh sick once in a while but they recover uh sick once in a while but they recover uh without supplements and without uh without supplements and without uh without supplements and without uh you know medical intervention so I there you know medical intervention so I there you know medical intervention so I there there's a path uh to get there and so I there's a path uh to get there and so I there's a path uh to get there and so I think there's a place for think there's a place for think there's a place for supplements but I've never taken a supplements but I've never taken a supplements but I've never taken a supplement and um supplement and um supplement and um &gt;&gt; and you have plenty of energy. &gt;&gt; and you have plenty of energy. &gt;&gt; and you have plenty of energy. &gt;&gt; I [laughter] I cultivate my energy in &gt;&gt; I [laughter] I cultivate my energy in &gt;&gt; I [laughter] I cultivate my energy in different ways different ways different ways &gt;&gt; and I feel like it's um it's a &gt;&gt; and I feel like it's um it's a &gt;&gt; and I feel like it's um it's a better investment of my energy and better investment of my energy and better investment of my energy and my research group. we haven't studied, my research group. we haven't studied, my research group. we haven't studied, you know, drugs or and we've been you know, drugs or and we've been you know, drugs or and we've been solicited to, you know, help solicited to, you know, help solicited to, you know, help pharmaceutical companies or other, pharmaceutical companies or other, pharmaceutical companies or other, you know, supplement type um to test the you know, supplement type um to test the you know, supplement type um to test the effects of supplements on mitochondria. effects of supplements on mitochondria. effects of supplements on mitochondria. If we go in that route, then I think If we go in that route, then I think If we go in that route, then I think there's it's one approach that, you there's it's one approach that, you there's it's one approach that, you know, might lead useful results at some know, might lead useful results at some know, might lead useful results at some point. But I feel like my energy, my point. But I feel like my energy, my point. But I feel like my energy, my contribution as a as a scientist is contribution as a as a scientist is contribution as a as a scientist is better positioned and understanding the better positioned and understanding the better positioned and understanding the energetic basis of mind subjective energetic basis of mind subjective energetic basis of mind subjective experiences body and uh developing a experiences body and uh developing a experiences body and uh developing a more holistic, you know, system for more holistic, you know, system for more holistic, you know, system for what we are, you know, energetically and what we are, you know, energetically and what we are, you know, energetically and what we can do to support that. what we can do to support that. what we can do to support that. &gt;&gt; Well, you're doing awesome work. So stay &gt;&gt; Well, you're doing awesome work. So stay &gt;&gt; Well, you're doing awesome work. So stay on the track you're on. I just wanted on the track you're on. I just wanted on the track you're on. I just wanted your thoughts there. Um, and I should your thoughts there. Um, and I should your thoughts there. Um, and I should just say for sake of being just say for sake of being just say for sake of being responsible, um, folks don't inject responsible, um, folks don't inject responsible, um, folks don't inject peptides that are for quote unquote peptides that are for quote unquote peptides that are for quote unquote research purposes only. People are research purposes only. People are research purposes only. People are getting them on the gray market. I getting them on the gray market. I getting them on the gray market. I mentioned methylene blue, so I should mentioned methylene blue, so I should mentioned methylene blue, so I should just close the hatch on that one that just close the hatch on that one that just close the hatch on that one that uh, I've avoided it for two reasons. uh, I've avoided it for two reasons. uh, I've avoided it for two reasons. One, I saw the images of blue brains One, I saw the images of blue brains One, I saw the images of blue brains from people who had recently taken it. from people who had recently taken it. from people who had recently taken it. doesn't mean their brain stayed blue cuz doesn't mean their brain stayed blue cuz doesn't mean their brain stayed blue cuz they had taken it recently. But um there they had taken it recently. But um there they had taken it recently. But um there are some data that um point to the fact are some data that um point to the fact are some data that um point to the fact that methylene blue can um intercolate that methylene blue can um intercolate that methylene blue can um intercolate into DNA and possibly cause some into DNA and possibly cause some into DNA and possibly cause some mutations there. That worries me. Um and mutations there. That worries me. Um and mutations there. That worries me. Um and there are some data as well and um Chris there are some data as well and um Chris there are some data as well and um Chris Master John talked about this recently Master John talked about this recently Master John talked about this recently um that if people are mitochondrial um that if people are mitochondrial um that if people are mitochondrial damage deficient, dealing with carbon damage deficient, dealing with carbon damage deficient, dealing with carbon monoxide poisoning, other metabolic monoxide poisoning, other metabolic monoxide poisoning, other metabolic issues that perhaps methylene blue issues that perhaps methylene blue issues that perhaps methylene blue because it can reroute some of the uh because it can reroute some of the uh because it can reroute some of the uh the pathways for these electrons can be the pathways for these electrons can be the pathways for these electrons can be helpful. But if people are generally helpful. But if people are generally helpful. But if people are generally healthy that it can cause more problems healthy that it can cause more problems healthy that it can cause more problems than it solves. And that was enough for than it solves. And that was enough for than it solves. And that was enough for me to just say, I'm going to just stay me to just say, I'm going to just stay me to just say, I'm going to just stay away from this stuff. Also, I don't want away from this stuff. Also, I don't want away from this stuff. Also, I don't want to have a blue tongue like a monitor to have a blue tongue like a monitor to have a blue tongue like a monitor lizard. Anyway, that's not a serious lizard. Anyway, that's not a serious lizard. Anyway, that's not a serious thing, but it just seems a little too it thing, but it just seems a little too it thing, but it just seems a little too it seems a little shaky for me. And I do seems a little shaky for me. And I do seems a little shaky for me. And I do worry about people just taking it. So, worry about people just taking it. So, worry about people just taking it. So, um, and I'm very happy that your um, and I'm very happy that your um, and I'm very happy that your laboratory is focusing on the molecular laboratory is focusing on the molecular laboratory is focusing on the molecular aspects, but also, as you said, the aspects, but also, as you said, the aspects, but also, as you said, the experiential aspects, meditation, uh, experiential aspects, meditation, uh, experiential aspects, meditation, uh, meaning, uh, purpose, and this notion of meaning, uh, purpose, and this notion of meaning, uh, purpose, and this notion of flow is something that I want to just flow is something that I want to just flow is something that I want to just ask you about. Um, when you see things ask you about. Um, when you see things ask you about. Um, when you see things like Tai Chi, like Tai Chi, like Tai Chi, &gt;&gt; if you're in New York City, you see &gt;&gt; if you're in New York City, you see &gt;&gt; if you're in New York City, you see people early in the morning, if you get people early in the morning, if you get people early in the morning, if you get up, you see them doing Tai Chi. Or, uh, up, you see them doing Tai Chi. Or, uh, up, you see them doing Tai Chi. Or, uh, years ago, I saw an interview with Iggy years ago, I saw an interview with Iggy years ago, I saw an interview with Iggy Pop. Um, you know, as a, you gosh, like Pop. Um, you know, as a, you gosh, like Pop. Um, you know, as a, you gosh, like the 70s and he's like in tremendously the 70s and he's like in tremendously the 70s and he's like in tremendously good shape now and has always been. And good shape now and has always been. And good shape now and has always been. And they asked him like, "What's your they asked him like, "What's your they asked him like, "What's your secret?" They always ask these kind of secret?" They always ask these kind of secret?" They always ask these kind of like, "What do you eat?" kind of things. like, "What do you eat?" kind of things. like, "What do you eat?" kind of things. And and he was like, "It's all in the And and he was like, "It's all in the And and he was like, "It's all in the Chiang breathing." And it was and I Chiang breathing." And it was and I Chiang breathing." And it was and I chuckled because Tai Chi, Chiong chuckled because Tai Chi, Chiong chuckled because Tai Chi, Chiong breathing, I personally believe that breathing, I personally believe that breathing, I personally believe that whether or not it's running, Tai Chi, whether or not it's running, Tai Chi, whether or not it's running, Tai Chi, Chiong breathing or lifting weights, the Chiong breathing or lifting weights, the Chiong breathing or lifting weights, the activity itself has certain benefits the activity itself has certain benefits the activity itself has certain benefits related to respiration, blood flow, related to respiration, blood flow, related to respiration, blood flow, muscle stress, etc. in recovery, but muscle stress, etc. in recovery, but muscle stress, etc. in recovery, but that the additional layer of benefit that the additional layer of benefit that the additional layer of benefit comes from the understanding over comes from the understanding over comes from the understanding over time yoga as well. The understanding time yoga as well. The understanding time yoga as well. The understanding over time of how to direct energy in over time of how to direct energy in over time of how to direct energy in your body and mind to be able to force your body and mind to be able to force your body and mind to be able to force yourself to get through some hard yourself to get through some hard yourself to get through some hard repetitions, but then to rest completely repetitions, but then to rest completely repetitions, but then to rest completely in the rest period. Yes. to dynamically in the rest period. Yes. to dynamically in the rest period. Yes. to dynamically move from one position to another, not move from one position to another, not move from one position to another, not just as a physical movement, but as an just as a physical movement, but as an just as a physical movement, but as an exercise in being able to anticipate, exercise in being able to anticipate, exercise in being able to anticipate, okay, here comes the painful part. I'm okay, here comes the painful part. I'm okay, here comes the painful part. I'm going to going to going to &gt;&gt; not brace myself too much. I'm going to &gt;&gt; not brace myself too much. I'm going to &gt;&gt; not brace myself too much. I'm going to try and quote unquote flow through it, try and quote unquote flow through it, try and quote unquote flow through it, &gt;&gt; but I'm also going to put some restraint &gt;&gt; but I'm also going to put some restraint &gt;&gt; but I'm also going to put some restraint and pull back. And so, it's I do think and pull back. And so, it's I do think and pull back. And so, it's I do think that for every physical and mental that for every physical and mental that for every physical and mental activity, there's the learning and then activity, there's the learning and then activity, there's the learning and then there's the metalarning there's the metalarning there's the metalarning &gt;&gt; that comes from just having done it over &gt;&gt; that comes from just having done it over &gt;&gt; that comes from just having done it over and over. So you have this and over. So you have this and over. So you have this expectation and understanding. You're expectation and understanding. You're expectation and understanding. You're learning how to allocate energy. And I learning how to allocate energy. And I learning how to allocate energy. And I would just like your thoughts about would just like your thoughts about would just like your thoughts about this. So I don't think it's Chiang per this. So I don't think it's Chiang per this. So I don't think it's Chiang per se, &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Tai Chi per se, yoga, Pilates per se, &gt;&gt; Tai Chi per se, yoga, Pilates per se, &gt;&gt; Tai Chi per se, yoga, Pilates per se, lifting weights per se. I think those lifting weights per se. I think those lifting weights per se. I think those have each different benefits. have each different benefits. have each different benefits. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; but what are your thoughts about &gt;&gt; but what are your thoughts about &gt;&gt; but what are your thoughts about learning to be a better Oh gosh, this learning to be a better Oh gosh, this learning to be a better Oh gosh, this sounds super woo, but what the heck sounds super woo, but what the heck sounds super woo, but what the heck &gt;&gt; energy channeler? [laughter] &gt;&gt; energy channeler? [laughter] &gt;&gt; energy channeler? [laughter] &gt;&gt; Two scientists talking about energy &gt;&gt; Two scientists talking about energy &gt;&gt; Two scientists talking about energy channeling. Uh well this is not woo I channeling. Uh well this is not woo I channeling. Uh well this is not woo I mean there the mitochondria flow energy mean there the mitochondria flow energy mean there the mitochondria flow energy you can say they their channel for you can say they their channel for you can say they their channel for energy flow from biochemistry to energy flow from biochemistry to energy flow from biochemistry to electricity to ATP to metabolites to electricity to ATP to metabolites to electricity to ATP to metabolites to reactive oxygen species all of these are reactive oxygen species all of these are reactive oxygen species all of these are different forms or you know modalities different forms or you know modalities different forms or you know modalities of energy um is there like a of energy um is there like a of energy um is there like a molecular reality to chiong or toqi or molecular reality to chiong or toqi or molecular reality to chiong or toqi or to you know prana or right like maybe um to you know prana or right like maybe um to you know prana or right like maybe um and maybe and if we look at all of these and maybe and if we look at all of these and maybe and if we look at all of these practices right and And then we ask practices right and And then we ask practices right and And then we ask what's the point of consilian like what's the point of consilian like what's the point of consilian like what's true maybe they all have like a what's true maybe they all have like a what's true maybe they all have like a little piece of the truth like molecular little piece of the truth like molecular little piece of the truth like molecular biology and you know molecular sciences biology and you know molecular sciences biology and you know molecular sciences also has a piece of the truth but it's also has a piece of the truth but it's also has a piece of the truth but it's not the whole truth and my sense is what not the whole truth and my sense is what not the whole truth and my sense is what is true that kind of is a bigger is true that kind of is a bigger is true that kind of is a bigger container to uh contain both our container to uh contain both our container to uh contain both our molecular you know physical existence molecular you know physical existence molecular you know physical existence and our experiential existence right the and our experiential existence right the and our experiential existence right the emotions the states of emotions the states of emotions the states of consciousness states of mind that consciousness states of mind that consciousness states of mind that we know are real uh like crazy states of we know are real uh like crazy states of we know are real uh like crazy states of consciousness that we can experience consciousness that we can experience consciousness that we can experience with psychedelics for example like what with psychedelics for example like what with psychedelics for example like what can uh encapsulate right all of this can uh encapsulate right all of this can uh encapsulate right all of this what's the bigger truth and I think that what's the bigger truth and I think that what's the bigger truth and I think that bigger truth is that we are energy and bigger truth is that we are energy and bigger truth is that we are energy and we flow through this channel this body we flow through this channel this body we flow through this channel this body right we have mouth we have nose you right we have mouth we have nose you right we have mouth we have nose you know lungs heart all of this you can know lungs heart all of this you can know lungs heart all of this you can understand or the our anatomy human understand or the our anatomy human understand or the our anatomy human anatomy you can understand as a an anatomy you can understand as a an anatomy you can understand as a an energy delivery an energy flow system energy delivery an energy flow system energy delivery an energy flow system like a flow cell right like a microchip like a flow cell right like a microchip like a flow cell right like a microchip And then there are gates that close and And then there are gates that close and And then there are gates that close and open and then you can process open and then you can process open and then you can process information. Uh instead of electricity information. Uh instead of electricity information. Uh instead of electricity flowing through, we flow food and then flowing through, we flow food and then flowing through, we flow food and then oxygen is at the other end pulling on oxygen is at the other end pulling on oxygen is at the other end pulling on electrons. Uh so maybe all those electrons. Uh so maybe all those electrons. Uh so maybe all those practices uh have something to do with you know uh have something to do with you know uh have something to do with you know the movement of energy which ultimately the movement of energy which ultimately the movement of energy which ultimately is electrons flowing through your is electrons flowing through your is electrons flowing through your metabolism through your mitochondria. metabolism through your mitochondria. metabolism through your mitochondria. But then there's an experiential But then there's an experiential But then there's an experiential dimension to that which is just as real. dimension to that which is just as real. dimension to that which is just as real. &gt;&gt; We don't have scientific tools to &gt;&gt; We don't have scientific tools to &gt;&gt; We don't have scientific tools to measure this. We can't you know image measure this. We can't you know image measure this. We can't you know image this with an MRI. Maybe not yet. Uh but this with an MRI. Maybe not yet. Uh but this with an MRI. Maybe not yet. Uh but I suspect there's a truth there and uh I suspect there's a truth there and uh I suspect there's a truth there and uh maybe one piece of that truth and maybe one piece of that truth and maybe one piece of that truth and that's you know the way you describe Tai that's you know the way you describe Tai that's you know the way you describe Tai Chi and the way you know we do exercise Chi and the way you know we do exercise Chi and the way you know we do exercise like you exercise you push hard and like you exercise you push hard and like you exercise you push hard and then you need to rest hard. If you don't then you need to rest hard. If you don't then you need to rest hard. If you don't rest hard you're going to injure rest hard you're going to injure rest hard you're going to injure yourself and you're not going to get as yourself and you're not going to get as yourself and you're not going to get as strong. You're not going to you know strong. You're not going to you know strong. You're not going to you know grow or you know evolve. Um mentally we grow or you know evolve. Um mentally we grow or you know evolve. Um mentally we need resistance and there's like so need resistance and there's like so need resistance and there's like so think about energy resistance brings us think about energy resistance brings us think about energy resistance brings us to think you know there's a philosophy to think you know there's a philosophy to think you know there's a philosophy of education that could be built around of education that could be built around of education that could be built around this. &gt;&gt; You need to you know the art of &gt;&gt; You need to you know the art of &gt;&gt; You need to you know the art of education is finding the right amount of education is finding the right amount of education is finding the right amount of resistance to expose a child to right if resistance to expose a child to right if resistance to expose a child to right if there is a if the problem is too hard or there is a if the problem is too hard or there is a if the problem is too hard or you're too severe you you're going to you're too severe you you're going to you're too severe you you're going to crush them right you kill their crush them right you kill their crush them right you kill their spirit. But if you don't apply any their spirit. But if you don't apply any their spirit. But if you don't apply any resistance there's no rules then the resistance there's no rules then the resistance there's no rules then the energy is like this and then they'll energy is like this and then they'll energy is like this and then they'll never learn. there needs to be like just never learn. there needs to be like just never learn. there needs to be like just the sweet spot, right? That's what great the sweet spot, right? That's what great the sweet spot, right? That's what great masters, great mentors are able to do. I masters, great mentors are able to do. I masters, great mentors are able to do. I think I I've started to see my role as a think I I've started to see my role as a think I I've started to see my role as a mentor for people in the lab, you know, mentor for people in the lab, you know, mentor for people in the lab, you know, like this a little bit. I see them as like this a little bit. I see them as like this a little bit. I see them as energetic processes. You know, they're energetic processes. You know, they're energetic processes. You know, they're transforming energy. They need the right transforming energy. They need the right transforming energy. They need the right amount of resistance and, you know, not amount of resistance and, you know, not amount of resistance and, you know, not too much. And it brings me more too much. And it brings me more too much. And it brings me more compassion maybe for them as compassion maybe for them as compassion maybe for them as energetic movements. And then I realize energetic movements. And then I realize energetic movements. And then I realize I'm more sensitive to the effect I have I'm more sensitive to the effect I have I'm more sensitive to the effect I have uh, you know, on them. But all of this uh, you know, on them. But all of this uh, you know, on them. But all of this movement and the Taichi, the exercise, movement and the Taichi, the exercise, movement and the Taichi, the exercise, you know, lifting and resting is you know, lifting and resting is you know, lifting and resting is analogous to what the heart does. The analogous to what the heart does. The analogous to what the heart does. The way that the heart works is by way that the heart works is by way that the heart works is by contracting cy, right? And then by contracting cy, right? And then by contracting cy, right? And then by relaxing &gt;&gt; and then contracting and relaxing. Same &gt;&gt; and then contracting and relaxing. Same &gt;&gt; and then contracting and relaxing. Same thing for like the way neurons work. thing for like the way neurons work. thing for like the way neurons work. Boom action potential, refractory phase. Boom action potential, refractory phase. Boom action potential, refractory phase. You need to have that period of science, You need to have that period of science, You need to have that period of science, right? Boom action potential and right? Boom action potential and right? Boom action potential and refractory. Same thing with sleepwake refractory. Same thing with sleepwake refractory. Same thing with sleepwake cycles. You need to get awake. Your body cycles. You need to get awake. Your body cycles. You need to get awake. Your body temperature rises. Cortisol spikes up. temperature rises. Cortisol spikes up. temperature rises. Cortisol spikes up. You, you know, you're aware of the You, you know, you're aware of the You, you know, you're aware of the world. You're exposed to stressors. Uh world. You're exposed to stressors. Uh world. You're exposed to stressors. Uh if there's not enough stressors, if there's not enough stressors, if there's not enough stressors, challenges slash meaningful things in challenges slash meaningful things in challenges slash meaningful things in your life. You get bored and you want to your life. You get bored and you want to your life. You get bored and you want to die. So you need that. But then you need die. So you need that. But then you need die. So you need that. But then you need to kind of let go and sleep, right? to kind of let go and sleep, right? to kind of let go and sleep, right? So sleepwake cycle, same thing. And So sleepwake cycle, same thing. And So sleepwake cycle, same thing. And maybe all of this has evolved from, maybe all of this has evolved from, maybe all of this has evolved from, you know, our existence on this planet. you know, our existence on this planet. you know, our existence on this planet. Like the sun rises, things get warm, Like the sun rises, things get warm, Like the sun rises, things get warm, right? And there's energy flowing around right? And there's energy flowing around right? And there's energy flowing around and then the sun sets. It's same and then the sun sets. It's same and then the sun sets. It's same movement as sunrise, sunset, you know, movement as sunrise, sunset, you know, movement as sunrise, sunset, you know, day, night is contraction, you know, day, night is contraction, you know, day, night is contraction, you know, resting yoga. The the whole, you know, resting yoga. The the whole, you know, resting yoga. The the whole, you know, practice of yoga is based around this. practice of yoga is based around this. practice of yoga is based around this. Like you strain your muscles a great Like you strain your muscles a great Like you strain your muscles a great poor crazy positions, you know, immense poor crazy positions, you know, immense poor crazy positions, you know, immense resistance on your muscles and then for resistance on your muscles and then for resistance on your muscles and then for what for shavasana what for shavasana what for shavasana &gt;&gt; and the whole point of yoga is &gt;&gt; and the whole point of yoga is &gt;&gt; and the whole point of yoga is shavasana. So you ready the body by shavasana. So you ready the body by shavasana. So you ready the body by you know bringing so much resistance you know bringing so much resistance you know bringing so much resistance into it so that you can finally relax. into it so that you can finally relax. into it so that you can finally relax. uh and then the art of training uh and then the art of training uh and then the art of training maybe is not about the doing right but maybe is not about the doing right but maybe is not about the doing right but it's about the being it's about the being it's about the being &gt;&gt; and maybe that's a broader kind of &gt;&gt; and maybe that's a broader kind of &gt;&gt; and maybe that's a broader kind of philosophy of life but the art of philosophy of life but the art of philosophy of life but the art of being uh [laughter] being uh [laughter] being uh [laughter] which uh because if we do too much which uh because if we do too much which uh because if we do too much doing I think you know many doing I think you know many doing I think you know many professionals know this if you're always professionals know this if you're always professionals know this if you're always in a doing and you're never kind in a doing and you're never kind in a doing and you're never kind of uh sitting back and resting and of uh sitting back and resting and of uh sitting back and resting and just being and being really means just being and being really means just being and being really means just flowing to use you know verbs being is flowing to use you know verbs being is flowing to use you know verbs being is just having your energy flow and it's just having your energy flow and it's just having your energy flow and it's doing its thing and it's healing you doing its thing and it's healing you doing its thing and it's healing you it's healing the body um and it's healing the body um and it's healing the body um and consolidating memories and you consolidating memories and you consolidating memories and you everything all the beautiful things that everything all the beautiful things that everything all the beautiful things that happen you know during sleep and happen you know during sleep and happen you know during sleep and &gt;&gt; as opposed to transforming it into &gt;&gt; as opposed to transforming it into &gt;&gt; as opposed to transforming it into something in the outside world like a something in the outside world like a something in the outside world like a paper or investing or and it's the paper or investing or and it's the paper or investing or and it's the balance I uh clearly what I'm hearing balance I uh clearly what I'm hearing balance I uh clearly what I'm hearing and uh I don't want to speak for you but and uh I don't want to speak for you but and uh I don't want to speak for you but what I'm hearing is that so much of what I'm hearing is that so much of what I'm hearing is that so much of health mental health and physical health mental health and physical health mental health and physical health and life really is about and life really is about and life really is about states of mind and body and states of mind and body and states of mind and body and mastering the transitions into and mastering the transitions into and mastering the transitions into and through and out of those states but in a through and out of those states but in a through and out of those states but in a controlled way learning to direct those controlled way learning to direct those controlled way learning to direct those so that we're not at the whim of I mean so that we're not at the whim of I mean so that we're not at the whim of I mean this is the challenge that we get this is the challenge that we get this is the challenge that we get pulled into pulled into pulled into &gt;&gt; the drama or the numbing out of some &gt;&gt; the drama or the numbing out of some &gt;&gt; the drama or the numbing out of some online activity or the uh you know the online activity or the uh you know the online activity or the uh you know the energy of something going on the energy of something going on the energy of something going on over there that really pulls us, you over there that really pulls us, you over there that really pulls us, you know, and so I think we have to have know, and so I think we have to have know, and so I think we have to have that self-awareness. that self-awareness. that self-awareness. &gt;&gt; Um, but I love the idea that resistance &gt;&gt; Um, but I love the idea that resistance &gt;&gt; Um, but I love the idea that resistance itself is the thing to seek itself is the thing to seek itself is the thing to seek &gt;&gt; not as a permanent state but as a &gt;&gt; not as a permanent state but as a &gt;&gt; not as a permanent state but as a temporary state that you can then move temporary state that you can then move temporary state that you can then move through. So and I think if through. So and I think if through. So and I think if &gt;&gt; if clearly people learned a ton today, &gt;&gt; if clearly people learned a ton today, &gt;&gt; if clearly people learned a ton today, but if nothing else they now but if nothing else they now but if nothing else they now understand the biohysical principle that understand the biohysical principle that understand the biohysical principle that it's through that resistance that you it's through that resistance that you it's through that resistance that you direct and create energy for something direct and create energy for something direct and create energy for something else. &gt;&gt; Transform. &gt;&gt; Transform. &gt;&gt; Transform. &gt;&gt; You transform. Exactly. Thank you. &gt;&gt; You transform. Exactly. Thank you. &gt;&gt; You transform. Exactly. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Good managers know this like if you want &gt;&gt; Good managers know this like if you want &gt;&gt; Good managers know this like if you want to have fulfilled employees, right, and to have fulfilled employees, right, and to have fulfilled employees, right, and a team that really derives joy and a team that really derives joy and a team that really derives joy and purpose like the people need to grow and purpose like the people need to grow and purpose like the people need to grow and learn. Um and uh and the way that learn. Um and uh and the way that learn. Um and uh and the way that happens is by creating the right amount happens is by creating the right amount happens is by creating the right amount of resistance. And uh Stephen of resistance. And uh Stephen of resistance. And uh Stephen Presfield said this uh the first time I Presfield said this uh the first time I Presfield said this uh the first time I heard of him, he was on the Joe Rogan heard of him, he was on the Joe Rogan heard of him, he was on the Joe Rogan podcast talking about his book and podcast talking about his book and podcast talking about his book and resistance and he talks about it in resistance and he talks about it in resistance and he talks about it in slightly different ways, but I think his slightly different ways, but I think his slightly different ways, but I think his resistance philosophy boils down to resistance philosophy boils down to resistance philosophy boils down to energy. Uh and he talked about how uh energy. Uh and he talked about how uh energy. Uh and he talked about how uh when you feel afraid of something, when you feel afraid of something, when you feel afraid of something, right? like as an artist, I think he right? like as an artist, I think he right? like as an artist, I think he speaks, you know, as an artist and for speaks, you know, as an artist and for speaks, you know, as an artist and for artist like you feel into artist like you feel into artist like you feel into like this problem or this challenge or like this problem or this challenge or like this problem or this challenge or you know this new project and you're you know this new project and you're you know this new project and you're like oh like I don't know like this is like oh like I don't know like this is like oh like I don't know like this is scary Well, I think his advice scary Well, I think his advice scary Well, I think his advice was when you feel fear this is the was when you feel fear this is the was when you feel fear this is the signal that there's something there for signal that there's something there for signal that there's something there for you, right? That this can help you grow. you, right? That this can help you grow. you, right? That this can help you grow. Um and I resonate with this and you Um and I resonate with this and you Um and I resonate with this and you know I make a lot of you know my know I make a lot of you know my know I make a lot of you know my decisions uh I can think rationally and decisions uh I can think rationally and decisions uh I can think rationally and think logically about steps in a think logically about steps in a think logically about steps in a biochemical pathway and about like biochemical pathway and about like biochemical pathway and about like logically like in five years and 10 logically like in five years and 10 logically like in five years and 10 years like doing strategic planning. Uh years like doing strategic planning. Uh years like doing strategic planning. Uh but I have an increasing but I have an increasing but I have an increasing um sense that uh when you make decisions um sense that uh when you make decisions um sense that uh when you make decisions with your heart and basically this is by with your heart and basically this is by with your heart and basically this is by listening to your energetic state you listening to your energetic state you listening to your energetic state you feel you see something you see someone feel you see something you see someone feel you see something you see someone you're like woo like I like this or you're like woo like I like this or you're like woo like I like this or like this is a little scary right um I like this is a little scary right um I like this is a little scary right um I started to ask my wife you know uh and started to ask my wife you know uh and started to ask my wife you know uh and she's really good at this how do you she's really good at this how do you she's really good at this how do you feel I think I used to ask my partner feel I think I used to ask my partner feel I think I used to ask my partner uh what are you thinking and if you ask uh what are you thinking and if you ask uh what are you thinking and if you ask someone what are you thinking like right someone what are you thinking like right someone what are you thinking like right away you go into this like cognitive away you go into this like cognitive away you go into this like cognitive level which is really devoid of like the level which is really devoid of like the level which is really devoid of like the beautiful um movement of energy. If you beautiful um movement of energy. If you beautiful um movement of energy. If you ask someone how are you feeling and then ask someone how are you feeling and then ask someone how are you feeling and then if that person if you can you help if that person if you can you help if that person if you can you help you make you create the space for you make you create the space for you make you create the space for that person to really answer from that person to really answer from that person to really answer from that place then you actually get to you know place then you actually get to you know place then you actually get to you know uh tune in to their energetic state and uh tune in to their energetic state and uh tune in to their energetic state and then you can be I think much better then you can be I think much better then you can be I think much better partner if you see a relationship as an partner if you see a relationship as an partner if you see a relationship as an energetic u um exchange right and then energetic u um exchange right and then energetic u um exchange right and then uh and then I can be a better I can be uh and then I can be a better I can be uh and then I can be a better I can be in a better state if I know that oo in a better state if I know that oo in a better state if I know that oo she's not feeling Great. And and then I she's not feeling Great. And and then I she's not feeling Great. And and then I think we've um I think the more you think we've um I think the more you think we've um I think the more you cultivate this kind of energetic cultivate this kind of energetic cultivate this kind of energetic awareness, I agree awareness, I agree awareness, I agree awareness, personal awareness, and I awareness, personal awareness, and I awareness, personal awareness, and I would say energetic awareness. Uh would say energetic awareness. Uh would say energetic awareness. Uh feeling into your mitochondria, maybe feeling into your mitochondria, maybe feeling into your mitochondria, maybe that's what it boils down to. I think that's what it boils down to. I think that's what it boils down to. I think it's our greatest superpower as human it's our greatest superpower as human it's our greatest superpower as human beings. And and that's not a new beings. And and that's not a new beings. And and that's not a new concept. It's I think the foundation concept. It's I think the foundation concept. It's I think the foundation for, you know, a lot of spiritual for, you know, a lot of spiritual for, you know, a lot of spiritual traditions like cultivating awareness of traditions like cultivating awareness of traditions like cultivating awareness of self. And then you realize at some point self. And then you realize at some point self. And then you realize at some point there's no self. I'm this like movement there's no self. I'm this like movement there's no self. I'm this like movement of energy and then you movement of energy and then you movement of energy and then you movement of energy and then we're all kind of energy and then we're all kind of energy and then we're all kind of arising emerging from you know an arising emerging from you know an arising emerging from you know an underlying current of consciousness and underlying current of consciousness and underlying current of consciousness and you know their ideas about this uh I'm you know their ideas about this uh I'm you know their ideas about this uh I'm not sure how it all you know fully gels not sure how it all you know fully gels not sure how it all you know fully gels together but uh awareness also as a together but uh awareness also as a together but uh awareness also as a scientist if you move through science scientist if you move through science scientist if you move through science without self-awareness then your biases without self-awareness then your biases without self-awareness then your biases end up ruling the kind of projects you end up ruling the kind of projects you end up ruling the kind of projects you take on end up ruling the kind of grants take on end up ruling the kind of grants take on end up ruling the kind of grants you apply to and end up ruling the kind you apply to and end up ruling the kind you apply to and end up ruling the kind of science you produce and you of science you produce and you of science you produce and you generate And um and so without generate And um and so without generate And um and so without self-awareness, I think we're not always self-awareness, I think we're not always self-awareness, I think we're not always doing you fulfilling our potential. And doing you fulfilling our potential. And doing you fulfilling our potential. And fulfilling our collective potential, fulfilling our collective potential, fulfilling our collective potential, right, as humanity, like we can if right, as humanity, like we can if right, as humanity, like we can if we can be the best person that we can we can be the best person that we can we can be the best person that we can be, then we can help other beings, you be, then we can help other beings, you be, then we can help other beings, you know, being their best self. We can be know, being their best self. We can be know, being their best self. We can be present. And when you're present to present. And when you're present to present. And when you're present to someone, it's basically saying, I see someone, it's basically saying, I see someone, it's basically saying, I see you energetic process and I'm opening to you energetic process and I'm opening to you energetic process and I'm opening to you. Uh you know, how are you feeling? you. Uh you know, how are you feeling? you. Uh you know, how are you feeling? You know, that's why I think those kind You know, that's why I think those kind You know, that's why I think those kind of conversations and connecting deeply of conversations and connecting deeply of conversations and connecting deeply with another human being is so with another human being is so with another human being is so rewarding. And and that's true, I rewarding. And and that's true, I rewarding. And and that's true, I think, across the board. We're social think, across the board. We're social think, across the board. We're social creatures. And what this means is we creatures. And what this means is we creatures. And what this means is we love connecting with other people. love connecting with other people. love connecting with other people. &gt;&gt; Uh and I suspect that's because it &gt;&gt; Uh and I suspect that's because it &gt;&gt; Uh and I suspect that's because it helps us flow, right? It helps us, you helps us flow, right? It helps us, you helps us flow, right? It helps us, you know, our energy flow. And then we know, our energy flow. And then we know, our energy flow. And then we love projects that are stimulating uh love projects that are stimulating uh love projects that are stimulating uh you know, inspiring. And what those you know, inspiring. And what those you know, inspiring. And what those words mean, stimulating, inspiring, words mean, stimulating, inspiring, words mean, stimulating, inspiring, they're all like energetic terms. So the they're all like energetic terms. So the they're all like energetic terms. So the things that helps us flow being like things that helps us flow being like things that helps us flow being like cognitive or spiritual or you know uh cognitive or spiritual or you know uh cognitive or spiritual or you know uh intellectual you know cog um social all intellectual you know cog um social all intellectual you know cog um social all of those I think probably boil down to of those I think probably boil down to of those I think probably boil down to is this thing helping energy flow is this thing helping energy flow is this thing helping energy flow through my mitochondria more easily or through my mitochondria more easily or through my mitochondria more easily or is it bringing me a resistance is it bringing me a resistance is it bringing me a resistance &gt;&gt; uh or is this thing bringing me &gt;&gt; uh or is this thing bringing me &gt;&gt; uh or is this thing bringing me resistance that I feel I have the resistance that I feel I have the resistance that I feel I have the capacity the inner you know potential to capacity the inner you know potential to capacity the inner you know potential to push through and then when I let go then push through and then when I let go then push through and then when I let go then I become stronger right and I grow as a I become stronger right and I grow as a I become stronger right and I grow as a person and I learned. person and I learned. person and I learned. &gt;&gt; I love it. It's a mitochondrial &gt;&gt; I love it. It's a mitochondrial &gt;&gt; I love it. It's a mitochondrial uh or energy flow ccentric view of uh or energy flow ccentric view of uh or energy flow ccentric view of everything and I think it is the everything and I think it is the everything and I think it is the basis of life. I know you're working on basis of life. I know you're working on basis of life. I know you're working on a book now. Um uh it sounds like there's a book now. Um uh it sounds like there's a book now. Um uh it sounds like there's also another book uh to follow that one, also another book uh to follow that one, also another book uh to follow that one, the mitochondrial marriage uh at the mitochondrial marriage uh at the mitochondrial marriage uh at some point. I'm only half kidding. uh some point. I'm only half kidding. uh some point. I'm only half kidding. uh what you described is really what you described is really what you described is really beautiful and it uh and it captures so beautiful and it uh and it captures so beautiful and it uh and it captures so much of what people are seeking and I much of what people are seeking and I much of what people are seeking and I think what people understand intuitively think what people understand intuitively think what people understand intuitively about the things that make them feel about the things that make them feel about the things that make them feel good versus the things that make them good versus the things that make them good versus the things that make them feel bad feel bad feel bad &gt;&gt; and the we have to pin above that &gt;&gt; and the we have to pin above that &gt;&gt; and the we have to pin above that resistance is critical to growth. So resistance is critical to growth. So resistance is critical to growth. So it's not just about things that it's not just about things that it's not just about things that &gt;&gt; don't take effort versus things that &gt;&gt; don't take effort versus things that &gt;&gt; don't take effort versus things that take effort. It's it's not it's not as take effort. It's it's not it's not as take effort. It's it's not it's not as simple as that. It's uh it's not simple as that. It's uh it's not simple as that. It's uh it's not infinitely complicated, but it's not as infinitely complicated, but it's not as infinitely complicated, but it's not as simple as that. Speaking of uh simple as that. Speaking of uh simple as that. Speaking of uh solutions, uh before I came in here to solutions, uh before I came in here to solutions, uh before I came in here to talk with you, uh I solicited the talk with you, uh I solicited the talk with you, uh I solicited the internet for some questions. We internet for some questions. We internet for some questions. We sometimes do a uh not rapid fire, but sometimes do a uh not rapid fire, but sometimes do a uh not rapid fire, but brief answer Q&amp;A. So, um if I may, I'm brief answer Q&amp;A. So, um if I may, I'm brief answer Q&amp;A. So, um if I may, I'm going to go fetch my phone um and gather going to go fetch my phone um and gather going to go fetch my phone um and gather a couple of questions to ask for some a couple of questions to ask for some a couple of questions to ask for some short answers. First question is why is short answers. First question is why is short answers. First question is why is it that over consuming calories it that over consuming calories it that over consuming calories causes disruption to the mitochondrial causes disruption to the mitochondrial causes disruption to the mitochondrial pathways? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's because it increases &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's because it increases &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's because it increases energy resistance. energy resistance. energy resistance. It's like uh a simple electrical It's like uh a simple electrical It's like uh a simple electrical circuit, maybe a computer, and then circuit, maybe a computer, and then circuit, maybe a computer, and then you're cranking [snorts] up the voltage, you're cranking [snorts] up the voltage, you're cranking [snorts] up the voltage, right? Right? So you're like pushing right? Right? So you're like pushing right? Right? So you're like pushing when you eat too much you're putting too when you eat too much you're putting too when you eat too much you're putting too much food too much energy into the much food too much energy into the much food too much energy into the system and then the system gets system and then the system gets system and then the system gets overwhelmed and then that increases overwhelmed and then that increases overwhelmed and then that increases blood glucose or you know blood lipids blood glucose or you know blood lipids blood glucose or you know blood lipids and so the effect this has we understand and so the effect this has we understand and so the effect this has we understand it pushes electrons onto your poor it pushes electrons onto your poor it pushes electrons onto your poor mitochondria. Mitochondria evolve to be mitochondria. Mitochondria evolve to be mitochondria. Mitochondria evolve to be super sensitive and then when there's super sensitive and then when there's super sensitive and then when there's like a bit not enough energy they change like a bit not enough energy they change like a bit not enough energy they change our behavior. If there's too much energy our behavior. If there's too much energy our behavior. If there's too much energy they change their behavior there they change their behavior there they change their behavior there chronically too much energy pushing on chronically too much energy pushing on chronically too much energy pushing on them. If you do the we have a little them. If you do the we have a little them. If you do the we have a little equation that helps us think equation that helps us think equation that helps us think energetically about this called the energetically about this called the energetically about this called the energy resistance principle ERP and this energy resistance principle ERP and this energy resistance principle ERP and this says if you raise the concentration of says if you raise the concentration of says if you raise the concentration of glucose you raise the energy potential glucose you raise the energy potential glucose you raise the energy potential like the voltage equivalent uh and like the voltage equivalent uh and like the voltage equivalent uh and then that increases energy resistance if then that increases energy resistance if then that increases energy resistance if you're not flowing that energy if you're not flowing that energy if you're not flowing that energy if you're not moving you know being active not moving you know being active not moving you know being active stimulated by something you just put too stimulated by something you just put too stimulated by something you just put too much food in the system it increases the much food in the system it increases the much food in the system it increases the resistance to energy flow and then the resistance to energy flow and then the resistance to energy flow and then you start to have more dissipative loss you start to have more dissipative loss you start to have more dissipative loss like too much reactive oxygen species like too much reactive oxygen species like too much reactive oxygen species and too much you know the damage and too much you know the damage and too much you know the damage molecular damage can happen. That's molecular damage can happen. That's molecular damage can happen. That's probably why overeating and why diabetes probably why overeating and why diabetes probably why overeating and why diabetes and why uh you know metabolic diseases and why uh you know metabolic diseases and why uh you know metabolic diseases increases the rate of aging and increases the rate of aging and increases the rate of aging and increases the rate of all sorts of the increases the rate of all sorts of the increases the rate of all sorts of the different diseases. I think it all different diseases. I think it all different diseases. I think it all converges on energy resistance. converges on energy resistance. converges on energy resistance. &gt;&gt; Someone asked has there been any &gt;&gt; Someone asked has there been any &gt;&gt; Someone asked has there been any progress made on tissue or organ progress made on tissue or organ progress made on tissue or organ specific mitochondrial optimization and specific mitochondrial optimization and specific mitochondrial optimization and I'll add to that andor measurement. Mhm. I'll add to that andor measurement. Mhm. I'll add to that andor measurement. Mhm. So the measurement piece, we're working So the measurement piece, we're working So the measurement piece, we're working on this. The Anna Monzo uh in our group on this. The Anna Monzo uh in our group on this. The Anna Monzo uh in our group uh who's moving to Germany now is uh who's moving to Germany now is uh who's moving to Germany now is developing a mitotyping platform. And if developing a mitotyping platform. And if developing a mitotyping platform. And if you want to explore kind of the if you want to explore kind of the if you want to explore kind of the if you're a scientist or you or not and you you're a scientist or you or not and you you're a scientist or you or not and you want to explore the molecular want to explore the molecular want to explore the molecular differences between mitochondria and differences between mitochondria and differences between mitochondria and different organs of the body, you can go different organs of the body, you can go different organs of the body, you can go to mitoypeexplorer.org to mitoypeexplorer.org to mitoypeexplorer.org or uh and then explore the different or uh and then explore the different or uh and then explore the different mitochondria and different organs. uh mitochondria and different organs. uh mitochondria and different organs. uh tissue organ specific mitochondrial tissue organ specific mitochondrial tissue organ specific mitochondrial optimization uh I think mostly is going to be driven uh I think mostly is going to be driven uh I think mostly is going to be driven by the organ or tissue specific use by the organ or tissue specific use by the organ or tissue specific use and you know flow of energy in that and you know flow of energy in that and you know flow of energy in that tissue like we were talking about tissue like we were talking about tissue like we were talking about earlier if you train on something you earlier if you train on something you earlier if you train on something you train you know on playing the violin train you know on playing the violin train you know on playing the violin you're going to parts of your brain are you're going to parts of your brain are you're going to parts of your brain are going to be you know more activated going to be you know more activated going to be you know more activated specific circuits are going to be um uh specific circuits are going to be um uh specific circuits are going to be um uh activated together they're going to you activated together they're going to you activated together they're going to you know wire together and then you make know wire together and then you make know wire together and then you make more mitochondria most likely and more mitochondria most likely and more mitochondria most likely and you know probably become more efficient you know probably become more efficient you know probably become more efficient as well. So there's rewiring at that as well. So there's rewiring at that as well. So there's rewiring at that level. Um so the I think it mitochondria level. Um so the I think it mitochondria level. Um so the I think it mitochondria follow or are there to serve the flow follow or are there to serve the flow follow or are there to serve the flow of energy. Uh so if you flow more energy of energy. Uh so if you flow more energy of energy. Uh so if you flow more energy in your legs you're going to make more in your legs you're going to make more in your legs you're going to make more mitochondria to kind of increase the mitochondria to kind of increase the mitochondria to kind of increase the number of flow channels mitochondria as number of flow channels mitochondria as number of flow channels mitochondria as little you know channels to flow energy little you know channels to flow energy little you know channels to flow energy towards oxygen. uh so yeah I don't know towards oxygen. uh so yeah I don't know towards oxygen. uh so yeah I don't know that we have ways yet maybe with uh you that we have ways yet maybe with uh you that we have ways yet maybe with uh you know light therapy uh photobiomodulation know light therapy uh photobiomodulation know light therapy uh photobiomodulation or maybe electromagnetic field at some or maybe electromagnetic field at some or maybe electromagnetic field at some point uh we need to be developing as you point uh we need to be developing as you point uh we need to be developing as you know healing science uh unfolds and we know healing science uh unfolds and we know healing science uh unfolds and we understand ourselves energetically understand ourselves energetically understand ourselves energetically uh I think we need energy based or uh I think we need energy based or uh I think we need energy based or energy informed approaches to uh help energy informed approaches to uh help energy informed approaches to uh help organisms heal and probably those organisms heal and probably those organisms heal and probably those are going to target mitochondria are going to target mitochondria are going to target mitochondria &gt;&gt; yeah using [clears throat] light or &gt;&gt; yeah using [clears throat] light or &gt;&gt; yeah using [clears throat] light or other tools to direct healing of other tools to direct healing of other tools to direct healing of internal specific internal organs. internal specific internal organs. internal specific internal organs. That's going to require something, a That's going to require something, a That's going to require something, a device of some sort as opposed to using device of some sort as opposed to using device of some sort as opposed to using one area of the body or one component of one area of the body or one component of one area of the body or one component of the brain is what I'm hearing. the brain is what I'm hearing. the brain is what I'm hearing. &gt;&gt; Yeah, most likely. Although there's some &gt;&gt; Yeah, most likely. Although there's some &gt;&gt; Yeah, most likely. Although there's some like crazy things that monks can do like crazy things that monks can do like crazy things that monks can do apparently like increasing the blood apparently like increasing the blood apparently like increasing the blood flow in one hand but not the other. flow in one hand but not the other. flow in one hand but not the other. There's even data showing that uh There's even data showing that uh There's even data showing that uh advanced meditators can increase blood advanced meditators can increase blood advanced meditators can increase blood flow in like one uh part of the brain flow in like one uh part of the brain flow in like one uh part of the brain and uh so there might be and uh so there might be and uh so there might be unsuspected ways of tapping into um you unsuspected ways of tapping into um you unsuspected ways of tapping into um you know using the mind basically to direct know using the mind basically to direct know using the mind basically to direct energy in different ways. I I've started energy in different ways. I I've started energy in different ways. I I've started to uh see the mind as you know a master to uh see the mind as you know a master to uh see the mind as you know a master regulator controller of energy like regulator controller of energy like regulator controller of energy like the mind can literally depolarize your the mind can literally depolarize your the mind can literally depolarize your muscles right and then cause you to run muscles right and then cause you to run muscles right and then cause you to run &gt;&gt; right that it starts up here with the &gt;&gt; right that it starts up here with the &gt;&gt; right that it starts up here with the inspiration or the inspiration or the inspiration or the motivation to contract your muscles and motivation to contract your muscles and motivation to contract your muscles and or to run or to do any behavior. This is or to run or to do any behavior. This is or to run or to do any behavior. This is like the mind controlling the energy like the mind controlling the energy like the mind controlling the energy flow in your muscles and then making flow in your muscles and then making flow in your muscles and then making more mitochondria as a result. more mitochondria as a result. more mitochondria as a result. What are the best or most sensitive What are the best or most sensitive What are the best or most sensitive tests for mitochondrial health if any tests for mitochondrial health if any tests for mitochondrial health if any exist? And I will say a number of exist? And I will say a number of exist? And I will say a number of questions and there were many questions and there were many questions and there were many questions centered around this idea of questions centered around this idea of questions centered around this idea of you know how can I measure mitochondrial you know how can I measure mitochondrial you know how can I measure mitochondrial health as a patient or as a you know health as a patient or as a you know health as a patient or as a you know with my with my with my &gt;&gt; physician. Are there any companies that &gt;&gt; physician. Are there any companies that &gt;&gt; physician. Are there any companies that make good mitochondrial health tests? make good mitochondrial health tests? make good mitochondrial health tests? &gt;&gt; There are diagnostic tests that you know &gt;&gt; There are diagnostic tests that you know &gt;&gt; There are diagnostic tests that you know clinics offer somewhere and those are clinics offer somewhere and those are clinics offer somewhere and those are good to diagnose mitochondrial diseases. good to diagnose mitochondrial diseases. good to diagnose mitochondrial diseases. Um there's a few uh you know companies Um there's a few uh you know companies Um there's a few uh you know companies that have popped up because like this is that have popped up because like this is that have popped up because like this is a future like thinking ourselves a future like thinking ourselves a future like thinking ourselves thinking about ourselves energetically thinking about ourselves energetically thinking about ourselves energetically realizing we are energy then if that's realizing we are energy then if that's realizing we are energy then if that's true which I think it is then what do true which I think it is then what do true which I think it is then what do you do about this and uh I suspect we're you do about this and uh I suspect we're you do about this and uh I suspect we're working on developing an institute that working on developing an institute that working on developing an institute that will really bring together the science will really bring together the science will really bring together the science of energy mitochondrial biology and of energy mitochondrial biology and of energy mitochondrial biology and psychobiology with the human experience psychobiology with the human experience psychobiology with the human experience uh that really is what moves us into uh that really is what moves us into uh that really is what moves us into action and determines whether into action and determines whether into action and determines whether you know our lives is worth living. you know our lives is worth living. you know our lives is worth living. Those things haven't been brought Those things haven't been brought Those things haven't been brought together and we haven't also together and we haven't also together and we haven't also explored scientifically the healing explored scientifically the healing explored scientifically the healing process. So we're developing an process. So we're developing an process. So we're developing an institute that will you know work do the institute that will you know work do the institute that will you know work do the research to develop those technologies research to develop those technologies research to develop those technologies and then we'll do the work as well to and then we'll do the work as well to and then we'll do the work as well to bring those into um into technologies bring those into um into technologies bring those into um into technologies that can reach people and you know that can reach people and you know that can reach people and you know people can have in their homes and maybe people can have in their homes and maybe people can have in their homes and maybe as a wearable or right as a as a kit as a wearable or right as a as a kit as a wearable or right as a as a kit that you get at home to really help you that you get at home to really help you that you get at home to really help you tune into your energy and know what tune into your energy and know what tune into your energy and know what works for you. which diet, which uh works for you. which diet, which uh works for you. which diet, which uh supplement or which you know there might supplement or which you know there might supplement or which you know there might be you know it might be that this person be you know it might be that this person be you know it might be that this person in your life when you're with them it's in your life when you're with them it's in your life when you're with them it's energetically it really does well for energetically it really does well for energetically it really does well for you and maybe that means it's a good you and maybe that means it's a good you and maybe that means it's a good person for you and there might be other person for you and there might be other person for you and there might be other people that you know really suck your people that you know really suck your people that you know really suck your energy um so we're working on energy um so we're working on energy um so we're working on initiatives and uh initiatives and uh initiatives and uh new methods to tune into mitochondrial new methods to tune into mitochondrial new methods to tune into mitochondrial health. I don't know now of things that health. I don't know now of things that health. I don't know now of things that I would use to tap into the health I would use to tap into the health I would use to tap into the health of our mitochondria. of our mitochondria. of our mitochondria. &gt;&gt; I can attest to both the pro- &gt;&gt; I can attest to both the pro- &gt;&gt; I can attest to both the pro- mitochondrial health and mitochondrial health and mitochondrial health and antimitochondrial health of certain antimitochondrial health of certain antimitochondrial health of certain relationships. &gt;&gt; What are some small daily tweaks that &gt;&gt; What are some small daily tweaks that &gt;&gt; What are some small daily tweaks that can help increase and people said can help increase and people said can help increase and people said energy, but let's just use that as a energy, but let's just use that as a energy, but let's just use that as a proxy for energy flow. Like if you could proxy for energy flow. Like if you could proxy for energy flow. Like if you could give just one, two, or three give just one, two, or three give just one, two, or three recommendations. There are a lot of busy recommendations. There are a lot of busy recommendations. There are a lot of busy people in this question list. They're people in this question list. They're people in this question list. They're saying, "I've got kids. you got a busy saying, "I've got kids. you got a busy saying, "I've got kids. you got a busy job. One, two, or three things that are One, two, or three things that are One, two, or three things that are straightforward outside the typical, you straightforward outside the typical, you straightforward outside the typical, you know, exercise, get your sleep, etc. know, exercise, get your sleep, etc. know, exercise, get your sleep, etc. What are some tweaks, dare I say, hacks? What are some tweaks, dare I say, hacks? What are some tweaks, dare I say, hacks? I think trying not to eat in the I think trying not to eat in the I think trying not to eat in the morning, like skipping breakfast seems morning, like skipping breakfast seems morning, like skipping breakfast seems like it does a lot of well for a lot of like it does a lot of well for a lot of like it does a lot of well for a lot of people. And I've heard for a long time people. And I've heard for a long time people. And I've heard for a long time breakfast is the most important, you breakfast is the most important, you breakfast is the most important, you know, meal of the day that my dad used know, meal of the day that my dad used know, meal of the day that my dad used to say that. he still believes that uh to say that. he still believes that uh to say that. he still believes that uh and I think it's hurting him his health and I think it's hurting him his health and I think it's hurting him his health in his like now in his 60s. Um so I in his like now in his 60s. Um so I in his like now in his 60s. Um so I think like trying to be hungry once in a think like trying to be hungry once in a think like trying to be hungry once in a while is probably a good thing. And then while is probably a good thing. And then while is probably a good thing. And then when you feel that hunger and then you when you feel that hunger and then you when you feel that hunger and then you you're like reflexively reaching for you're like reflexively reaching for you're like reflexively reaching for food like think what you're I think food like think what you're I think food like think what you're I think you're probably doing something good for you're probably doing something good for you're probably doing something good for your mitochondria. Your mitochondria your mitochondria. Your mitochondria your mitochondria. Your mitochondria when you're hungry or when a cell you when you're hungry or when a cell you when you're hungry or when a cell you know what we know that the science is if know what we know that the science is if know what we know that the science is if a cell is hungry in the dish the a cell is hungry in the dish the a cell is hungry in the dish the mitochondria start to fuse and there's mitochondria start to fuse and there's mitochondria start to fuse and there's more kind of the social connection more kind of the social connection more kind of the social connection between your mitochondria. Maybe it between your mitochondria. Maybe it between your mitochondria. Maybe it happens inside the body and then you get happens inside the body and then you get happens inside the body and then you get rid of the bad mitochondria. You make rid of the bad mitochondria. You make rid of the bad mitochondria. You make more new ones that work better, more new ones that work better, more new ones that work better, more efficient. So being hungry once in more efficient. So being hungry once in more efficient. So being hungry once in a while is probably a good thing. And a while is probably a good thing. And a while is probably a good thing. And then being out of breath, you mentioned then being out of breath, you mentioned then being out of breath, you mentioned one of your friend I think who says like one of your friend I think who says like one of your friend I think who says like I just need to be out of breath for an I just need to be out of breath for an I just need to be out of breath for an hour. [laughter] hour. [laughter] hour. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Uh finding ways to be out of breath. &gt;&gt; Uh finding ways to be out of breath. &gt;&gt; Uh finding ways to be out of breath. That can be like a run. It can be being That can be like a run. It can be being That can be like a run. It can be being at the gym. Uh you know, whatever makes at the gym. Uh you know, whatever makes at the gym. Uh you know, whatever makes you breathe harder. You breathe harder you breathe harder. You breathe harder you breathe harder. You breathe harder because your mitochondria are calling because your mitochondria are calling because your mitochondria are calling for oxygen. It's it's that simple. for oxygen. It's it's that simple. for oxygen. It's it's that simple. So, if you feel like you need to breathe So, if you feel like you need to breathe So, if you feel like you need to breathe harder, it means your mitochondria are harder, it means your mitochondria are harder, it means your mitochondria are flowing more energy and it's probably flowing more energy and it's probably flowing more energy and it's probably good for you. good for you. good for you. &gt;&gt; Great. Yeah. I need to say something &gt;&gt; Great. Yeah. I need to say something &gt;&gt; Great. Yeah. I need to say something about meditation. I think somehow about meditation. I think somehow about meditation. I think somehow meditation does something to our energy meditation does something to our energy meditation does something to our energy that is uh valuable and just yesterday that is uh valuable and just yesterday that is uh valuable and just yesterday there was a piece published in nature there was a piece published in nature there was a piece published in nature reviews uh cardiology about reviews uh cardiology about reviews uh cardiology about transcendental meditation. I think the transcendental meditation. I think the transcendental meditation. I think the that shows that the world is changing. that shows that the world is changing. that shows that the world is changing. you know, a clinical u uh medical you know, a clinical u uh medical you know, a clinical u uh medical journal like Nature Reviews Cardiology journal like Nature Reviews Cardiology journal like Nature Reviews Cardiology saying maybe there's something about saying maybe there's something about saying maybe there's something about like calming down the body, right? And like calming down the body, right? And like calming down the body, right? And not only is this like calming down the not only is this like calming down the not only is this like calming down the mind, sure, like maybe it improves mind, sure, like maybe it improves mind, sure, like maybe it improves well-being, this could actually be a well-being, this could actually be a well-being, this could actually be a treatment to help the heart recover, treatment to help the heart recover, treatment to help the heart recover, &gt;&gt; right? And to help treat a very serious &gt;&gt; right? And to help treat a very serious &gt;&gt; right? And to help treat a very serious um you know, life-threatening um you know, life-threatening um you know, life-threatening [clears throat] disease, cardiovascular [clears throat] disease, cardiovascular [clears throat] disease, cardiovascular disease. So, that's I suspect there's disease. So, that's I suspect there's disease. So, that's I suspect there's something with meditation. I have a something with meditation. I have a something with meditation. I have a 10-minute every morning I sit down. This 10-minute every morning I sit down. This 10-minute every morning I sit down. This is I'm religious about this. I wake up, is I'm religious about this. I wake up, is I'm religious about this. I wake up, first thing I do is sit down for 10 first thing I do is sit down for 10 first thing I do is sit down for 10 minutes uh with Sam Harris's waking up minutes uh with Sam Harris's waking up minutes uh with Sam Harris's waking up app. And I it just helps me connect app. And I it just helps me connect app. And I it just helps me connect ground, you know, connect with my ground, you know, connect with my ground, you know, connect with my energy. And then I think the for the energy. And then I think the for the energy. And then I think the for the rest of the day, I'm a little more in rest of the day, I'm a little more in rest of the day, I'm a little more in tune and I probably can make better tune and I probably can make better tune and I probably can make better decisions and I'm more grounded um decisions and I'm more grounded um decisions and I'm more grounded um you know, mentally, but probably also you know, mentally, but probably also you know, mentally, but probably also physically. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. There's a lot of discussion about There's a lot of discussion about There's a lot of discussion about peptides. MC Cuminin SS31 also called Elamma MC Cuminin SS31 also called Elamma MC Cuminin SS31 also called Elamma pretide. Didn't know that. pretide. Didn't know that. pretide. Didn't know that. &gt;&gt; Uh GHKU copper and various BPC157 TB500 &gt;&gt; Uh GHKU copper and various BPC157 TB500 &gt;&gt; Uh GHKU copper and various BPC157 TB500 analoges. I told you this stuff's analoges. I told you this stuff's analoges. I told you this stuff's getting popular. Um people are curious. getting popular. Um people are curious. getting popular. Um people are curious. &gt;&gt; Uh let me ask you this. I'll jump &gt;&gt; Uh let me ask you this. I'll jump &gt;&gt; Uh let me ask you this. I'll jump in on their question because we talked in on their question because we talked in on their question because we talked about some of this earlier. Would you about some of this earlier. Would you about some of this earlier. Would you inject any of these things? inject any of these things? inject any of these things? &gt;&gt; I wouldn't. uh would you let your &gt;&gt; I wouldn't. uh would you let your &gt;&gt; I wouldn't. uh would you let your sibling mom or dad inject these things? sibling mom or dad inject these things? sibling mom or dad inject these things? &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; There were many questions centered &gt;&gt; There were many questions centered &gt;&gt; There were many questions centered around the fact that uh fertility around the fact that uh fertility around the fact that uh fertility doctors OBGYNS are recommending various doctors OBGYNS are recommending various doctors OBGYNS are recommending various things to improve mitochondrial health things to improve mitochondrial health things to improve mitochondrial health for sake of fertility and egg quality. for sake of fertility and egg quality. for sake of fertility and egg quality. &gt;&gt; This makes sense because the &gt;&gt; This makes sense because the &gt;&gt; This makes sense because the mitochondrial genes are involved in the mitochondrial genes are involved in the mitochondrial genes are involved in the spindle and the formation of the embryo spindle and the formation of the embryo spindle and the formation of the embryo etc. And uh there the questions were etc. And uh there the questions were etc. And uh there the questions were specifically about uh the specifically about uh the specifically about uh the recommendations of ubiquininal recommendations of ubiquininal recommendations of ubiquininal and CoQ10 and CoQ10 and CoQ10 urolithn. These are very prominent in urolithn. These are very prominent in urolithn. These are very prominent in the in the health space especially in the in the health space especially in the in the health space especially in the fertility health space right now. Is the fertility health space right now. Is the fertility health space right now. Is there any real evidence that these there any real evidence that these there any real evidence that these compounds can improve mitochondrial compounds can improve mitochondrial compounds can improve mitochondrial health and therefore egg quality? health and therefore egg quality? health and therefore egg quality? &gt;&gt; There's some good data uh on urolithin a &gt;&gt; There's some good data uh on urolithin a &gt;&gt; There's some good data uh on urolithin a um that improves quality in cultured um that improves quality in cultured um that improves quality in cultured cells and then in animals. Um cells and then in animals. Um cells and then in animals. Um so it's possible and it there I think I so it's possible and it there I think I so it's possible and it there I think I saw recently some very compelling data saw recently some very compelling data saw recently some very compelling data on sperm mitochondrial DNA uh content on sperm mitochondrial DNA uh content on sperm mitochondrial DNA uh content mitochondrial DNA content like per sperm mitochondrial DNA content like per sperm mitochondrial DNA content like per sperm um linked to infertility. Uh so I um linked to infertility. Uh so I um linked to infertility. Uh so I suspect that this massive crash which is suspect that this massive crash which is suspect that this massive crash which is really worrying infertility um we're really worrying infertility um we're really worrying infertility um we're well below replacement right now. We're well below replacement right now. We're well below replacement right now. We're having very few babies as a as a having very few babies as a as a having very few babies as a as a society. Uh I it could be that part of society. Uh I it could be that part of society. Uh I it could be that part of the issue behind this is the issue behind this is the issue behind this is mitochondria aren't um you know as mitochondria aren't um you know as mitochondria aren't um you know as optimal as they should be and or energy optimal as they should be and or energy optimal as they should be and or energy is not flowing as uh freely as it is not flowing as uh freely as it is not flowing as uh freely as it should be. Um so I don't know about the should be. Um so I don't know about the should be. Um so I don't know about the whether those treatments could solve the whether those treatments could solve the whether those treatments could solve the issue. My my sense is the issue the issue. My my sense is the issue the issue. My my sense is the issue behind infertility is not behind infertility is not behind infertility is not doesn't arise from some molecular doesn't arise from some molecular doesn't arise from some molecular deficiency in our mitochondria. It deficiency in our mitochondria. It deficiency in our mitochondria. It arises from some higher level process arises from some higher level process arises from some higher level process that ends up messing up our energy. that ends up messing up our energy. that ends up messing up our energy. &gt;&gt; Last question, feel free to pass on this &gt;&gt; Last question, feel free to pass on this &gt;&gt; Last question, feel free to pass on this one. There were a number of people who one. There were a number of people who one. There were a number of people who asked whether there is any evidence asked whether there is any evidence asked whether there is any evidence animal studies in vitro or even in animal studies in vitro or even in animal studies in vitro or even in humans that electromagnetic fields can humans that electromagnetic fields can humans that electromagnetic fields can disrupt mitochondrial flow. Mhm. disrupt mitochondrial flow. Mhm. disrupt mitochondrial flow. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Uh this is, I realize, somewhat of a &gt;&gt; Uh this is, I realize, somewhat of a &gt;&gt; Uh this is, I realize, somewhat of a barbedwire topic because it immediately barbedwire topic because it immediately barbedwire topic because it immediately gets us to the place where people think, gets us to the place where people think, gets us to the place where people think, oh, they're, you know, worried about, oh, they're, you know, worried about, oh, they're, you know, worried about, you know, 5G and Bluetooth and things you know, 5G and Bluetooth and things you know, 5G and Bluetooth and things like that. But like that. But like that. But &gt;&gt; I don't know, I did an episode on &gt;&gt; I don't know, I did an episode on &gt;&gt; I don't know, I did an episode on fertility where I reviewed a meta fertility where I reviewed a meta fertility where I reviewed a meta analysis of data showing that indeed uh analysis of data showing that indeed uh analysis of data showing that indeed uh sperm motility can be impacted. But what sperm motility can be impacted. But what sperm motility can be impacted. But what are the data on EMFs or other electrical are the data on EMFs or other electrical are the data on EMFs or other electrical &gt;&gt; signals or other energy fields that um &gt;&gt; signals or other energy fields that um &gt;&gt; signals or other energy fields that um could potentially impact um brain, could potentially impact um brain, could potentially impact um brain, sperm, eggs? sperm, eggs? sperm, eggs? &gt;&gt; If if there's, you know, something in &gt;&gt; If if there's, you know, something in &gt;&gt; If if there's, you know, something in most cells that could respond to most cells that could respond to most cells that could respond to electromagnetic fields, I think it would electromagnetic fields, I think it would electromagnetic fields, I think it would be mitochondria. If you reason about be mitochondria. If you reason about be mitochondria. If you reason about this from first principles uh in the this from first principles uh in the this from first principles uh in the mitochondria there's a bunch of iron you mitochondria there's a bunch of iron you mitochondria there's a bunch of iron you know iron sulfur clusters which uh know iron sulfur clusters which uh know iron sulfur clusters which uh some of them at least are paramagnetic some of them at least are paramagnetic some of them at least are paramagnetic meaning they interact with magnetic meaning they interact with magnetic meaning they interact with magnetic fields um so I think in terms of fields um so I think in terms of fields um so I think in terms of biological plausibility I think there's biological plausibility I think there's biological plausibility I think there's basis to believe that mitochondria could basis to believe that mitochondria could basis to believe that mitochondria could be sensitive and you know respond and be sensitive and you know respond and be sensitive and you know respond and be functionally impacted by some for you functionally impacted by some for you functionally impacted by some for you know magnetic fields uh so that's for know magnetic fields uh so that's for know magnetic fields uh so that's for biological plausibility data I know some biological plausibility data I know some biological plausibility data I know some data where people have measured data where people have measured data where people have measured mitochondrial respiration, right? Which mitochondrial respiration, right? Which mitochondrial respiration, right? Which is flowing electrons to oxygen and you is flowing electrons to oxygen and you is flowing electrons to oxygen and you see oxygen disappearing. So you can see oxygen disappearing. So you can see oxygen disappearing. So you can measure this very well in the lab and measure this very well in the lab and measure this very well in the lab and then you can measure this in the absence then you can measure this in the absence then you can measure this in the absence of any magnetic field and then with a of any magnetic field and then with a of any magnetic field and then with a bit of a field, a stronger field, a bit of a field, a stronger field, a bit of a field, a stronger field, a stronger field, stronger field uh and it stronger field, stronger field uh and it stronger field, stronger field uh and it seems like there's an seems like there's an seems like there's an effect uh on this one function effect uh on this one function effect uh on this one function mitochondria which is uh respiration. So mitochondria which is uh respiration. So mitochondria which is uh respiration. So there seems to be data that says this there seems to be data that says this there seems to be data that says this could happen. uh what we're talking this could happen. uh what we're talking this could happen. uh what we're talking about in terms of magnetic field there about in terms of magnetic field there about in terms of magnetic field there is not 5G and it's not you know some uh is not 5G and it's not you know some uh is not 5G and it's not you know some uh like Wi-Fi widely uh used magnetic you like Wi-Fi widely uh used magnetic you like Wi-Fi widely uh used magnetic you know fields or uh electromagnetic know fields or uh electromagnetic know fields or uh electromagnetic radiation they're pretty specific and radiation they're pretty specific and radiation they're pretty specific and you know the earth's magnetic field you know the earth's magnetic field you know the earth's magnetic field which is in like very low level seems to which is in like very low level seems to which is in like very low level seems to perhaps have an effect also on perhaps have an effect also on perhaps have an effect also on mitochondria um and uh there are mitochondria um and uh there are mitochondria um and uh there are biohysicists like my wife Nosha Morgan biohysicists like my wife Nosha Morgan biohysicists like my wife Nosha Morgan who has done experiment experiments with who has done experiment experiments with who has done experiment experiments with pattern magnetic fields which is uh pattern magnetic fields which is uh pattern magnetic fields which is uh different than just you apply a static different than just you apply a static different than just you apply a static magnetic field like with a magnet right magnetic field like with a magnet right magnetic field like with a magnet right or a field that doesn't change over time or a field that doesn't change over time or a field that doesn't change over time it's like a sine wave there's no it's like a sine wave there's no it's like a sine wave there's no information there but you can pattern a information there but you can pattern a information there but you can pattern a magnetic field to have information to magnetic field to have information to magnetic field to have information to have content like Morse code you know have content like Morse code you know have content like Morse code you know back to the Morse code analogy so you back to the Morse code analogy so you back to the Morse code analogy so you can deliver information through that and can deliver information through that and can deliver information through that and it seems uh we have preliminary data it seems uh we have preliminary data it seems uh we have preliminary data that shows the mitochondria might that shows the mitochondria might that shows the mitochondria might be changing in response to you know this be changing in response to you know this be changing in response to you know this basically you're beaming energy at a c a basically you're beaming energy at a c a basically you're beaming energy at a c a certain pattern instead of uh with um certain pattern instead of uh with um certain pattern instead of uh with um molecules like glucose and pyrovate and molecules like glucose and pyrovate and molecules like glucose and pyrovate and lipids and stuff and you're or light lipids and stuff and you're or light lipids and stuff and you're or light right now you're beaming energy in right now you're beaming energy in right now you're beaming energy in another modality as electromagnetic another modality as electromagnetic another modality as electromagnetic waves and uh and there proteins clearly waves and uh and there proteins clearly waves and uh and there proteins clearly that and iron sulfur clusters that can that and iron sulfur clusters that can that and iron sulfur clusters that can be sensitive to that. Um, so I think be sensitive to that. Um, so I think be sensitive to that. Um, so I think there's some biological plausibility. there's some biological plausibility. there's some biological plausibility. There's evidence that this might happen There's evidence that this might happen There's evidence that this might happen and affect mitochondrial respiration. and affect mitochondrial respiration. and affect mitochondrial respiration. Um, and um, and there's, I think, Um, and um, and there's, I think, Um, and um, and there's, I think, another layer of sophistication that another layer of sophistication that another layer of sophistication that tells us this potentially could be tells us this potentially could be tells us this potentially could be harnessed eventually to help kind of harnessed eventually to help kind of harnessed eventually to help kind of rewrite some energetic states in the rewrite some energetic states in the rewrite some energetic states in the body. Maybe we can use those at some body. Maybe we can use those at some body. Maybe we can use those at some point to promote the healing process. point to promote the healing process. point to promote the healing process. &gt;&gt; Love it. &gt;&gt; Love it. &gt;&gt; Love it. &gt;&gt; So, we'll see. &gt;&gt; So, we'll see. &gt;&gt; So, we'll see. &gt;&gt; We will see. &gt;&gt; We will see. &gt;&gt; We will see. &gt;&gt; Dr. Martin Peicard, thank you so &gt;&gt; Dr. Martin Peicard, thank you so &gt;&gt; Dr. Martin Peicard, thank you so much. You gave us a master class in much. You gave us a master class in much. You gave us a master class in mitochondria, mitochondrial function. mitochondria, mitochondrial function. mitochondria, mitochondrial function. You clarified a lot of what is clearly You clarified a lot of what is clearly You clarified a lot of what is clearly confusion for people out there, confusion for people out there, confusion for people out there, including many biologists, mind you, including many biologists, mind you, including many biologists, mind you, about how mitochondrial work and the about how mitochondrial work and the about how mitochondrial work and the spectacular things that they do. Uh, and spectacular things that they do. Uh, and spectacular things that they do. Uh, and the way you frame this whole notion of the way you frame this whole notion of the way you frame this whole notion of energy flow. And I guess we should energy flow. And I guess we should energy flow. And I guess we should credit your wife here for uh energy is credit your wife here for uh energy is credit your wife here for uh energy is the potential for change, the potential for change, the potential for change, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And the behaviors, the mindsets, the &gt;&gt; And the behaviors, the mindsets, the &gt;&gt; And the behaviors, the mindsets, the small moments where you can give small moments where you can give small moments where you can give yourself relief like an exhale and just yourself relief like an exhale and just yourself relief like an exhale and just take the tension off the body. Those are take the tension off the body. Those are take the tension off the body. Those are surely creating it energetic savings surely creating it energetic savings surely creating it energetic savings that you can allocate to other things. that you can allocate to other things. that you can allocate to other things. and to just think about life as a as a and to just think about life as a as a and to just think about life as a as a uh a game of sorts of controlling uh a game of sorts of controlling uh a game of sorts of controlling your energy and it gets us to sleep and your energy and it gets us to sleep and your energy and it gets us to sleep and all the things that we love talking all the things that we love talking all the things that we love talking about on this podcast and the way you about on this podcast and the way you about on this podcast and the way you framed it is truly novel and is just framed it is truly novel and is just framed it is truly novel and is just spectacular. Also, spectacular. Also, spectacular. Also, &gt;&gt; you're reversing graying of hair. Um &gt;&gt; you're reversing graying of hair. Um &gt;&gt; you're reversing graying of hair. Um people get you're giving people agency people get you're giving people agency people get you're giving people agency over that. And I just want to over that. And I just want to over that. And I just want to re-emphasize that how incredible it is re-emphasize that how incredible it is re-emphasize that how incredible it is that you're approaching things at this that you're approaching things at this that you're approaching things at this very high level of subjective very high level of subjective very high level of subjective experience, this very real level that experience, this very real level that experience, this very real level that people live in all the time people live in all the time people live in all the time &gt;&gt; and yet you're able to bridge across all &gt;&gt; and yet you're able to bridge across all &gt;&gt; and yet you're able to bridge across all these levels of analysis down to the these levels of analysis down to the these levels of analysis down to the subcellular and biohysical mechanisms. subcellular and biohysical mechanisms. subcellular and biohysical mechanisms. It's really spectacular. uh you're truly It's really spectacular. uh you're truly It's really spectacular. uh you're truly an N of one as we say and I'm very an N of one as we say and I'm very an N of one as we say and I'm very excited for what you're putting together excited for what you're putting together excited for what you're putting together in terms of this uh scientific institute in terms of this uh scientific institute in terms of this uh scientific institute to solve healing your book. We'll talk to solve healing your book. We'll talk to solve healing your book. We'll talk again later uh at some point about your again later uh at some point about your again later uh at some point about your book and I should probably also sit down book and I should probably also sit down book and I should probably also sit down and have a conversation with your wife and have a conversation with your wife and have a conversation with your wife because she's got some spectacular because she's got some spectacular because she's got some spectacular results in this realm too and uh results in this realm too and uh results in this realm too and uh &gt;&gt; just thank you thank you thank you for &gt;&gt; just thank you thank you thank you for &gt;&gt; just thank you thank you thank you for the education and the actionable items the education and the actionable items the education and the actionable items that you're providing. Thanks for coming that you're providing. Thanks for coming that you're providing. Thanks for coming out all this way. out all this way. out all this way. &gt;&gt; I'm very grateful to you. Thank you. &gt;&gt; I'm very grateful to you. Thank you. &gt;&gt; I'm very grateful to you. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you Andrew. Thank you for joining &gt;&gt; Thank you Andrew. Thank you for joining &gt;&gt; Thank you Andrew. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. me for today's discussion with Dr. me for today's discussion with Dr. Martin Picard. To learn more about his Martin Picard. To learn more about his Martin Picard. To learn more about his work, please see the links in the show work, please see the links in the show work, please see the links in the show not captions. If you're learning from not captions. If you're learning from not captions. If you're learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please andor enjoying this podcast, please andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three-page protocols in the form of 1 to three-page protocols in the form of 1 to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Martin Peard. today's discussion with Martin Peard. today's discussion with Martin Peard. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you [music] for your interest in you [music] for your interest in you [music] for your interest in science.