Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This Stanford School of Medicine. This Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. Today's episode to the general public. Today's episode to the general public. Today's episode is going to be all about vision and is going to be all about vision and is going to be all about vision and eyesight, a topic that's very near and eyesight, a topic that's very near and eyesight, a topic that's very near and dear to my heart because it's the one dear to my heart because it's the one dear to my heart because it's the one that I've been focusing on for well over that I've been focusing on for well over that I've been focusing on for well over 25 years of my career. When we hear the 25 years of my career. When we hear the 25 years of my career. When we hear the word vision, we most often think about word vision, we most often think about word vision, we most often think about eyesight or our ability to perceive eyesight or our ability to perceive eyesight or our ability to perceive shapes and objects and faces and colors. shapes and objects and faces and colors. shapes and objects and faces and colors. However, our eyes are responsible for much more our eyes are responsible for much more our eyes are responsible for much more than that, than that, than that, including our mood, our level of including our mood, our level of including our mood, our level of alertness, and all of that is included alertness, and all of that is included alertness, and all of that is included in what we call vision. in what we call vision. in what we call vision. What is vision? Well, vision starts with What is vision? Well, vision starts with What is vision? Well, vision starts with the eyes. the eyes. the eyes. We have no what's called extraocular We have no what's called extraocular We have no what's called extraocular light perception. While it feels good to light perception. While it feels good to light perception. While it feels good to have light on our skin, while it feels have light on our skin, while it feels have light on our skin, while it feels good to be outside in the sunlight for good to be outside in the sunlight for good to be outside in the sunlight for most people, most people, most people, the only way that light information can the only way that light information can the only way that light information can get to the cells of your body is through get to the cells of your body is through get to the cells of your body is through these two little goodies on the front of these two little goodies on the front of these two little goodies on the front of your face. And for those of you your face. And for those of you your face. And for those of you listening, I'm just pointing to my eyes. listening, I'm just pointing to my eyes. listening, I'm just pointing to my eyes. As many of you have heard me say before As many of you have heard me say before As many of you have heard me say before on this and other podcasts, your eyes, on this and other podcasts, your eyes, on this and other podcasts, your eyes, and in particular your neural retinas, and in particular your neural retinas, and in particular your neural retinas, are part of your central nervous system. are part of your central nervous system. are part of your central nervous system. They are part of your brain. They are They are part of your brain. They are They are part of your brain. They are the only part of your brain that sits the only part of your brain that sits the only part of your brain that sits outside the cranial vault. In other outside the cranial vault. In other outside the cranial vault. In other words, you have two pieces of your brain words, you have two pieces of your brain words, you have two pieces of your brain that deliberately got squeezed out of that deliberately got squeezed out of that deliberately got squeezed out of the skull during development and placed the skull during development and placed the skull during development and placed in these things we call eye sockets. in these things we call eye sockets. in these things we call eye sockets. Now, the eyes have a lot of other Now, the eyes have a lot of other Now, the eyes have a lot of other goodies in them that are very important, goodies in them that are very important, goodies in them that are very important, and those are the goodies that we're and those are the goodies that we're and those are the goodies that we're going to focus on a lot today. going to focus on a lot today. going to focus on a lot today. There's a lens to focus light precisely There's a lens to focus light precisely There's a lens to focus light precisely to the retina. to the retina. to the retina. There are also other pieces of the eye There are also other pieces of the eye There are also other pieces of the eye that are designed to keep the eye that are designed to keep the eye that are designed to keep the eye lubricated. You also have these things that we call You also have these things that we call You also have these things that we call eyelashes. Most people don't know this, eyelashes. Most people don't know this, eyelashes. Most people don't know this, but eyelashes are there to trigger the but eyelashes are there to trigger the but eyelashes are there to trigger the blink reflex. They aren't just blink reflex. They aren't just blink reflex. They aren't just aesthetically nice. Eyelashes are there aesthetically nice. Eyelashes are there aesthetically nice. Eyelashes are there so that if a piece of dust or something so that if a piece of dust or something so that if a piece of dust or something starts to head towards the cornea, the starts to head towards the cornea, the starts to head towards the cornea, the eye blinks very, very fast. It's the eye blinks very, very fast. It's the eye blinks very, very fast. It's the fastest reflex you own. We also have fastest reflex you own. We also have fastest reflex you own. We also have these things called eyelids. Now, these things called eyelids. Now, these things called eyelids. Now, eyelids might seem like the most boring eyelids might seem like the most boring eyelids might seem like the most boring topic of all, but they are incredibly topic of all, but they are incredibly topic of all, but they are incredibly fascinating. Today, we're going to talk fascinating. Today, we're going to talk fascinating. Today, we're going to talk about how you can actually use your about how you can actually use your about how you can actually use your visual system to increase your levels of visual system to increase your levels of visual system to increase your levels of alertness based on the neural circuits that link based on the neural circuits that link based on the neural circuits that link your brainstem with your eyelids. your brainstem with your eyelids. your brainstem with your eyelids. So, let's talk about what the eyes do for let's talk about what the eyes do for let's talk about what the eyes do for vision. Basically, the entire job of the eyes is Basically, the entire job of the eyes is Basically, the entire job of the eyes is to collect light information to collect light information to collect light information and send it off to the rest of the brain and send it off to the rest of the brain and send it off to the rest of the brain in a form that the brain can understand. in a form that the brain can understand. in a form that the brain can understand. Remember, no light actually gets in past Remember, no light actually gets in past Remember, no light actually gets in past those neural retinas. It gets to the those neural retinas. It gets to the those neural retinas. It gets to the neural retina neural retina neural retina and we have specific cells in the eye and we have specific cells in the eye and we have specific cells in the eye called photoreceptors. They come in two called photoreceptors. They come in two called photoreceptors. They come in two different types, rods and cones. Cones different types, rods and cones. Cones different types, rods and cones. Cones are mainly responsible are mainly responsible are mainly responsible for daytime vision for daytime vision for daytime vision and the rods are mainly responsible for and the rods are mainly responsible for and the rods are mainly responsible for vision at night or under low light vision at night or under low light vision at night or under low light conditions, generally speaking. conditions, generally speaking. conditions, generally speaking. These photoreceptors, the rods and These photoreceptors, the rods and These photoreceptors, the rods and cones, have chemical reactions inside them that have chemical reactions inside them that have chemical reactions inside them that involve things like vitamin A involve things like vitamin A involve things like vitamin A and that chemical reaction converts the and that chemical reaction converts the and that chemical reaction converts the light into electricity. light into electricity. light into electricity. Within the eye, within the retina, there Within the eye, within the retina, there Within the eye, within the retina, there then a series of stages of processing then a series of stages of processing then a series of stages of processing and that information eventually gets and that information eventually gets and that information eventually gets sent into the brain by a very specific sent into the brain by a very specific sent into the brain by a very specific class of neurons. They're called the class of neurons. They're called the class of neurons. They're called the retinal ganglion cells. retinal ganglion cells. retinal ganglion cells. Now, here's what's incredible. I just Now, here's what's incredible. I just Now, here's what's incredible. I just want you to ponder this for a second. want you to ponder this for a second. want you to ponder this for a second. This still blows my mind. This still blows my mind. This still blows my mind. Everything you see around you, Everything you see around you, Everything you see around you, you're not actually seeing those objects you're not actually seeing those objects you're not actually seeing those objects directly. What you're directly. What you're directly. What you're doing is you're making a best guess doing is you're making a best guess doing is you're making a best guess about what's there based on the pattern about what's there based on the pattern about what's there based on the pattern of electricity that arrives in your of electricity that arrives in your of electricity that arrives in your brain. Now, that might just seem totally wild Now, that might just seem totally wild Now, that might just seem totally wild and hard to wrap your head around, and hard to wrap your head around, and hard to wrap your head around, but think about it this way, because but think about it this way, because but think about it this way, because this is the way it actually works. this is the way it actually works. this is the way it actually works. Let's take a an example of a color, Let's take a an example of a color, Let's take a an example of a color, like green or blue. like green or blue. like green or blue. You have cones You have cones You have cones in your eye that respond best to the in your eye that respond best to the in your eye that respond best to the wavelength of light wavelength of light wavelength of light that is reflected off, say, a green that is reflected off, say, a green that is reflected off, say, a green apple. So, you don't actually see the apple. So, you don't actually see the apple. So, you don't actually see the green apple. What you see is the light green apple. What you see is the light green apple. What you see is the light bouncing off that green apple. bouncing off that green apple. bouncing off that green apple. And it goes into your eye, And it goes into your eye, And it goes into your eye, and you see it and perceive it as round and you see it and perceive it as round and you see it and perceive it as round and green, but not because you see and green, but not because you see and green, but not because you see anything green. No green light arrives anything green. No green light arrives anything green. No green light arrives in your brain. in your brain. in your brain. What happens is your brain actually What happens is your brain actually What happens is your brain actually compares the amount of green reflection compares the amount of green reflection compares the amount of green reflection coming off that apple coming off that apple coming off that apple to the amount of red and blue around it. to the amount of red and blue around it. to the amount of red and blue around it. What the brain is receiving is a series What the brain is receiving is a series What the brain is receiving is a series of signals, electrical signals, and it's of signals, electrical signals, and it's of signals, electrical signals, and it's comparing electrical signals in order to comparing electrical signals in order to comparing electrical signals in order to come up with what we call these come up with what we call these come up with what we call these perceptions, like I see something green, perceptions, like I see something green, perceptions, like I see something green, a green apple, or I see red. So, that's a green apple, or I see red. So, that's a green apple, or I see red. So, that's what I'd like you to understand about what I'd like you to understand about what I'd like you to understand about the way the eye communicates with the way the eye communicates with the way the eye communicates with the brain. I would also like you to understand I would also like you to understand I would also like you to understand that the brain itself is making these the brain itself is making these the brain itself is making these guesses, and that those guesses are largely and that those guesses are largely and that those guesses are largely right. How do I know that? How do I know that? How do I know that? Well, they're right because when you Well, they're right because when you Well, they're right because when you reach out to grab a glass, most of the reach out to grab a glass, most of the reach out to grab a glass, most of the time you grab the glass and you don't time you grab the glass and you don't time you grab the glass and you don't miss. Right? Most of the time when you make Right? Most of the time when you make Right? Most of the time when you make judgments about the world around you judgments about the world around you judgments about the world around you based on your visual impression of them, based on your visual impression of them, based on your visual impression of them, it allows you to move functionally it allows you to move functionally it allows you to move functionally through the world. through the world. through the world. So, the brain is doing these incredible the brain is doing these incredible the brain is doing these incredible things. It's also creating depth, a things. It's also creating depth, a things. It's also creating depth, a sense of depth, even though what arrives sense of depth, even though what arrives sense of depth, even though what arrives from the retina is essentially a readout from the retina is essentially a readout from the retina is essentially a readout of a two-dimensional flat image. Your of a two-dimensional flat image. Your of a two-dimensional flat image. Your eyes are slightly offset from one eyes are slightly offset from one eyes are slightly offset from one another so that, for instance, if I look at you, so that, for instance, if I look at you, so that, for instance, if I look at you, if you were standing right in front of if you were standing right in front of if you were standing right in front of me right now, and I were to look at you, me right now, and I were to look at you, me right now, and I were to look at you, the image of your face, the light the image of your face, the light the image of your face, the light bouncing off your face, to be more bouncing off your face, to be more bouncing off your face, to be more precise, lands on one eye in a slightly precise, lands on one eye in a slightly precise, lands on one eye in a slightly different location than it does in the different location than it does in the different location than it does in the other eye, and then the brain does math. other eye, and then the brain does math. other eye, and then the brain does math. It basically does the equivalent of It basically does the equivalent of It basically does the equivalent of geometry and trigonometry and geometry and trigonometry and geometry and trigonometry and essentially figures out how far away you essentially figures out how far away you essentially figures out how far away you are from me. from me. from me. Which is just incredible. So, the brain Which is just incredible. So, the brain Which is just incredible. So, the brain does all this very, very fast, and the does all this very, very fast, and the does all this very, very fast, and the brain uses about 40 to 50% of its total brain uses about 40 to 50% of its total brain uses about 40 to 50% of its total real estate for vision. That's how real estate for vision. That's how real estate for vision. That's how important vision is. important vision is. important vision is. Now, I want to talk about the other Now, I want to talk about the other Now, I want to talk about the other aspect of vision, which is the stuff aspect of vision, which is the stuff aspect of vision, which is the stuff that you don't perceive, the that you don't perceive, the that you don't perceive, the subconscious stuff. subconscious stuff. subconscious stuff. And then we'll transition directly into And then we'll transition directly into And then we'll transition directly into how you can use light and eyesight to how you can use light and eyesight to how you can use light and eyesight to control this other stuff, because it's control this other stuff, because it's control this other stuff, because it's very important, and that other stuff very important, and that other stuff very important, and that other stuff is mood, sleep, and appetite. is mood, sleep, and appetite. is mood, sleep, and appetite. And there are ways in which you can use And there are ways in which you can use And there are ways in which you can use these same protocols that I will these same protocols that I will these same protocols that I will describe in order to preserve and even describe in order to preserve and even describe in order to preserve and even enhance your vision, your ability to see enhance your vision, your ability to see enhance your vision, your ability to see things and consciously perceive them. things and consciously perceive them. things and consciously perceive them. So, the protocols we will describe have So, the protocols we will describe have So, the protocols we will describe have a lot of carryover to both conscious a lot of carryover to both conscious a lot of carryover to both conscious eyesight and to these subconscious eyesight and to these subconscious eyesight and to these subconscious aspects of vision. aspects of vision. aspects of vision. And I just want you to understand a And I just want you to understand a And I just want you to understand a little bit more about the science of little bit more about the science of little bit more about the science of seeing, of eyesight and vision, and then seeing, of eyesight and vision, and then seeing, of eyesight and vision, and then all the protocols will make perfect all the protocols will make perfect all the protocols will make perfect sense. So, as amazing as eyesight is, it sense. So, as amazing as eyesight is, it sense. So, as amazing as eyesight is, it actually did not evolve for us to see actually did not evolve for us to see actually did not evolve for us to see shapes and colors and motion and form. shapes and colors and motion and form. shapes and colors and motion and form. The most ancient cells The most ancient cells The most ancient cells in our eyes, in our eyes, in our eyes, and the reason we have eyes, and the reason we have eyes, and the reason we have eyes, is to communicate information about time is to communicate information about time is to communicate information about time of day to the rest of the brain and of day to the rest of the brain and of day to the rest of the brain and body. Remember, there's no extraocular Remember, there's no extraocular Remember, there's no extraocular photoreception. There's no way for light photoreception. There's no way for light photoreception. There's no way for light information to get to all the cells of information to get to all the cells of information to get to all the cells of your body. your body. your body. But, every cell in your body needs to But, every cell in your body needs to But, every cell in your body needs to know if it's night or day. know if it's night or day. know if it's night or day. I talked a little bit about this on the I talked a little bit about this on the I talked a little bit about this on the in the episodes on sleep. And I this in the episodes on sleep. And I this in the episodes on sleep. And I this episode is not about sleep, but I want episode is not about sleep, but I want episode is not about sleep, but I want to emphasize that there is a particular to emphasize that there is a particular to emphasize that there is a particular category of retinal ganglion cell. category of retinal ganglion cell. category of retinal ganglion cell. Remember the neurons that connect the Remember the neurons that connect the Remember the neurons that connect the retina to the brain. retina to the brain. retina to the brain. These are so-called melanopsin These are so-called melanopsin These are so-called melanopsin retinal ganglion cells, named after the retinal ganglion cells, named after the retinal ganglion cells, named after the opsin that they contain within them. opsin that they contain within them. opsin that they contain within them. They are essentially photoreceptors. They are essentially photoreceptors. They are essentially photoreceptors. Remember before I said there are Remember before I said there are Remember before I said there are photoreceptors and then these ganglion photoreceptors and then these ganglion photoreceptors and then these ganglion cells? Well, these melanopsin cells, as cells? Well, these melanopsin cells, as cells? Well, these melanopsin cells, as the name suggests, melanopsin, the name suggests, melanopsin, the name suggests, melanopsin, have their own photoreceptor built have their own photoreceptor built have their own photoreceptor built inside them. inside them. inside them. These cells, retinal ganglion cells, These cells, retinal ganglion cells, These cells, retinal ganglion cells, communicate to areas of the brain communicate to areas of the brain communicate to areas of the brain when particular qualities of light are when particular qualities of light are when particular qualities of light are present in your environment present in your environment present in your environment and signal to the brain, therefore, and signal to the brain, therefore, and signal to the brain, therefore, that it's that it's that it's early day or late in the day. They early day or late in the day. They early day or late in the day. They regulate when you'll get sleepy, when regulate when you'll get sleepy, when regulate when you'll get sleepy, when you'll feel awake, how fast your you'll feel awake, how fast your you'll feel awake, how fast your metabolism is, excuse me, metabolism is, excuse me, metabolism is, excuse me, your blood sugar levels, your dopamine your blood sugar levels, your dopamine your blood sugar levels, your dopamine levels, and your pain threshold. and your pain threshold. and your pain threshold. These melanopsin ganglion cells These melanopsin ganglion cells These melanopsin ganglion cells have been shown to set the circadian have been shown to set the circadian have been shown to set the circadian clock and to respond best clock and to respond best clock and to respond best to the contrast between blue and yellow to the contrast between blue and yellow to the contrast between blue and yellow light of the sort light of the sort light of the sort that lands that lands that lands on these cells when you view on these cells when you view on these cells when you view the sun when it's at so-called low solar the sun when it's at so-called low solar the sun when it's at so-called low solar angle, when it's low in the sky either angle, when it's low in the sky either angle, when it's low in the sky either in the morning in the morning in the morning or in the evening. What does all this or in the evening. What does all this or in the evening. What does all this mean? The most central and important mean? The most central and important mean? The most central and important aspect of our biology, aspect of our biology, aspect of our biology, and perhaps our psychology as well, is and perhaps our psychology as well, is and perhaps our psychology as well, is to anchor to anchor to anchor ourselves in time, to know when we ourselves in time, to know when we ourselves in time, to know when we exist. We know time at a biological exist. We know time at a biological exist. We know time at a biological level based on where the sun is. What level based on where the sun is. What level based on where the sun is. What does this mean for a protocol? It means does this mean for a protocol? It means does this mean for a protocol? It means see, get that light in your eyes early see, get that light in your eyes early see, get that light in your eyes early in the day, in the day, in the day, and anytime you want to be awake. So, and anytime you want to be awake. So, and anytime you want to be awake. So, try and get as much sunlight in your try and get as much sunlight in your try and get as much sunlight in your eyes during the day as you safely can. eyes during the day as you safely can. eyes during the day as you safely can. You need a lot of this light in order to You need a lot of this light in order to You need a lot of this light in order to trigger these melanopsin cells, which trigger these melanopsin cells, which trigger these melanopsin cells, which will then trigger your circadian clock, will then trigger your circadian clock, will then trigger your circadian clock, which sits above the roof of your mouth, which sits above the roof of your mouth, which sits above the roof of your mouth, which will signal every cell in your which will signal every cell in your which will signal every cell in your body, including temperature rhythms, et body, including temperature rhythms, et body, including temperature rhythms, et cetera. So, first things first, your cetera. So, first things first, your cetera. So, first things first, your visual system was not for seeing faces, visual system was not for seeing faces, visual system was not for seeing faces, motion, et cetera. motion, et cetera. motion, et cetera. The most ancient cells in your eye, The most ancient cells in your eye, The most ancient cells in your eye, which are there right now as we speak, which are there right now as we speak, which are there right now as we speak, are there to inform your body and brain are there to inform your body and brain are there to inform your body and brain about time of day. about time of day. about time of day. So, you want to get that bright light So, you want to get that bright light So, you want to get that bright light early in the day. Absolutely essential. early in the day. Absolutely essential. early in the day. Absolutely essential. 2 to 10 minutes. Now, 2 to 10 minutes. Now, 2 to 10 minutes. Now, here's another reason to do this. here's another reason to do this. here's another reason to do this. Getting 2 hours a day Getting 2 hours a day Getting 2 hours a day of outdoor time without sunglasses has a of outdoor time without sunglasses has a of outdoor time without sunglasses has a significant effect on reducing significant effect on reducing significant effect on reducing the probability that you will get the probability that you will get the probability that you will get myopia. Now, myopia or nearsightedness myopia. Now, myopia or nearsightedness myopia. Now, myopia or nearsightedness has to do with the way that the lens has to do with the way that the lens has to do with the way that the lens focuses light onto the retina. light onto the retina. light onto the retina. So, remember, your eye is an optical So, remember, your eye is an optical So, remember, your eye is an optical device. You have lenses in your eyes, device. You have lenses in your eyes, device. You have lenses in your eyes, and those lenses need to move. It's not and those lenses need to move. It's not and those lenses need to move. It's not a It's not a rigid lens like a glass a It's not a rigid lens like a glass a It's not a rigid lens like a glass lens. It's a dynamic lens. The eye can lens. It's a dynamic lens. The eye can lens. It's a dynamic lens. The eye can dynamically adjust where light lands by dynamically adjust where light lands by dynamically adjust where light lands by moving the lens and changing the shape moving the lens and changing the shape moving the lens and changing the shape of the lens in your eye through a of the lens in your eye through a of the lens in your eye through a process called accommodation. process called accommodation. process called accommodation. And if you understand this process of And if you understand this process of And if you understand this process of accommodation, you not only can enhance the health of you not only can enhance the health of you not only can enhance the health of your eyes in the immediate and long your eyes in the immediate and long your eyes in the immediate and long term, but you also can work better. term, but you also can work better. term, but you also can work better. You'll be able to focus better on You'll be able to focus better on You'll be able to focus better on physical and mental work. You will be physical and mental work. You will be physical and mental work. You will be able to concentrate for longer. So much able to concentrate for longer. So much able to concentrate for longer. So much of our mental focus, whether or not it's of our mental focus, whether or not it's of our mental focus, whether or not it's for cognitive endeavors or physical for cognitive endeavors or physical for cognitive endeavors or physical endeavors, is grounded in where we place our visual is grounded in where we place our visual is grounded in where we place our visual focus. Okay, what we look at and our ability to Okay, what we look at and our ability to Okay, what we look at and our ability to hold our concentration there is hold our concentration there is hold our concentration there is critically determining how we think. determining how we think. determining how we think. Now, accommodation Now, accommodation Now, accommodation is our ability to accommodate to things is our ability to accommodate to things is our ability to accommodate to things that are up close here or further away. that are up close here or further away. that are up close here or further away. And the way this works is that the iris And the way this works is that the iris And the way this works is that the iris and the musculature and a structure and the musculature and a structure and the musculature and a structure called the ciliary body move the lens. called the ciliary body move the lens. called the ciliary body move the lens. So, when you look far away, okay, when So, when you look far away, okay, when So, when you look far away, okay, when you see things far away, you see things far away, you see things far away, your lens actually your lens actually your lens actually relaxes. It can flatten out. And you'll relaxes. It can flatten out. And you'll relaxes. It can flatten out. And you'll notice that it actually is relaxing to notice that it actually is relaxing to notice that it actually is relaxing to look at a horizon. Whereas if I look at look at a horizon. Whereas if I look at look at a horizon. Whereas if I look at something up close to me like this pen something up close to me like this pen something up close to me like this pen or my phone or a computer screen or this or my phone or a computer screen or this or my phone or a computer screen or this microphone, it takes effort. You'll sense the it takes effort. You'll sense the it takes effort. You'll sense the effort. Now, some of that effort is effort. Now, some of that effort is effort. Now, some of that effort is actually eye movements because you have actually eye movements because you have actually eye movements because you have muscles that can move your eyes within muscles that can move your eyes within muscles that can move your eyes within their sockets. their sockets. their sockets. But a lot of the work, quote and quote, But a lot of the work, quote and quote, But a lot of the work, quote and quote, is neural work of the muscles having to is neural work of the muscles having to is neural work of the muscles having to move and contract such that the lens to move and contract such that the lens to move and contract such that the lens actually gets thicker actually gets thicker actually gets thicker in order to bring the light to the in order to bring the light to the in order to bring the light to the retina and not to a location in front of retina and not to a location in front of retina and not to a location in front of it or behind it, so-called it or behind it, so-called it or behind it, so-called accommodation. Now, you might say, "Why are you telling me you might say, "Why are you telling me you might say, "Why are you telling me about accommodation?" Well, about accommodation?" Well, about accommodation?" Well, these days we're spending a lot of time these days we're spending a lot of time these days we're spending a lot of time looking at things, mainly our phones, up looking at things, mainly our phones, up looking at things, mainly our phones, up close and computers up close and we are close and computers up close and we are close and computers up close and we are indoors. In other words, you are not indoors. In other words, you are not indoors. In other words, you are not giving your lens the opportunity to giving your lens the opportunity to giving your lens the opportunity to flatten out and for these muscles to flatten out and for these muscles to flatten out and for these muscles to relieve themselves of this work. relieve themselves of this work. relieve themselves of this work. But you are also you are also you are also training your eyes training your eyes training your eyes to be to be to be good at looking at things up close and good at looking at things up close and good at looking at things up close and not far away, and as a consequence, you not far away, and as a consequence, you not far away, and as a consequence, you are reshaping the neural circuitry in are reshaping the neural circuitry in are reshaping the neural circuitry in your brain and it is not good. You want your brain and it is not good. You want your brain and it is not good. You want to get outside, not just to lighten the to get outside, not just to lighten the to get outside, not just to lighten the load on your mind or to think about load on your mind or to think about load on your mind or to think about other things, but to maintain the health other things, but to maintain the health other things, but to maintain the health of your visual system. of your visual system. of your visual system. In other words, you want to exercise In other words, you want to exercise In other words, you want to exercise these muscles these muscles these muscles and that involves both and that involves both and that involves both the lens moving and getting kind of the lens moving and getting kind of the lens moving and getting kind of thicker and relaxing that lens. And the thicker and relaxing that lens. And the thicker and relaxing that lens. And the relaxation of the lens is actually one relaxation of the lens is actually one relaxation of the lens is actually one of the best things you can do for the of the best things you can do for the of the best things you can do for the musculature of the inner eye. So, what's musculature of the inner eye. So, what's musculature of the inner eye. So, what's the protocol? You might be surprised, the protocol? You might be surprised, the protocol? You might be surprised, but for every 30 minutes of focused but for every 30 minutes of focused but for every 30 minutes of focused work, you probably want to look up every once you probably want to look up every once you probably want to look up every once in a while and just try to relax your in a while and just try to relax your in a while and just try to relax your face and eye muscles, including your jaw face and eye muscles, including your jaw face and eye muscles, including your jaw muscles, because all these things are muscles, because all these things are muscles, because all these things are closely linked in the brainstem, closely linked in the brainstem, closely linked in the brainstem, and allow your eyes to go into so-called and allow your eyes to go into so-called and allow your eyes to go into so-called panoramic vision, where you're just not panoramic vision, where you're just not panoramic vision, where you're just not really focusing on anything, and then really focusing on anything, and then really focusing on anything, and then refocus on your work. refocus on your work. refocus on your work. If you are feeling tired, If you are feeling tired, If you are feeling tired, it actually can be beneficial to the it actually can be beneficial to the it actually can be beneficial to the wakefulness systems of the brain, wakefulness systems of the brain, wakefulness systems of the brain, including the locus ceruleus and these including the locus ceruleus and these including the locus ceruleus and these areas that release norepinephrine, to areas that release norepinephrine, to areas that release norepinephrine, to actually look up, to actually look up actually look up, to actually look up actually look up, to actually look up toward the ceiling. You don't want your toward the ceiling. You don't want your toward the ceiling. You don't want your chin all the way back, but to look up chin all the way back, but to look up chin all the way back, but to look up and to raise your eyes toward the and to raise your eyes toward the and to raise your eyes toward the ceiling and to look up and try and hold ceiling and to look up and try and hold ceiling and to look up and try and hold that for 10 to 15 seconds. It actually that for 10 to 15 seconds. It actually that for 10 to 15 seconds. It actually triggers some of the areas of the brain triggers some of the areas of the brain triggers some of the areas of the brain that are involved in wakefulness. So, if that are involved in wakefulness. So, if that are involved in wakefulness. So, if you're somebody who's falling asleep at you're somebody who's falling asleep at you're somebody who's falling asleep at your work, your work, your work, this can be very beneficial. When things this can be very beneficial. When things this can be very beneficial. When things are up, we tend to be alert. When are up, we tend to be alert. When are up, we tend to be alert. When everything's focused down, including our everything's focused down, including our everything's focused down, including our eyes, it tends to have a more eyes, it tends to have a more eyes, it tends to have a more suppressive or sedative type signaling suppressive or sedative type signaling suppressive or sedative type signaling to the deeper centers of the brain. How to the deeper centers of the brain. How to the deeper centers of the brain. How can you improve your vision? can you improve your vision? can you improve your vision? How can you get better at seeing things? How can you get better at seeing things? How can you get better at seeing things? Well, one way is to make sure that you Well, one way is to make sure that you Well, one way is to make sure that you spend at least 10 minutes a day total, spend at least 10 minutes a day total, spend at least 10 minutes a day total, at least, viewing things off in the at least, viewing things off in the at least, viewing things off in the distance. So, that would be well over distance. So, that would be well over distance. So, that would be well over half a mile or more. Try and see a half a mile or more. Try and see a half a mile or more. Try and see a horizon. Try and get your vision out to horizon. Try and get your vision out to horizon. Try and get your vision out to a location that's beyond the four walls a location that's beyond the four walls a location that's beyond the four walls of your house or apartment, uh or the of your house or apartment, uh or the of your house or apartment, uh or the doors of your car and the windshield of doors of your car and the windshield of doors of your car and the windshield of your car. I know that can be hard to do, your car. I know that can be hard to do, your car. I know that can be hard to do, but it's very valuable. So, try and see but it's very valuable. So, try and see but it's very valuable. So, try and see at a distance because it's good for your at a distance because it's good for your at a distance because it's good for your eyesight. It'll keep this lens nice and eyesight. It'll keep this lens nice and eyesight. It'll keep this lens nice and elastic and the muscles nice and strong elastic and the muscles nice and strong elastic and the muscles nice and strong that move the lens and that move the lens and that move the lens and it has this relaxing component to it. it has this relaxing component to it. it has this relaxing component to it. Now, our visual system is exquisitely Now, our visual system is exquisitely Now, our visual system is exquisitely tuned to motion. tuned to motion. tuned to motion. Not just our self-generated motion, but Not just our self-generated motion, but Not just our self-generated motion, but the motion of things around us. And one the motion of things around us. And one the motion of things around us. And one of the things that it does is something of the things that it does is something of the things that it does is something called smooth pursuit. Smooth pursuit called smooth pursuit. Smooth pursuit called smooth pursuit. Smooth pursuit is our ability to track is our ability to track is our ability to track individual objects moving, as the name individual objects moving, as the name individual objects moving, as the name suggests, smoothly through space suggests, smoothly through space suggests, smoothly through space in various trajectories. in various trajectories. in various trajectories. You can actually train or improve You can actually train or improve You can actually train or improve your vision your vision your vision by looking at smooth pursuit stimuli. by looking at smooth pursuit stimuli. by looking at smooth pursuit stimuli. And that sounds really boring. Remember, And that sounds really boring. Remember, And that sounds really boring. Remember, the brain follows the eye. It follows the brain follows the eye. It follows the brain follows the eye. It follows the movements of the eye. It has to deal the movements of the eye. It has to deal the movements of the eye. It has to deal with that, and the neural circuits with that, and the neural circuits with that, and the neural circuits within the brain have to cope with within the brain have to cope with within the brain have to cope with changes in smooth pursuit. So, if you're changes in smooth pursuit. So, if you're changes in smooth pursuit. So, if you're doing a lot of reading up close, you're doing a lot of reading up close, you're doing a lot of reading up close, you're not viewing horizons, you're not getting not viewing horizons, you're not getting not viewing horizons, you're not getting a lot of smooth pursuit type stimulation a lot of smooth pursuit type stimulation a lot of smooth pursuit type stimulation from your life, from your life, from your life, or you're just getting it within the or you're just getting it within the or you're just getting it within the confines of a little box on your phone, confines of a little box on your phone, confines of a little box on your phone, your vision will get worse. The idea is your vision will get worse. The idea is your vision will get worse. The idea is that you want to use the visual system you want to use the visual system you want to use the visual system regularly for what it was designed for. regularly for what it was designed for. regularly for what it was designed for. And smooth pursuit is a great way to And smooth pursuit is a great way to And smooth pursuit is a great way to keep the visual and motion tracking keep the visual and motion tracking keep the visual and motion tracking systems of the brain and the eye and the systems of the brain and the eye and the systems of the brain and the eye and the extraocular muscles working in a really extraocular muscles working in a really extraocular muscles working in a really nice coordinated fashion. So, what does nice coordinated fashion. So, what does nice coordinated fashion. So, what does this mean? The tool is this mean? The tool is this mean? The tool is spend 2 to 3 minutes doing smooth spend 2 to 3 minutes doing smooth spend 2 to 3 minutes doing smooth pursuit. There's some programs on pursuit. There's some programs on pursuit. There's some programs on YouTube. Um you can just look up smooth YouTube. Um you can just look up smooth YouTube. Um you can just look up smooth pursuit stimulus. Practice accommodation pursuit stimulus. Practice accommodation pursuit stimulus. Practice accommodation for a few minutes, maybe every other for a few minutes, maybe every other for a few minutes, maybe every other day. Just bringing in something in day. Just bringing in something in day. Just bringing in something in close, you'll feel the strain of your close, you'll feel the strain of your close, you'll feel the strain of your eyes doing that. Move it out. eyes doing that. Move it out. eyes doing that. Move it out. You'll feel a relaxation point. Move it You'll feel a relaxation point. Move it You'll feel a relaxation point. Move it past that relaxation point, where you past that relaxation point, where you past that relaxation point, where you will have to do what's called a vergence will have to do what's called a vergence will have to do what's called a vergence eye movement to maintain focus on that eye movement to maintain focus on that eye movement to maintain focus on that location as it moves out. Bring it back location as it moves out. Bring it back location as it moves out. Bring it back in. Practice that. Practice in. Practice that. Practice in. Practice that. Practice accommodation, and then be sure to give accommodation, and then be sure to give accommodation, and then be sure to give your eyes some rest. Get outside, look your eyes some rest. Get outside, look your eyes some rest. Get outside, look at a horizon, or do nothing. Just kind at a horizon, or do nothing. Just kind at a horizon, or do nothing. Just kind of let your eyes go soft. It's what the of let your eyes go soft. It's what the of let your eyes go soft. It's what the yogis would call soft gaze. Practice a yogis would call soft gaze. Practice a yogis would call soft gaze. Practice a little bit of smooth pursuit. You don't little bit of smooth pursuit. You don't little bit of smooth pursuit. You don't have to be neurotic about this, but you have to be neurotic about this, but you have to be neurotic about this, but you if you do this often enough, if you do this often enough, if you do this often enough, meaning every other day, every third day meaning every other day, every third day meaning every other day, every third day or so, you can be the strange person on or so, you can be the strange person on or so, you can be the strange person on the plane or in the classroom doing the plane or in the classroom doing the plane or in the classroom doing this, you know, that people might this, you know, that people might this, you know, that people might chuckle or look at you funny or tease chuckle or look at you funny or tease chuckle or look at you funny or tease you, but that's okay because you'll be you, but that's okay because you'll be you, but that's okay because you'll be able to see when they are losing their able to see when they are losing their able to see when they are losing their vision. So, you'll get the last laugh. Let's So, you'll get the last laugh. Let's So, you'll get the last laugh. Let's talk about binocular vision and lazy talk about binocular vision and lazy talk about binocular vision and lazy eye. The young brain up until about age The young brain up until about age The young brain up until about age seven, but maybe even extending out seven, but maybe even extending out seven, but maybe even extending out until about age 12, is extremely until about age 12, is extremely until about age 12, is extremely vulnerable to differences in ocular vulnerable to differences in ocular vulnerable to differences in ocular input between the two eyes. input between the two eyes. input between the two eyes. My scientific great-grandparents won the My scientific great-grandparents won the My scientific great-grandparents won the Nobel Prize for discovering so-called Nobel Prize for discovering so-called Nobel Prize for discovering so-called critical periods, periods of time in critical periods, periods of time in critical periods, periods of time in which the brain is more plastic, more which the brain is more plastic, more which the brain is more plastic, more able to change. Those two guys, David able to change. Those two guys, David able to change. Those two guys, David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, thank you Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, thank you Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, thank you David and Torsten, forever changed the David and Torsten, forever changed the David and Torsten, forever changed the face of visual neuroscience and forever face of visual neuroscience and forever face of visual neuroscience and forever changed the way we think about changed the way we think about changed the way we think about treatment of the young brain. It used to treatment of the young brain. It used to treatment of the young brain. It used to be thought that you wouldn't want to do be thought that you wouldn't want to do be thought that you wouldn't want to do a surgery on a young kid because of risk a surgery on a young kid because of risk a surgery on a young kid because of risk of anesthesia in young individuals, but of anesthesia in young individuals, but of anesthesia in young individuals, but we now know that you need to repair we now know that you need to repair we now know that you need to repair these imbalances, that even a few hours these imbalances, that even a few hours these imbalances, that even a few hours of occluding one eye early in life can of occluding one eye early in life can of occluding one eye early in life can lead to permanent, unless something's lead to permanent, unless something's lead to permanent, unless something's done, permanent changes in the way that done, permanent changes in the way that done, permanent changes in the way that the brain perceives the outside world, the brain perceives the outside world, the brain perceives the outside world, such that when that eye is opened up such that when that eye is opened up such that when that eye is opened up again, the brain actually can't make again, the brain actually can't make again, the brain actually can't make sense of anything that's coming through sense of anything that's coming through sense of anything that's coming through it. It shuts down that visual pathway it. It shuts down that visual pathway it. It shuts down that visual pathway somehow. So, what does this all mean in somehow. So, what does this all mean in somehow. So, what does this all mean in terms of protocols? If you're a young terms of protocols? If you're a young terms of protocols? If you're a young person, do your best to get really good person, do your best to get really good person, do your best to get really good binocular vision, not just at level of binocular vision, not just at level of binocular vision, not just at level of your phone or your tablet, but also at your phone or your tablet, but also at your phone or your tablet, but also at distance. You will build strong distance. You will build strong distance. You will build strong binocular visual machinery in the brain binocular visual machinery in the brain binocular visual machinery in the brain and at the level of the eyes and the eye and at the level of the eyes and the eye and at the level of the eyes and the eye musculature. Now, if you're somebody who did have an Now, if you're somebody who did have an Now, if you're somebody who did have an occlusion, what's needed is to cover up occlusion, what's needed is to cover up occlusion, what's needed is to cover up the other eye to create an imbalance so the other eye to create an imbalance so the other eye to create an imbalance so that the weak eye, the so-called lazy that the weak eye, the so-called lazy that the weak eye, the so-called lazy eye, that's sometimes referred to as eye, that's sometimes referred to as eye, that's sometimes referred to as amblyopia, that eye has to work harder. amblyopia, that eye has to work harder. amblyopia, that eye has to work harder. Now, you might ask, what happens if you Now, you might ask, what happens if you Now, you might ask, what happens if you cover both eyes early in life? There are cover both eyes early in life? There are cover both eyes early in life? There are some like retreats and stuff where some like retreats and stuff where some like retreats and stuff where people go into caves with absolutely no people go into caves with absolutely no people go into caves with absolutely no vision. Uh creates hallucinations. We'll talk Uh creates hallucinations. We'll talk Uh creates hallucinations. We'll talk about why that is in just a moment. But, about why that is in just a moment. But, about why that is in just a moment. But, here's my suggestion. Try and get here's my suggestion. Try and get here's my suggestion. Try and get balanced visual input through the two balanced visual input through the two balanced visual input through the two eyes. Almost everybody has a dominant eyes. Almost everybody has a dominant eyes. Almost everybody has a dominant eye. It usually doesn't relate to your eye. It usually doesn't relate to your eye. It usually doesn't relate to your dominant hand, although it can. And so, dominant hand, although it can. And so, dominant hand, although it can. And so, for me, if I cover up my right eye, I for me, if I cover up my right eye, I for me, if I cover up my right eye, I see much less well, much more poorly. see much less well, much more poorly. see much less well, much more poorly. It's a little bit fuzzy and I have to It's a little bit fuzzy and I have to It's a little bit fuzzy and I have to work harder in order to see the camera, work harder in order to see the camera, work harder in order to see the camera, for instance, than if I cover up my left for instance, than if I cover up my left for instance, than if I cover up my left eye. And if you do have strong eye. And if you do have strong eye. And if you do have strong imbalances between the two eyes, imbalances between the two eyes, imbalances between the two eyes, which can be caused by which can be caused by which can be caused by cataract and lens issues, can be uh cataract and lens issues, can be uh cataract and lens issues, can be uh caused by neuromuscular issues, etc. to caused by neuromuscular issues, etc. to caused by neuromuscular issues, etc. to try and get those dealt with as early as try and get those dealt with as early as try and get those dealt with as early as possible by contacting a really good possible by contacting a really good possible by contacting a really good ophthalmologist and ideally a ophthalmologist and ideally a ophthalmologist and ideally a neuro-ophthalmologist. It's very common for young children, It's very common for young children, It's very common for young children, babies, to have an eye that um with babies, to have an eye that um with babies, to have an eye that um with strabismus that either deviates out or strabismus that either deviates out or strabismus that either deviates out or that deviates in. It is important to that deviates in. It is important to that deviates in. It is important to correct that if you would like to have correct that if you would like to have correct that if you would like to have balanced vision between the two eyes and balanced vision between the two eyes and balanced vision between the two eyes and for the brain to respond for the brain to respond for the brain to respond uh equally to the two eyes and to have I uh equally to the two eyes and to have I uh equally to the two eyes and to have I would say high-fidelity quality vision. would say high-fidelity quality vision. would say high-fidelity quality vision. Hallucinations are a property of the Hallucinations are a property of the Hallucinations are a property of the visual system and it was always thought visual system and it was always thought visual system and it was always thought that hallucinations arise because of that hallucinations arise because of that hallucinations arise because of over-activation or activation of certain over-activation or activation of certain over-activation or activation of certain aspects of the visual system. I just aspects of the visual system. I just aspects of the visual system. I just briefly want to mention a paper that was briefly want to mention a paper that was briefly want to mention a paper that was published by my good friend and published by my good friend and published by my good friend and phenomenal uh scientist and physicist, for that uh scientist and physicist, for that uh scientist and physicist, for that matter, Chris Niehl, who's up at the University Chris Niehl, who's up at the University Chris Niehl, who's up at the University of Oregon in Eugene. of Oregon in Eugene. of Oregon in Eugene. They studied LSD-like compounds and They studied LSD-like compounds and They studied LSD-like compounds and discovered that hallucinations actually occur that hallucinations actually occur that hallucinations actually occur because portions of your brain become portions of your brain become portions of your brain become under-active. The visual portions of under-active. The visual portions of under-active. The visual portions of your brain are under-stimulated. This is your brain are under-stimulated. This is your brain are under-stimulated. This is probably why when people go into these probably why when people go into these probably why when people go into these cave retreats, something I've never cave retreats, something I've never cave retreats, something I've never done, um I don't think I ever will do, done, um I don't think I ever will do, done, um I don't think I ever will do, where it's completely black, pretty soon where it's completely black, pretty soon where it's completely black, pretty soon they start hallucinating. They start they start hallucinating. They start they start hallucinating. They start seeing things even though there's seeing things even though there's seeing things even though there's nothing there. The visual system is nothing there. The visual system is nothing there. The visual system is desperate to make guesses about what's desperate to make guesses about what's desperate to make guesses about what's out in the world. It's like the eager out in the world. It's like the eager out in the world. It's like the eager beaver of your brain. It's like, "What's beaver of your brain. It's like, "What's beaver of your brain. It's like, "What's out there? What's out there? What's out there? What's out there? What's out there? What's out there? What's out there?" So, it turns out that hallucinations are an it turns out that hallucinations are an it turns out that hallucinations are an under-activation of the visual system under-activation of the visual system under-activation of the visual system and then a compensatory, a compensation and then a compensatory, a compensation and then a compensatory, a compensation by which the visual system creates by which the visual system creates by which the visual system creates activity and hallucinations. So, if activity and hallucinations. So, if activity and hallucinations. So, if you're in the dark long enough, you you're in the dark long enough, you you're in the dark long enough, you start to hallucinate and see things. So, start to hallucinate and see things. So, start to hallucinate and see things. So, that's a little note about that's a little note about that's a little note about hallucinations. One of the things that you can do to One of the things that you can do to One of the things that you can do to improve your vision, and it's also kind improve your vision, and it's also kind improve your vision, and it's also kind of fun, is to put a Snellen chart in of fun, is to put a Snellen chart in of fun, is to put a Snellen chart in your home. your home. your home. A Snellen chart is that list of letters A Snellen chart is that list of letters A Snellen chart is that list of letters that if you go to the dreaded Department that if you go to the dreaded Department that if you go to the dreaded Department of Motor Vehicles, have you cover up an of Motor Vehicles, have you cover up an of Motor Vehicles, have you cover up an eye, read the eye, read the eye, read the letters on the chart. the letters on the chart. the letters on the chart. The letters, of course, get smaller and The letters, of course, get smaller and The letters, of course, get smaller and smaller. They're trying to figure out smaller. They're trying to figure out smaller. They're trying to figure out roughly what your vision is. Cover up roughly what your vision is. Cover up roughly what your vision is. Cover up the other eye. You'll do that. This is the other eye. You'll do that. This is the other eye. You'll do that. This is something that's not often mentioned, something that's not often mentioned, something that's not often mentioned, but your performance on the Snellen but your performance on the Snellen but your performance on the Snellen chart will vary depending on time of day chart will vary depending on time of day chart will vary depending on time of day because your level of fatigue and your because your level of fatigue and your because your level of fatigue and your ability to control that accommodation ability to control that accommodation ability to control that accommodation and other mechanisms of the eye muscles and other mechanisms of the eye muscles and other mechanisms of the eye muscles will vary. So, you can take it as an will vary. So, you can take it as an will vary. So, you can take it as an average. It's also a good thing if average. It's also a good thing if average. It's also a good thing if you're going to get your vision tested you're going to get your vision tested you're going to get your vision tested for corrective lenses or maybe you're for corrective lenses or maybe you're for corrective lenses or maybe you're going to do laser surgery or something going to do laser surgery or something going to do laser surgery or something of that sort. If you're thinking about of that sort. If you're thinking about of that sort. If you're thinking about any of that, to really get it measured any of that, to really get it measured any of that, to really get it measured by a professional, get your vision by a professional, get your vision by a professional, get your vision tested by somebody who really tested by somebody who really tested by somebody who really understands vision like an understands vision like an understands vision like an ophthalmologist or a really good ophthalmologist or a really good ophthalmologist or a really good optometrist. If you put a Snellen chart in your home, If you put a Snellen chart in your home, If you put a Snellen chart in your home, you know, you can do that as part of you know, you can do that as part of you know, you can do that as part of your visual training. Now, this might your visual training. Now, this might your visual training. Now, this might seem excessively nerdy, but what is more seem excessively nerdy, but what is more seem excessively nerdy, but what is more important than your eyesight? Right? important than your eyesight? Right? important than your eyesight? Right? Eyesight is so vital. It's right up Eyesight is so vital. It's right up Eyesight is so vital. It's right up there with movement and our ability to there with movement and our ability to there with movement and our ability to move, to generate, to get up out of move, to generate, to get up out of move, to generate, to get up out of chairs, and to walk, and to run, and to chairs, and to walk, and to run, and to chairs, and to walk, and to run, and to take care of ourselves. Eyesight and to take care of ourselves. Eyesight and to take care of ourselves. Eyesight and movement are the main ways that we are movement are the main ways that we are movement are the main ways that we are able to take care of ourselves and take able to take care of ourselves and take able to take care of ourselves and take care of others. When you start having care of others. When you start having care of others. When you start having compromised eyesight or compromised eyesight or compromised eyesight or compromised movement, people need to take care of us movement, people need to take care of us movement, people need to take care of us and we become much more challenged in and we become much more challenged in and we become much more challenged in moving through our daily life. So, while moving through our daily life. So, while moving through our daily life. So, while it might seem nerdy to have a Snellen it might seem nerdy to have a Snellen it might seem nerdy to have a Snellen chart in your home or to do of a smooth chart in your home or to do of a smooth chart in your home or to do of a smooth pursuit exercise a couple times a week pursuit exercise a couple times a week pursuit exercise a couple times a week or to get outside for a few hours a day or to get outside for a few hours a day or to get outside for a few hours a day and do your reading or your laptop work and do your reading or your laptop work and do your reading or your laptop work there, preserving your eyesight and preserving your eyesight and preserving your eyesight and preserving your vision is one of the most your vision is one of the most your vision is one of the most life-enhancing or quality of life-enhancing or quality of life-enhancing or quality of life-enhancing things that you can do. life-enhancing things that you can do. life-enhancing things that you can do. Now, of course, there are genetic Now, of course, there are genetic Now, of course, there are genetic factors and there are injury-related factors and there are injury-related factors and there are injury-related factors that can compromise eyesight and factors that can compromise eyesight and factors that can compromise eyesight and our ability to see. our ability to see. our ability to see. And, of course, And, of course, And, of course, this is the things I'm talking about this is the things I'm talking about this is the things I'm talking about today aren't going to solve all those today aren't going to solve all those today aren't going to solve all those issues, but they can have a tremendous issues, but they can have a tremendous issues, but they can have a tremendous positive impact if you're willing to do positive impact if you're willing to do positive impact if you're willing to do just a little bit of work. So, I want I just a little bit of work. So, I want I just a little bit of work. So, I want I do want to talk about a few other things do want to talk about a few other things do want to talk about a few other things that can in that can in that can in perhaps improve vision. I want to dispel perhaps improve vision. I want to dispel perhaps improve vision. I want to dispel a few myths about stuff to take to a few myths about stuff to take to a few myths about stuff to take to improve vision. So, now you understand a improve vision. So, now you understand a improve vision. So, now you understand a lot about the biology of vision. You lot about the biology of vision. You lot about the biology of vision. You understand that light has to arrive at understand that light has to arrive at understand that light has to arrive at the retina and get converted into the retina and get converted into the retina and get converted into electrical signals. electrical signals. electrical signals. That process requires things like That process requires things like That process requires things like vitamin A, a fat-soluble vitamin. vitamin A, a fat-soluble vitamin. vitamin A, a fat-soluble vitamin. It requires things like the carotenoids. It requires things like the carotenoids. It requires things like the carotenoids. That metabolic cascade, that biochemical That metabolic cascade, that biochemical That metabolic cascade, that biochemical cascade, is essential for vision. And this is why is essential for vision. And this is why is essential for vision. And this is why you've been told that carrots help you you've been told that carrots help you you've been told that carrots help you see better cuz they're high in vitamin see better cuz they're high in vitamin see better cuz they're high in vitamin A. There are a few simple things you can do There are a few simple things you can do There are a few simple things you can do to support your vision. to support your vision. to support your vision. First of all, First of all, First of all, it is true it is true it is true that eating vegetables, the dark leafy eating vegetables, the dark leafy eating vegetables, the dark leafy vegetables and things like carrots that vegetables and things like carrots that vegetables and things like carrots that have vitamin A in abundance, have vitamin A in abundance, have vitamin A in abundance, and eating them in close to their raw and eating them in close to their raw and eating them in close to their raw form, so naturally occurring foods that so naturally occurring foods that so naturally occurring foods that contain a lot of vitamin A in their contain a lot of vitamin A in their contain a lot of vitamin A in their raw form can help support vision. Now, raw form can help support vision. Now, raw form can help support vision. Now, does that mean that if you ingest super does that mean that if you ingest super does that mean that if you ingest super physiological amounts of that stuff that physiological amounts of that stuff that physiological amounts of that stuff that it's going to make your vision that much it's going to make your vision that much it's going to make your vision that much better? No. better? No. better? No. But, you do need a threshold level of But, you do need a threshold level of But, you do need a threshold level of vitamin A in order to see. vitamin A in order to see. vitamin A in order to see. And in order to see well. And in order to see well. And in order to see well. Now, there's a lot of excitement nowadays there's a lot of excitement nowadays there's a lot of excitement nowadays about supplementation to help support about supplementation to help support about supplementation to help support the health of the visual system. the health of the visual system. the health of the visual system. But I want to talk about But I want to talk about But I want to talk about a molecule that's in a lot of a molecule that's in a lot of a molecule that's in a lot of supplements to support vision. supplements to support vision. supplements to support vision. And there are some really good data on And there are some really good data on And there are some really good data on and that's lutein. What is this lutein and that's lutein. What is this lutein and that's lutein. What is this lutein stuff? Well, lutein is in the pathway stuff? Well, lutein is in the pathway stuff? Well, lutein is in the pathway that relates to vitamin A and the that relates to vitamin A and the that relates to vitamin A and the formation of the opsin, the formation of the opsin, the formation of the opsin, the photopigment, that captures light in the photopigment, that captures light in the photopigment, that captures light in the back of your eye, literally absorbs back of your eye, literally absorbs back of your eye, literally absorbs light pigment in your eye. light pigment in your eye. light pigment in your eye. And converts that into electrical And converts that into electrical And converts that into electrical signals and allows you to see. signals and allows you to see. signals and allows you to see. And there is some evidence. I spoke to And there is some evidence. I spoke to And there is some evidence. I spoke to our chair of ophthalmology, there is our chair of ophthalmology, there is our chair of ophthalmology, there is some evidence through quality some evidence through quality some evidence through quality peer-reviewed studies that supplementing peer-reviewed studies that supplementing peer-reviewed studies that supplementing with lutein with lutein with lutein can help offset some of the can help offset some of the can help offset some of the detrimental effects of age-related detrimental effects of age-related detrimental effects of age-related macular degeneration, but macular degeneration, but macular degeneration, but I want to emphasize but I want to emphasize but I want to emphasize but I emphasize however I emphasize however I emphasize however only for individuals with moderate to only for individuals with moderate to only for individuals with moderate to severe macular degeneration. For people severe macular degeneration. For people severe macular degeneration. For people that have normal vision or with that have normal vision or with that have normal vision or with a just a low degree of macular a just a low degree of macular a just a low degree of macular degeneration, these studies did not see degeneration, these studies did not see degeneration, these studies did not see a significant improvement of vision from a significant improvement of vision from a significant improvement of vision from supplementing with lutein. supplementing with lutein. supplementing with lutein. And the other one is a s t a x a n t h i And the other one is a s t a x a n t h i And the other one is a s t a x a n t h i n. What is astaxanthin? n. What is astaxanthin? n. What is astaxanthin? It's a really interesting compound. It's a really interesting compound. It's a really interesting compound. It's the red pink pigment found in various the red pink pigment found in various the red pink pigment found in various seafoods. Uh I'm not a big seafood fan, seafoods. Uh I'm not a big seafood fan, seafoods. Uh I'm not a big seafood fan, but like certain fish like the you'll but like certain fish like the you'll but like certain fish like the you'll see at the fish market will have that see at the fish market will have that see at the fish market will have that red pink pigment. And it's also in the red pink pigment. And it's also in the red pink pigment. And it's also in the feathers of flamingos. It's structurally feathers of flamingos. It's structurally feathers of flamingos. It's structurally similar to beta-carotene, so it's very similar to beta-carotene, so it's very similar to beta-carotene, so it's very pro provitamin A. pro provitamin A. pro provitamin A. But it has some chemical differences But it has some chemical differences But it has some chemical differences which may make it safer than vitamin A. which may make it safer than vitamin A. which may make it safer than vitamin A. Remember, vitamin A is a lipid-soluble Remember, vitamin A is a lipid-soluble Remember, vitamin A is a lipid-soluble vitamin, so it can be stored in our body vitamin, so it can be stored in our body vitamin, so it can be stored in our body for long periods of time. for long periods of time. for long periods of time. What is the deal with this astaxanthin? What is the deal with this astaxanthin? What is the deal with this astaxanthin? You know, what are its drawbacks? Well, You know, what are its drawbacks? Well, You know, what are its drawbacks? Well, it has a number of different effects, it has a number of different effects, it has a number of different effects, but the most notable for sake of this but the most notable for sake of this but the most notable for sake of this episode is the one on ocular blood flow. episode is the one on ocular blood flow. episode is the one on ocular blood flow. It does seem to increase the amount of It does seem to increase the amount of It does seem to increase the amount of ocular blood flow, so the blood supply ocular blood flow, so the blood supply ocular blood flow, so the blood supply to the eyes. So, that makes it an to the eyes. So, that makes it an to the eyes. So, that makes it an interesting compound. interesting compound. interesting compound. It's also been shown to have positive It's also been shown to have positive It's also been shown to have positive effects on things like skin elasticity, effects on things like skin elasticity, effects on things like skin elasticity, skin moisture, skin quality, etc. skin moisture, skin quality, etc. skin moisture, skin quality, etc. Probably due to its effects on blood Probably due to its effects on blood Probably due to its effects on blood flow. So, lutein, astaxanthin, a s t a x flow. So, lutein, astaxanthin, a s t a x flow. So, lutein, astaxanthin, a s t a x a n t h i n. So, everything I've talked a n t h i n. So, everything I've talked a n t h i n. So, everything I've talked about today relates to studies that were about today relates to studies that were about today relates to studies that were done and published in quality done and published in quality done and published in quality peer-review journals. That doesn't peer-review journals. That doesn't peer-review journals. That doesn't necessarily mean you want to run out and necessarily mean you want to run out and necessarily mean you want to run out and start taking the stuff that I've start taking the stuff that I've start taking the stuff that I've described or even doing the protocols described or even doing the protocols described or even doing the protocols I've described. I've given you an array, I've described. I've given you an array, I've described. I've given you an array, a pallet, a buffet if you will, of a pallet, a buffet if you will, of a pallet, a buffet if you will, of things that you could do to try and things that you could do to try and things that you could do to try and enhance or support your vision enhance or support your vision enhance or support your vision depending on how good your vision is, depending on how good your vision is, depending on how good your vision is, your uh family history of vision and your uh family history of vision and your uh family history of vision and vision loss, your occupational hazards. vision loss, your occupational hazards. vision loss, your occupational hazards. You know, people that work with uh metal You know, people that work with uh metal You know, people that work with uh metal filings that are flying out of machines filings that are flying out of machines filings that are flying out of machines are going to have a higher uh degree of are going to have a higher uh degree of are going to have a higher uh degree of vision of vision of vision um you know, risk to the visual system um you know, risk to the visual system um you know, risk to the visual system than will people who just do office than will people who just do office than will people who just do office work. Although, if you're doing a lot of work. Although, if you're doing a lot of work. Although, if you're doing a lot of office work, chances are you're not office work, chances are you're not office work, chances are you're not getting a lot of long view vision, your getting a lot of long view vision, your getting a lot of long view vision, your accommodation mechanisms are going to accommodation mechanisms are going to accommodation mechanisms are going to start to suffer over time. I think we start to suffer over time. I think we start to suffer over time. I think we can reliably predict that. So, I tried can reliably predict that. So, I tried can reliably predict that. So, I tried to give you an array of behavioral to give you an array of behavioral to give you an array of behavioral tools, and we did touch upon some and we did touch upon some and we did touch upon some supplementation tools. I'd be remiss if supplementation tools. I'd be remiss if supplementation tools. I'd be remiss if I didn't say that because blood flow is I didn't say that because blood flow is I didn't say that because blood flow is so critical for the neurons of the eye. so critical for the neurons of the eye. so critical for the neurons of the eye. Remember, these are the most Remember, these are the most Remember, these are the most metabolically active cells in your metabolically active cells in your metabolically active cells in your entire body, the cells within your entire body, the cells within your entire body, the cells within your retina. Because blood flow is required retina. Because blood flow is required retina. Because blood flow is required to get them the energy and nutrients to get them the energy and nutrients to get them the energy and nutrients they need, having a healthy they need, having a healthy they need, having a healthy cardiovascular system, cardiovascular system, cardiovascular system, right? Doing endurance work, doing right? Doing endurance work, doing right? Doing endurance work, doing strength training work regularly is strength training work regularly is strength training work regularly is going to support your eyes and your going to support your eyes and your going to support your eyes and your brain and your vision. It's indirect, brain and your vision. It's indirect, brain and your vision. It's indirect, but it's essential, right? It's but it's essential, right? It's but it's essential, right? It's necessary, but it's not going to be necessary, but it's not going to be necessary, but it's not going to be sufficient. You're going to have to do sufficient. You're going to have to do sufficient. You're going to have to do other things to support your eyesight as other things to support your eyesight as other things to support your eyesight as well. But, having a healthy well. But, having a healthy well. But, having a healthy cardiovascular system because it's going cardiovascular system because it's going cardiovascular system because it's going to deliver blood and oxygen and to deliver blood and oxygen and to deliver blood and oxygen and nutrients to this incredible apparati on nutrients to this incredible apparati on nutrients to this incredible apparati on the front of your face, the front of your face, the front of your face, these two pieces of brain, is going to these two pieces of brain, is going to these two pieces of brain, is going to support your overall brain health and support your overall brain health and support your overall brain health and vision over time. Last but not least, I vision over time. Last but not least, I vision over time. Last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and want to thank you for your time and want to thank you for your time and attention today, your willingness to attention today, your willingness to attention today, your willingness to learn about vision and the visual system learn about vision and the visual system learn about vision and the visual system and the various things that you can do and the various things that you can do and the various things that you can do to help support the health and to help support the health and to help support the health and functioning of your visual system. And functioning of your visual system. And functioning of your visual system. And of course, I want to thank you for your of course, I want to thank you for your of course, I want to thank you for your interest in science.