When the moment calls for fierceness, When the moment calls for fierceness, When the moment calls for fierceness, a good Morirani is a killer. And they a good Morirani is a killer. And they a good Morirani is a killer. And they are. They're warriors. They'll kill they are. They're warriors. They'll kill they are. They're warriors. They'll kill you. Don't cross them. When the moment you. Don't cross them. When the moment you. Don't cross them. When the moment calls for tenderness, a good Morirani calls for tenderness, a good Morirani calls for tenderness, a good Morirani will lay down his sword and shield and will lay down his sword and shield and will lay down his sword and shield and be sweet like a baby. What makes a great be sweet like a baby. What makes a great be sweet like a baby. What makes a great Morani is knowing which moment is which. Morani is knowing which moment is which. Morani is knowing which moment is which. Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, where we discuss [music] science and where we discuss [music] science and where we discuss [music] science and science-based tools for everyday life. science-based tools for everyday life. science-based tools for everyday life. &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Terry Reel. Terry Reel is a today is Terry Reel. Terry Reel is a today is Terry Reel. Terry Reel is a therapist and considered one of the therapist and considered one of the therapist and considered one of the world's foremost experts on male world's foremost experts on male world's foremost experts on male psychology and on male female dynamics psychology and on male female dynamics psychology and on male female dynamics in romantic relationships. Today we in romantic relationships. Today we in romantic relationships. Today we discuss what it means to be a man and discuss what it means to be a man and discuss what it means to be a man and the mental health crisis that men are the mental health crisis that men are the mental health crisis that men are facing nowadays. As you may have heard, facing nowadays. As you may have heard, facing nowadays. As you may have heard, rates of depression and suicide are at rates of depression and suicide are at rates of depression and suicide are at an all-time high in men right now. Fewer an all-time high in men right now. Fewer an all-time high in men right now. Fewer and fewer men are in romantic and fewer men are in romantic and fewer men are in romantic relationships, and many don't even have relationships, and many don't even have relationships, and many don't even have a single close friend. And for those a single close friend. And for those a single close friend. And for those that are in romantic relationships, the that are in romantic relationships, the that are in romantic relationships, the public messaging about how to show up in public messaging about how to show up in public messaging about how to show up in those relationships is very conflicted. those relationships is very conflicted. those relationships is very conflicted. Today, we address all of these issues Today, we address all of these issues Today, we address all of these issues headon. Terry explains that to thrive in headon. Terry explains that to thrive in headon. Terry explains that to thrive in life, men have to look at relating as a life, men have to look at relating as a life, men have to look at relating as a skill that requires action and yes, skill that requires action and yes, skill that requires action and yes, feelings, but also processing and feelings, but also processing and feelings, but also processing and communicating those feelings in a communicating those feelings in a communicating those feelings in a specific way and sometimes not specific way and sometimes not specific way and sometimes not communicating them at all. We also communicating them at all. We also communicating them at all. We also discussed the critical importance of discussed the critical importance of discussed the critical importance of fraternity, not necessarily college fraternity, not necessarily college fraternity, not necessarily college fraternities, but finding and belonging fraternities, but finding and belonging fraternities, but finding and belonging to a group of men that you can trust, to a group of men that you can trust, to a group of men that you can trust, that you can enjoy time with, that give that you can enjoy time with, that give that you can enjoy time with, that give you honest feedback, and that hold you honest feedback, and that hold you honest feedback, and that hold you accountable. What I appreciate so much accountable. What I appreciate so much accountable. What I appreciate so much about Terry Reel is that he's willing to about Terry Reel is that he's willing to about Terry Reel is that he's willing to answer the hard questions about men and answer the hard questions about men and answer the hard questions about men and women very directly. And frankly, most women very directly. And frankly, most women very directly. And frankly, most therapists are not willing to do that therapists are not willing to do that therapists are not willing to do that publicly. For example, he explains that publicly. For example, he explains that publicly. For example, he explains that in his extensive work with couples, in his extensive work with couples, in his extensive work with couples, women and men are equally bad at women and men are equally bad at women and men are equally bad at relationships, but in different ways, relationships, but in different ways, relationships, but in different ways, and he offers solutions for them both if and he offers solutions for them both if and he offers solutions for them both if they actually want their relationship to they actually want their relationship to they actually want their relationship to thrive. Thanks to his honesty and thrive. Thanks to his honesty and thrive. Thanks to his honesty and providing practical tools, Terry Reel providing practical tools, Terry Reel providing practical tools, Terry Reel provides us today with essential provides us today with essential provides us today with essential information for men and women of all information for men and women of all information for men and women of all ages. It cuts through all the ages. It cuts through all the ages. It cuts through all the generational differences that certainly generational differences that certainly generational differences that certainly exist to highlight the practical ways exist to highlight the practical ways exist to highlight the practical ways that men can build and support their that men can build and support their that men can build and support their mental health and thrive at work, mental health and thrive at work, mental health and thrive at work, school, and in romantic relationships school, and in romantic relationships school, and in romantic relationships and also just as importantly in their and also just as importantly in their and also just as importantly in their relationship to themselves. That is how relationship to themselves. That is how relationship to themselves. That is how men can build a strong self-concept, men can build a strong self-concept, men can build a strong self-concept, sense of agency, and confidence. Before sense of agency, and confidence. Before sense of agency, and confidence. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Terry Real. Terry Reel, discussion with Terry Real. Terry Reel, discussion with Terry Real. Terry Reel, welcome. &gt;&gt; Uh, it's a pleasure to be here. Thank &gt;&gt; Uh, it's a pleasure to be here. Thank &gt;&gt; Uh, it's a pleasure to be here. Thank you. &gt;&gt; What's going on with men? What's this &gt;&gt; What's going on with men? What's this &gt;&gt; What's going on with men? What's this mental health uh men's crisis suicide mental health uh men's crisis suicide mental health uh men's crisis suicide rates are way up? What's going on? rates are way up? What's going on? rates are way up? What's going on? What's going on is that the old role is What's going on is that the old role is What's going on is that the old role is shifted. The sand is uh shifted under shifted. The sand is uh shifted under shifted. The sand is uh shifted under our feet our feet our feet and we're trying to figure out what the and we're trying to figure out what the and we're trying to figure out what the hell we are and if we're not going to be hell we are and if we're not going to be hell we are and if we're not going to be what our dads and granddads were, what our dads and granddads were, what our dads and granddads were, what are we going to be? and are we going to be? and are we going to be? and we're searching and we're grappling. I we're searching and we're grappling. I we're searching and we're grappling. I got to tell you the other thing that's got to tell you the other thing that's got to tell you the other thing that's going on going on going on is somewhat in reaction to feminism and you somewhat in reaction to feminism and you somewhat in reaction to feminism and you know somebody said about my work women know somebody said about my work women know somebody said about my work women have had a revolution and now men have had a revolution and now men have had a revolution and now men have to deal with it. It's like what are we to deal with it. It's like what are we to deal with it. It's like what are we supposed to do here? And there's been a supposed to do here? And there's been a supposed to do here? And there's been a backlash. Uh there's been a resurgence in our Uh there's been a resurgence in our Uh there's been a resurgence in our country and around the globe of almost a country and around the globe of almost a country and around the globe of almost a celebration of some of the most celebration of some of the most celebration of some of the most difficult unattractive aspects of traditional unattractive aspects of traditional unattractive aspects of traditional masculinity. And we're not sure what it means to be a And we're not sure what it means to be a And we're not sure what it means to be a man anymore. particularly young guys are man anymore. particularly young guys are man anymore. particularly young guys are grappling and um are grappling and um are grappling and um there aren't a lot of healthy examples there aren't a lot of healthy examples there aren't a lot of healthy examples saying, "Okay, here's the new territory. saying, "Okay, here's the new territory. saying, "Okay, here's the new territory. Let me let me show you what it looks Let me let me show you what it looks Let me let me show you what it looks like." Uh the biggest response that I like." Uh the biggest response that I like." Uh the biggest response that I see uh to the confusion about what are see uh to the confusion about what are see uh to the confusion about what are we supposed to do here uh has been uh we supposed to do here uh has been uh we supposed to do here uh has been uh regressive. Let's go back to being regressive. Let's go back to being regressive. Let's go back to being powerful, dominant, entitled, powerful, dominant, entitled, powerful, dominant, entitled, aggressive. Uh, and you see this at the top. You see Uh, and you see this at the top. You see Uh, and you see this at the top. You see this in politics, not just in our this in politics, not just in our this in politics, not just in our country, but all over the globe. Um, country, but all over the globe. Um, country, but all over the globe. Um, autocracy dominance is celebrated. autocracy dominance is celebrated. autocracy dominance is celebrated. And it's like And it's like And it's like we're tired of the woke. We're tired of we're tired of the woke. We're tired of we're tired of the woke. We're tired of being told that we're bad. You know, I being told that we're bad. You know, I being told that we're bad. You know, I grew up in the 60s in the height of grew up in the 60s in the height of grew up in the 60s in the height of feminist and I consider myself a feminist and I consider myself a feminist and I consider myself a feminist family therapist. feminist family therapist. feminist family therapist. &gt;&gt; Did you have long hair in the &gt;&gt; Did you have long hair in the &gt;&gt; Did you have long hair in the &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. And a mustache and the whole &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. And a mustache and the whole &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. And a mustache and the whole thing. Yeah. Yeah, I did. And a lot of thing. Yeah. Yeah, I did. And a lot of thing. Yeah. Yeah, I did. And a lot of drugs. And uh but uh when I grew up, the drugs. And uh but uh when I grew up, the drugs. And uh but uh when I grew up, the joke was um you know, the joke was um you know, the joke was um you know, the philosophical uh if a tree falls in the philosophical uh if a tree falls in the philosophical uh if a tree falls in the woods and no one's there, does it still woods and no one's there, does it still woods and no one's there, does it still make a sound? And when I grew up, it was make a sound? And when I grew up, it was make a sound? And when I grew up, it was uh if a man speaks in the woods and uh if a man speaks in the woods and uh if a man speaks in the woods and there's no one there, is he still wrong? there's no one there, is he still wrong? there's no one there, is he still wrong? &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; That was the first surge of major &gt;&gt; That was the first surge of major &gt;&gt; That was the first surge of major feminism. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, early stage feminism was uh &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, early stage feminism was uh &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, early stage feminism was uh angry. I am proud to say my dear friends angry. I am proud to say my dear friends angry. I am proud to say my dear friends and colleagues who are uh in the and colleagues who are uh in the and colleagues who are uh in the forefront of feminism, Mr. Pel, Carol forefront of feminism, Mr. Pel, Carol forefront of feminism, Mr. Pel, Carol Gilligan are man-loving feminists. But Gilligan are man-loving feminists. But Gilligan are man-loving feminists. But that's that wasn't the first wave. And that's that wasn't the first wave. And that's that wasn't the first wave. And it was really a um understandable it was really a um understandable it was really a um understandable uh reaction to uh reaction to uh reaction to the entitlement and the oppression of the entitlement and the oppression of the entitlement and the oppression of women. But I call that political women. But I call that political women. But I call that political patriarchy and it exists. Look uh you patriarchy and it exists. Look uh you patriarchy and it exists. Look uh you step out of America and it's pretty step out of America and it's pretty step out of America and it's pretty clear uh women are oppressed by men all clear uh women are oppressed by men all clear uh women are oppressed by men all over the globe. That's true. But what I over the globe. That's true. But what I over the globe. That's true. But what I as a psychologist, what I'm interested as a psychologist, what I'm interested as a psychologist, what I'm interested in is what I call psychological in is what I call psychological in is what I call psychological patriarchy. The dynamics of patriarchy. The dynamics of patriarchy. The dynamics of patriarchy. And that can take place between two men, And that can take place between two men, And that can take place between two men, between two women, between a mother and between two women, between a mother and between two women, between a mother and a child, between two races. And the a child, between two races. And the a child, between two races. And the psychology of patriarchy is a straight psychology of patriarchy is a straight psychology of patriarchy is a straight jacket that is, I believe, toxic for jacket that is, I believe, toxic for jacket that is, I believe, toxic for everybody. Uh, now there are some everybody. Uh, now there are some everybody. Uh, now there are some positive traits to traditional positive traits to traditional positive traits to traditional masculinity. It's not completely black masculinity. It's not completely black masculinity. It's not completely black and white, but a lot of it is really and white, but a lot of it is really and white, but a lot of it is really unhealthy. So, a lot of guys reacted to being told, So, a lot of guys reacted to being told, So, a lot of guys reacted to being told, "You're wrong, you're wrong, you're "You're wrong, you're wrong, you're "You're wrong, you're wrong, you're wrong," by, "Hey, I'm throwing off the wrong," by, "Hey, I'm throwing off the wrong," by, "Hey, I'm throwing off the shackles. I'll do what the hell I want." shackles. I'll do what the hell I want." shackles. I'll do what the hell I want." And a kind of celebration of the old And a kind of celebration of the old And a kind of celebration of the old freedoms and the old entitlements. But freedoms and the old entitlements. But freedoms and the old entitlements. But that ain't the way out. And even though that ain't the way out. And even though that ain't the way out. And even though we see this resurgence right now, that we see this resurgence right now, that we see this resurgence right now, that does not breed a happy human being. Uh does not breed a happy human being. Uh does not breed a happy human being. Uh so we need models of progressive so we need models of progressive so we need models of progressive masculinity, not regressive masculinity, not regressive masculinity, not regressive masculinity, and they're rare. and they're rare. and they're rare. Is it possible that now there are more Is it possible that now there are more Is it possible that now there are more templates of what it is to be a man than templates of what it is to be a man than templates of what it is to be a man than there were before? I mean, in my mind, there were before? I mean, in my mind, there were before? I mean, in my mind, in my very simple-minded, in my very simple-minded, in my very simple-minded, not formally educated about this topic, not formally educated about this topic, not formally educated about this topic, except having grown up. except having grown up. except having grown up. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you are a man. You are a guy. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you are a man. You are a guy. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you are a man. You are a guy. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, that's the only &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, that's the only &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, that's the only experience I have, right? So, experience I have, right? So, experience I have, right? So, everything's filtered through my own everything's filtered through my own everything's filtered through my own experience as best as I can try and get experience as best as I can try and get experience as best as I can try and get outside. I mean, outside. I mean, outside. I mean, &gt;&gt; this is where I started and where I'll &gt;&gt; this is where I started and where I'll &gt;&gt; this is where I started and where I'll end up. uh you know that the model that end up. uh you know that the model that end up. uh you know that the model that I was exposed to was okay you know um in I was exposed to was okay you know um in I was exposed to was okay you know um in the 40s and 50s men looked and acted a the 40s and 50s men looked and acted a the 40s and 50s men looked and acted a certain way certain way certain way &gt;&gt; and there it was a fairly narrow &gt;&gt; and there it was a fairly narrow &gt;&gt; and there it was a fairly narrow template &gt;&gt; very narrow &gt;&gt; very narrow &gt;&gt; very narrow &gt;&gt; pretty narrow template &gt;&gt; pretty narrow template &gt;&gt; pretty narrow template &gt;&gt; and pretty inhuman in some ways the &gt;&gt; and pretty inhuman in some ways the &gt;&gt; and pretty inhuman in some ways the essence of traditional masculinity essence of traditional masculinity essence of traditional masculinity which didn't end in the 50s it's still which didn't end in the 50s it's still which didn't end in the 50s it's still with us very much today is stoicism uh with us very much today is stoicism uh with us very much today is stoicism uh The essence of being a man is being The essence of being a man is being The essence of being a man is being invulnerable. The more invulnerable you are, the more The more invulnerable you are, the more The more invulnerable you are, the more manly you are. The more vulnerable you manly you are. The more vulnerable you manly you are. The more vulnerable you are, the more girly you are to this day. are, the more girly you are to this day. are, the more girly you are to this day. And being girly is not a good thing. And being girly is not a good thing. And being girly is not a good thing. Well, there's some problems with that. Well, there's some problems with that. Well, there's some problems with that. One is we are vulnerable as human One is we are vulnerable as human One is we are vulnerable as human beings. That's a lie. Denying our beings. That's a lie. Denying our beings. That's a lie. Denying our vulnerability is a lie. And so I see vulnerability is a lie. And so I see vulnerability is a lie. And so I see chronic anxiety, depression, everybody's chronic anxiety, depression, everybody's chronic anxiety, depression, everybody's in a state of do I measure up? And you in a state of do I measure up? And you in a state of do I measure up? And you don't because what you're trying to don't because what you're trying to don't because what you're trying to measure up to isn't real. You know, I measure up to isn't real. You know, I measure up to isn't real. You know, I say to guys, uh trying to run away say to guys, uh trying to run away say to guys, uh trying to run away from your own vulnerability is like from your own vulnerability is like from your own vulnerability is like trying to outrun your rectum. It has a trying to outrun your rectum. It has a trying to outrun your rectum. It has a way of following you everywhere you go. way of following you everywhere you go. way of following you everywhere you go. We are vulnerable. And the other issue We are vulnerable. And the other issue We are vulnerable. And the other issue with that traditional model of stoicism with that traditional model of stoicism with that traditional model of stoicism is we connect to each other through is we connect to each other through is we connect to each other through vulnerability. That's how human beings vulnerability. That's how human beings vulnerability. That's how human beings connect. And men are walled off. And one connect. And men are walled off. And one connect. And men are walled off. And one of the issues facing us uh is in of the issues facing us uh is in of the issues facing us uh is in heterero relationships. Women across the heterero relationships. Women across the heterero relationships. Women across the West are insisting on levels of West are insisting on levels of West are insisting on levels of emotional connection and openheartedness emotional connection and openheartedness emotional connection and openheartedness and intimacy from their from us guys and intimacy from their from us guys and intimacy from their from us guys that literally were stamped out of us as that literally were stamped out of us as that literally were stamped out of us as boys. You know, the way we turn boys boys. You know, the way we turn boys boys. You know, the way we turn boys into men traditionally in this culture into men traditionally in this culture into men traditionally in this culture is through disconnection. is through disconnection. is through disconnection. You disconnect from your feelings. You disconnect from your feelings. You disconnect from your feelings. You disconnect from vulnerability. You disconnect from vulnerability. You disconnect from vulnerability. You disconnect from others. you disconnect from others. you disconnect from others. you disconnect from your mother. We call all this from your mother. We call all this from your mother. We call all this becoming autonomous. Well, this whole becoming autonomous. Well, this whole becoming autonomous. Well, this whole story of achieving autonomy has nothing story of achieving autonomy has nothing story of achieving autonomy has nothing to do with real psychology. There's no to do with real psychology. There's no to do with real psychology. There's no basis for it at all. It's just basis for it at all. It's just basis for it at all. It's just patriarchy. So, like for example, you know, the So, like for example, you know, the So, like for example, you know, the monoselabic adolescent boy who won't monoselabic adolescent boy who won't monoselabic adolescent boy who won't answer his mother, that's not normal. We answer his mother, that's not normal. We answer his mother, that's not normal. We we think of it as normal. Uh but that's we think of it as normal. Uh but that's we think of it as normal. Uh but that's not psychologically necessary. It is a not psychologically necessary. It is a not psychologically necessary. It is a mandate of traditional masculinity. mandate of traditional masculinity. mandate of traditional masculinity. And I'm here to tell you that And I'm here to tell you that And I'm here to tell you that traditional masculinity is harmful. traditional masculinity is harmful. traditional masculinity is harmful. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. Now, I've been doing entirely online. Now, I've been doing entirely online. Now, I've been doing therapy for a long time, and I can tell therapy for a long time, and I can tell therapy for a long time, and I can tell you that in many ways, it's like a you that in many ways, it's like a you that in many ways, it's like a physical workout. There are days when I physical workout. There are days when I physical workout. There are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I don't want to do it. But whenever I don't want to do it. But whenever I don't want to do it. But whenever I finish a therapy session, every single finish a therapy session, every single finish a therapy session, every single time, I come away feeling better and time, I come away feeling better and time, I come away feeling better and knowing that the time was well spent. knowing that the time was well spent. knowing that the time was well spent. And more often than not, when I finish a And more often than not, when I finish a And more often than not, when I finish a therapy session, I come away with some therapy session, I come away with some therapy session, I come away with some valuable insight, or some cases many valuable insight, or some cases many valuable insight, or some cases many insights, or new perspectives on insights, or new perspectives on insights, or new perspectives on something that I'm working through, something that I'm working through, something that I'm working through, whether it's with work, with whether it's with work, with whether it's with work, with relationships, or with my relationship relationships, or with my relationship relationships, or with my relationship to myself. There is just so much benefit to myself. There is just so much benefit to myself. There is just so much benefit that comes through doing effective that comes through doing effective that comes through doing effective therapy. And with BetterHelp, they make therapy. And with BetterHelp, they make therapy. And with BetterHelp, they make it extremely easy to find an expert it extremely easy to find an expert it extremely easy to find an expert therapist that can help provide those therapist that can help provide those therapist that can help provide those benefits that come through effective benefits that come through effective benefits that come through effective therapy. Also, because BetterHelp is therapy. Also, because BetterHelp is therapy. Also, because BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's very done entirely online, it's very done entirely online, it's very timeefficient. There's no driving to a timeefficient. There's no driving to a timeefficient. There's no driving to a therapist's office looking for parking therapist's office looking for parking therapist's office looking for parking or anything like that. You just log on or anything like that. You just log on or anything like that. You just log on and hold your session. If you would like and hold your session. If you would like and hold your session. If you would like to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by David. David makes a protein bar unlike David. David makes a protein bar unlike David. David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 grams of protein, any other. It has 28 grams of protein, any other. It has 28 grams of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its calories come from protein. of its calories come from protein. of its calories come from protein. That's 50% higher than the next closest That's 50% higher than the next closest That's 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. These bars from David also protein bar. These bars from David also protein bar. These bars from David also taste amazing. Right now, my favorite taste amazing. Right now, my favorite taste amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I also like the chocolate chip but I also like the chocolate chip but I also like the chocolate chip cookie dough flavor, and I also like the cookie dough flavor, and I also like the cookie dough flavor, and I also like the salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like all the flavors. They're all I like all the flavors. They're all I like all the flavors. They're all delicious. Also, big news. David bars delicious. Also, big news. David bars delicious. Also, big news. David bars are now back in stock. They were sold are now back in stock. They were sold are now back in stock. They were sold out for several months because they are out for several months because they are out for several months because they are that popular, but they are now back in that popular, but they are now back in that popular, but they are now back in stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the to get 28 grams of protein in the to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it very calories of a snack, which makes it very calories of a snack, which makes it very easy for me to meet my protein goals of easy for me to meet my protein goals of easy for me to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per day and to do so without weight per day and to do so without weight per day and to do so without eating excess calories. I generally eat eating excess calories. I generally eat eating excess calories. I generally eat a David Bar most afternoons and I always a David Bar most afternoons and I always a David Bar most afternoons and I always keep them with me when I'm away from keep them with me when I'm away from keep them with me when I'm away from home or traveling because they're home or traveling because they're home or traveling because they're incredibly convenient to get enough incredibly convenient to get enough incredibly convenient to get enough protein. As I mentioned, they're protein. As I mentioned, they're protein. As I mentioned, they're incredibly delicious and given that 28 g incredibly delicious and given that 28 g incredibly delicious and given that 28 g of protein, they're pretty filling for of protein, they're pretty filling for of protein, they're pretty filling for just 150 calories. So, they're great just 150 calories. So, they're great just 150 calories. So, they're great between meals as well. If you'd like to between meals as well. If you'd like to between meals as well. If you'd like to try David, you can go to try David, you can go to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Let me ask you about this uh template. Let me ask you about this uh template. Let me ask you about this uh template. Like, so there's the 1940s Like, so there's the 1940s Like, so there's the 1940s went into the 60s somewhat template, went into the 60s somewhat template, went into the 60s somewhat template, right? As Steve Jobs so aptly said, you right? As Steve Jobs so aptly said, you right? As Steve Jobs so aptly said, you know, the 60s really happened in the know, the 60s really happened in the know, the 60s really happened in the 70s. The long hair, the mustaches, most 70s. The long hair, the mustaches, most 70s. The long hair, the mustaches, most of that was in the 70s. Some of it was of that was in the 70s. Some of it was of that was in the 70s. Some of it was in the 60s, but most of it was in the in the 60s, but most of it was in the in the 60s, but most of it was in the 70s. Okay? So there's that very stoic 70s. Okay? So there's that very stoic 70s. Okay? So there's that very stoic template, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Right. Um provider, protector, stoic, &gt;&gt; Right. Um provider, protector, stoic, &gt;&gt; Right. Um provider, protector, stoic, &gt;&gt; no feelings. &gt;&gt; no feelings. &gt;&gt; no feelings. &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. And it's actually &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. And it's actually &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. And it's actually interesting to look I have looked a interesting to look I have looked a interesting to look I have looked a little bit of the history of this. Um little bit of the history of this. Um little bit of the history of this. Um you know, there were even uh diagrams you know, there were even uh diagrams you know, there were even uh diagrams that, you know, men should never stand that, you know, men should never stand that, you know, men should never stand with their hands on their hips because with their hands on their hips because with their hands on their hips because that was like a feminine stance. Never that was like a feminine stance. Never that was like a feminine stance. Never tilt a hip to one side. I mean, this tilt a hip to one side. I mean, this tilt a hip to one side. I mean, this stuff was but it was out there, right? stuff was but it was out there, right? stuff was but it was out there, right? And it was also coupled with etiquette. And it was also coupled with etiquette. And it was also coupled with etiquette. It was very clear how to act, right? It was very clear how to act, right? It was very clear how to act, right? There wasn't much range, but the sort of There wasn't much range, but the sort of There wasn't much range, but the sort of range of things to do and say was fairly range of things to do and say was fairly range of things to do and say was fairly scripted, which I I'll just make I'm not scripted, which I I'll just make I'm not scripted, which I I'll just make I'm not trying to play devil's advocate here, trying to play devil's advocate here, trying to play devil's advocate here, but it made the script simpler but it made the script simpler but it made the script simpler and therefore more accessible, but it and therefore more accessible, but it and therefore more accessible, but it masked a lot of other things is I think masked a lot of other things is I think masked a lot of other things is I think what we both agree on. But then came the what we both agree on. But then came the what we both agree on. But then came the template. You I was born in 75, so I'm template. You I was born in 75, so I'm template. You I was born in 75, so I'm 50 now. Um, 50 now. Um, 50 now. Um, in the late 80s and 90s, it was kind of in the late 80s and 90s, it was kind of in the late 80s and 90s, it was kind of a mishmash of things. We saw our first a mishmash of things. We saw our first a mishmash of things. We saw our first um, gay male characters in television um, gay male characters in television um, gay male characters in television shows. Yes, shows. Yes, shows. Yes, &gt;&gt; we saw also g &gt;&gt; we saw also g &gt;&gt; we saw also g gay female characters, but g gay female characters, but g gay female characters, but since we're talking about men and since we're talking about men and since we're talking about men and masculinity here, that be that was masculinity here, that be that was masculinity here, that be that was the first time I think it was the first time I think it was the first time I think it was the character on the real world San character on the real world San character on the real world San Francisco that um the first character, Francisco that um the first character, Francisco that um the first character, forgive me for not remembering his name, forgive me for not remembering his name, forgive me for not remembering his name, he died of AIDS and it was during the he died of AIDS and it was during the he died of AIDS and it was during the AIDS um AIDS epidemic and AIDS um AIDS epidemic and AIDS um AIDS epidemic and &gt;&gt; Willian Grace and Yeah. &gt;&gt; Willian Grace and Yeah. &gt;&gt; Willian Grace and Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, there was more of that, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, there was more of that, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, there was more of that, right? But there's a difference between having But there's a difference between having But there's a difference between having gay men in the public eye and saying gay men in the public eye and saying gay men in the public eye and saying that the role of straight men had that the role of straight men had that the role of straight men had changed. &gt;&gt; Totally agree. Totally agree. Those are &gt;&gt; Totally agree. Totally agree. Those are &gt;&gt; Totally agree. Totally agree. Those are two separate things, but there was sort two separate things, but there was sort two separate things, but there was sort of an expansion of notions of an expansion of notions of an expansion of notions of maleness. I would say in the 80s and maleness. I would say in the 80s and maleness. I would say in the 80s and 90s, it's almost like um things became 90s, it's almost like um things became 90s, it's almost like um things became somewhat more of a buffet, right? You somewhat more of a buffet, right? You somewhat more of a buffet, right? You had your football jock types, your had your football jock types, your had your football jock types, your finance guys. There was the stoic thing, finance guys. There was the stoic thing, finance guys. There was the stoic thing, the provider protector thing, but then the provider protector thing, but then the provider protector thing, but then there was more of an of an art artsy there was more of an of an art artsy there was more of an of an art artsy artist phenotype. artist phenotype. artist phenotype. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That um emerged as well. You had um I &gt;&gt; That um emerged as well. You had um I &gt;&gt; That um emerged as well. You had um I wouldn't say sensitive artist, but the wouldn't say sensitive artist, but the wouldn't say sensitive artist, but the artistic expression. artistic expression. artistic expression. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Became kind of it was always, but it &gt;&gt; Became kind of it was always, but it &gt;&gt; Became kind of it was always, but it became part of masculinity. became part of masculinity. became part of masculinity. &gt;&gt; Well, you had hippies. &gt;&gt; Well, you had hippies. &gt;&gt; Well, you had hippies. &gt;&gt; You had hippies and then it became and &gt;&gt; You had hippies and then it became and &gt;&gt; You had hippies and then it became and then it was like rock and roll, right? then it was like rock and roll, right? then it was like rock and roll, right? Right. I mean, you had also, not my Right. I mean, you had also, not my Right. I mean, you had also, not my taste, but you had like the bonjovies taste, but you had like the bonjovies taste, but you had like the bonjovies types, you know, you had like long hair types, you know, you had like long hair types, you know, you had like long hair and it was Oh, you're from Jersey. and it was Oh, you're from Jersey. and it was Oh, you're from Jersey. Okay. I've got memory. So, so Bonjov is Okay. I've got memory. So, so Bonjov is Okay. I've got memory. So, so Bonjov is an appropriate example. So, there was an appropriate example. So, there was an appropriate example. So, there was somewhat of an expansion. somewhat of an expansion. somewhat of an expansion. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. There was somewhat of an &gt;&gt; Right. There was somewhat of an &gt;&gt; Right. There was somewhat of an expansion. And then now it seems that expansion. And then now it seems that expansion. And then now it seems that the templates of maleness, I mean some the templates of maleness, I mean some the templates of maleness, I mean some of the most famous musical artists who of the most famous musical artists who of the most famous musical artists who are men and you know report as are men and you know report as are men and you know report as heterosexual from what I know are, you heterosexual from what I know are, you heterosexual from what I know are, you know, dress in what used to be know, dress in what used to be know, dress in what used to be considered a very feminine way, right? considered a very feminine way, right? considered a very feminine way, right? You had that before too, David Bowie. You had that before too, David Bowie. You had that before too, David Bowie. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. I mean, so there's always been a &gt;&gt; Right. I mean, so there's always been a &gt;&gt; Right. I mean, so there's always been a bit of gender bending within this bit of gender bending within this bit of gender bending within this template, but it really, I think, template, but it really, I think, template, but it really, I think, emerged the most in the '9s, and it's emerged the most in the '9s, and it's emerged the most in the '9s, and it's continued forward. And now, when I talk continued forward. And now, when I talk continued forward. And now, when I talk to guys in their 20s, cuz I have friends to guys in their 20s, cuz I have friends to guys in their 20s, cuz I have friends with kids who are now in their late with kids who are now in their late with kids who are now in their late teens and 20s, um, it seems that they teens and 20s, um, it seems that they teens and 20s, um, it seems that they are very comfortable with the idea of are very comfortable with the idea of are very comfortable with the idea of self-expression. I guess this is where self-expression. I guess this is where self-expression. I guess this is where I'm trying to reconcile this notion of I'm trying to reconcile this notion of I'm trying to reconcile this notion of like that we're so you said that we're like that we're so you said that we're like that we're so you said that we're kind of still steeped in the patriarchy, kind of still steeped in the patriarchy, kind of still steeped in the patriarchy, but it seems like the kids in their but it seems like the kids in their but it seems like the kids in their 20s and 30s um and maybe even 40s, they 20s and 30s um and maybe even 40s, they 20s and 30s um and maybe even 40s, they feel like they have options. Well, they feel like they have options. Well, they feel like they have options. Well, they have access to emotion in ways that they have access to emotion in ways that they have access to emotion in ways that we didn't. You know, they were all we didn't. You know, they were all we didn't. You know, they were all raised by feminist mothers. Uh and it raised by feminist mothers. Uh and it raised by feminist mothers. Uh and it had its uh impact. But the problem had its uh impact. But the problem had its uh impact. But the problem is, you know, I see these guys and is, you know, I see these guys and is, you know, I see these guys and they're all whining that women aren't they're all whining that women aren't they're all whining that women aren't attracted to them. And there's a reason attracted to them. And there's a reason attracted to them. And there's a reason for that. A lot of guys who get in touch for that. A lot of guys who get in touch for that. A lot of guys who get in touch with the emotion and the sort of with the emotion and the sort of with the emotion and the sort of more heartfelt uh issues uh bring along more heartfelt uh issues uh bring along more heartfelt uh issues uh bring along with it traditional male privilege. with it traditional male privilege. with it traditional male privilege. So it's like I'm emotional now. Come and So it's like I'm emotional now. Come and So it's like I'm emotional now. Come and take care of me. take care of me. take care of me. And a lot of the women are complaining And a lot of the women are complaining And a lot of the women are complaining that these guys are kind of children. that these guys are kind of children. that these guys are kind of children. They're not they don't stand up. The They're not they don't stand up. The They're not they don't stand up. The issue is this. Can you be big-hearted and open and Can you be big-hearted and open and Can you be big-hearted and open and emotional and show up and be responsible emotional and show up and be responsible emotional and show up and be responsible and be giving? The thing that hasn't and be giving? The thing that hasn't and be giving? The thing that hasn't changed for a lot of us guys is giving. changed for a lot of us guys is giving. changed for a lot of us guys is giving. uh back in the 50s and it was stoic. uh back in the 50s and it was stoic. uh back in the 50s and it was stoic. It's about me. I show up and I am It's about me. I show up and I am It's about me. I show up and I am responsible in ways that our younger responsible in ways that our younger responsible in ways that our younger guys are less responsible than our dads guys are less responsible than our dads guys are less responsible than our dads were. That that's all true. Uh but you were. That that's all true. Uh but you were. That that's all true. Uh but you know, I go out and I fight dragons and I know, I go out and I fight dragons and I know, I go out and I fight dragons and I come home and where's my martini and come home and where's my martini and come home and where's my martini and slippers? Then the 60s came on and slippers? Then the 60s came on and slippers? Then the 60s came on and feminism and uh okay, it's okay to have feminism and uh okay, it's okay to have feminism and uh okay, it's okay to have feelings. It's might even be okay to be feelings. It's might even be okay to be feelings. It's might even be okay to be a little bit uh vulnerable. a little bit uh vulnerable. a little bit uh vulnerable. Um, but it's still about me. Um, but it's still about me. Um, but it's still about me. And when I talk about progressive when I talk about progressive when I talk about progressive masculinity, I want men who are masculinity, I want men who are masculinity, I want men who are big-hearted, strong, connected, and big-hearted, strong, connected, and big-hearted, strong, connected, and giving. And that's missing both in the giving. And that's missing both in the giving. And that's missing both in the um traditional patriarchal model and in um traditional patriarchal model and in um traditional patriarchal model and in many of the countercultural model. You many of the countercultural model. You many of the countercultural model. You know what's missing in our culture? Uh know what's missing in our culture? Uh know what's missing in our culture? Uh I'm going to fade back from men for a I'm going to fade back from men for a I'm going to fade back from men for a moment and talk about generally. What's moment and talk about generally. What's moment and talk about generally. What's missing in our culture generally is missing in our culture generally is missing in our culture generally is relationality. What's missing in our culture uh is the What's missing in our culture uh is the What's missing in our culture uh is the beauty of connection. And look, you beauty of connection. And look, you beauty of connection. And look, you follow the science. I've been saying follow the science. I've been saying follow the science. I've been saying this for 40 years and now the science is this for 40 years and now the science is this for 40 years and now the science is really very clear. Being connected, really very clear. Being connected, really very clear. Being connected, being intimate with yourself and with being intimate with yourself and with being intimate with yourself and with others, uh that's what we humans are others, uh that's what we humans are others, uh that's what we humans are born for. That's how we're designed. born for. That's how we're designed. born for. That's how we're designed. We're pack animals. And the lack of We're pack animals. And the lack of We're pack animals. And the lack of intimate connection uh is not only bad intimate connection uh is not only bad intimate connection uh is not only bad for us psychologically, but I think it for us psychologically, but I think it for us psychologically, but I think it was Vivic Murthy who quoted uh is as bad was Vivic Murthy who quoted uh is as bad was Vivic Murthy who quoted uh is as bad as smoking a pack and a half of as smoking a pack and a half of as smoking a pack and a half of cigarettes a day on your body. We are cigarettes a day on your body. We are cigarettes a day on your body. We are born to be connected and related. born to be connected and related. born to be connected and related. And I wrote about male depression back in I wrote about male depression back in I wrote about male depression back in the 90s. the 90s. the 90s. Um what I said is the way we quote turn Um what I said is the way we quote turn Um what I said is the way we quote turn boys into men is through disconnection. boys into men is through disconnection. boys into men is through disconnection. We tell them to disconnect from their We tell them to disconnect from their We tell them to disconnect from their hearts less so younger men disconnect hearts less so younger men disconnect hearts less so younger men disconnect from others. That's being independent from others. That's being independent from others. That's being independent and autonomous. And the cost of and autonomous. And the cost of and autonomous. And the cost of disconnection is disconnection. disconnection is disconnection. disconnection is disconnection. And some men have recovered more feeling And some men have recovered more feeling And some men have recovered more feeling inside their skin, but they haven't inside their skin, but they haven't inside their skin, but they haven't developed the art of connection. You developed the art of connection. You developed the art of connection. You know, I deal with uh just like you know, I deal with uh just like you know, I deal with uh just like you and many of your uh I deal with high and many of your uh I deal with high and many of your uh I deal with high rollers in my in my practice. And one of rollers in my in my practice. And one of rollers in my in my practice. And one of the things that I teach these guys is the things that I teach these guys is the things that I teach these guys is the difference between gratification and the difference between gratification and the difference between gratification and what I call relational joy. what I call relational joy. what I call relational joy. Gratification is just what you think, a Gratification is just what you think, a Gratification is just what you think, a short-term hit of pleasure. And our short-term hit of pleasure. And our short-term hit of pleasure. And our culture loves gratification. And you culture loves gratification. And you culture loves gratification. And you know, these captains of industry who know, these captains of industry who know, these captains of industry who come in and fly their private planes in come in and fly their private planes in come in and fly their private planes in to see me, they're all about to see me, they're all about to see me, they're all about gratification and they've done gratification and they've done gratification and they've done beautifully at it. You know, they're beautifully at it. You know, they're beautifully at it. You know, they're rich, they're powerful. That's great in rich, they're powerful. That's great in rich, they're powerful. That's great in this place. I'm I like pleasure. There's this place. I'm I like pleasure. There's this place. I'm I like pleasure. There's a deeper pleasure that I call relational a deeper pleasure that I call relational a deeper pleasure that I call relational joy. And you get that as a parent. joy. And you get that as a parent. joy. And you get that as a parent. Sometimes your kids are gratifying. Sometimes your kids are gratifying. Sometimes your kids are gratifying. Sometimes you want to throw them through Sometimes you want to throw them through Sometimes you want to throw them through the goddamn window. But if anybody said, the goddamn window. But if anybody said, the goddamn window. But if anybody said, "Hey, we could do a time machine and you "Hey, we could do a time machine and you "Hey, we could do a time machine and you don't have to have this deck yet because don't have to have this deck yet because don't have to have this deck yet because there's a deeper down joy in just being there's a deeper down joy in just being there's a deeper down joy in just being there and being connected, just being in there and being connected, just being in there and being connected, just being in the relationship." And that's been lost the relationship." And that's been lost the relationship." And that's been lost in our culture. We live in an anti- in our culture. We live in an anti- in our culture. We live in an anti- relational narcissistic culture. And relational narcissistic culture. And relational narcissistic culture. And even though some of the terms of even though some of the terms of even though some of the terms of patriarchy have moved, the narcissism patriarchy have moved, the narcissism patriarchy have moved, the narcissism and the lack of relationality has not and the lack of relationality has not and the lack of relationality has not moved. It's just a different variation. moved. It's just a different variation. moved. It's just a different variation. &gt;&gt; There's a lot there. And I want to um &gt;&gt; There's a lot there. And I want to um &gt;&gt; There's a lot there. And I want to um make sure I ask about this notion of make sure I ask about this notion of make sure I ask about this notion of emotional experience and expression from emotional experience and expression from emotional experience and expression from men. Um, men. Um, men. Um, seems like a very important topic to seems like a very important topic to seems like a very important topic to parse because parse because parse because indeed it seems that indeed it seems that indeed it seems that men now are thanks to your work and men now are thanks to your work and men now are thanks to your work and others are hearing that it's important others are hearing that it's important others are hearing that it's important to feel to feel. to feel to feel. to feel to feel. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That feelings are not just okay, they're &gt;&gt; That feelings are not just okay, they're &gt;&gt; That feelings are not just okay, they're encouraged um that if you bottle them encouraged um that if you bottle them encouraged um that if you bottle them in, you know, we used to hear about this in, you know, we used to hear about this in, you know, we used to hear about this in the context of the impact on heart in the context of the impact on heart in the context of the impact on heart health, right? type A, type B, like if health, right? type A, type B, like if health, right? type A, type B, like if you go back and look at the it was it you go back and look at the it was it you go back and look at the it was it was almost like a mask for this other was almost like a mask for this other was almost like a mask for this other thing. It's still true. You know, you thing. It's still true. You know, you thing. It's still true. You know, you can destroy your heart by smoking can destroy your heart by smoking can destroy your heart by smoking cigarettes and all this other stuff, but cigarettes and all this other stuff, but cigarettes and all this other stuff, but it was really it was about the those it was really it was about the those it was really it was about the those that original typing of people who tend that original typing of people who tend that original typing of people who tend to die early from heart attack. It was to die early from heart attack. It was to die early from heart attack. It was the people who hold it inside. It was the people who hold it inside. It was the people who hold it inside. It was about people who manage a lot, do a about people who manage a lot, do a about people who manage a lot, do a lot, &gt;&gt; but hold inside. And it's kind of &gt;&gt; but hold inside. And it's kind of &gt;&gt; but hold inside. And it's kind of interesting because the ones that turned interesting because the ones that turned interesting because the ones that turned out, and I'm not suggesting people do out, and I'm not suggesting people do out, and I'm not suggesting people do that, screamed and yelled a lot. that that, screamed and yelled a lot. that that, screamed and yelled a lot. that catharsis actually helped them in that catharsis actually helped them in that catharsis actually helped them in terms of longevity. Not saying you terms of longevity. Not saying you terms of longevity. Not saying you should go scream at people um but Steve should go scream at people um but Steve should go scream at people um but Steve Jobs used to um be a big proponent of Jobs used to um be a big proponent of Jobs used to um be a big proponent of scream therapy and um you know and just scream therapy and um you know and just scream therapy and um you know and just getting out there and getting out there and getting out there and vocalizing. But the I think that the vocalizing. But the I think that the vocalizing. But the I think that the real that the question that's in my mind real that the question that's in my mind real that the question that's in my mind is okay so if it's important to feel is okay so if it's important to feel is okay so if it's important to feel then let's just do this as a decision then let's just do this as a decision then let's just do this as a decision tree. Okay. So I think if we agree men tree. Okay. So I think if we agree men tree. Okay. So I think if we agree men need to feel their feelings. Yes. need to feel their feelings. Yes. need to feel their feelings. Yes. &gt;&gt; Then the question becomes should they &gt;&gt; Then the question becomes should they &gt;&gt; Then the question becomes should they feel those alone or in the presence of feel those alone or in the presence of feel those alone or in the presence of someone else? And I'm guessing there's a someone else? And I'm guessing there's a someone else? And I'm guessing there's a case for both. case for both. case for both. &gt;&gt; But then at what point &gt;&gt; But then at what point &gt;&gt; But then at what point &gt;&gt; does one uh not have this um what you &gt;&gt; does one uh not have this um what you &gt;&gt; does one uh not have this um what you refer to as emotional privilege where refer to as emotional privilege where refer to as emotional privilege where it's like putting it on someone else to it's like putting it on someone else to it's like putting it on someone else to take care of them. Could you give an take care of them. Could you give an take care of them. Could you give an example of what healthy expression of an example of what healthy expression of an example of what healthy expression of an emotion is? Let's keep this in the emotion is? Let's keep this in the emotion is? Let's keep this in the context of heterosexual couple for context of heterosexual couple for context of heterosexual couple for simplicity. Obviously it carries over. simplicity. Obviously it carries over. simplicity. Obviously it carries over. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; what is an example of healthy emotional &gt;&gt; what is an example of healthy emotional &gt;&gt; what is an example of healthy emotional expression? Let's say sadness, deep expression? Let's say sadness, deep expression? Let's say sadness, deep sadness &gt;&gt; or frustration and sadness. &gt;&gt; or frustration and sadness. &gt;&gt; or frustration and sadness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; in the presence of a partner. &gt;&gt; in the presence of a partner. &gt;&gt; in the presence of a partner. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That doesn't bring about this thing of &gt;&gt; That doesn't bring about this thing of &gt;&gt; That doesn't bring about this thing of that they're regressing and are some of that they're regressing and are some of that they're regressing and are some now becoming a child. now becoming a child. now becoming a child. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; What does that look like? &gt;&gt; What does that look like? &gt;&gt; What does that look like? &gt;&gt; It looks like a negotiation and not a &gt;&gt; It looks like a negotiation and not a &gt;&gt; It looks like a negotiation and not a demand. Could you tell me more? demand. Could you tell me more? demand. Could you tell me more? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because even in our I'm going to &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because even in our I'm going to &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because even in our I'm going to push us. Even in our talk, push us. Even in our talk, push us. Even in our talk, I don't care about the feelings. I don't care about the feelings. I don't care about the feelings. I care about the connection. I care about the connection. I care about the connection. What what will make us men healthy is What what will make us men healthy is What what will make us men healthy is connection. So, yeah, great. Have your feelings. And So, yeah, great. Have your feelings. And So, yeah, great. Have your feelings. And then what are you going to do with them? then what are you going to do with them? then what are you going to do with them? Uh uh Uh uh Uh uh I uh I used to have no feelings and I uh I used to have no feelings and I uh I used to have no feelings and now I have feelings all over the place now I have feelings all over the place now I have feelings all over the place and I don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about you and I don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about you and I don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about you and your feelings. I want you to pay your feelings. I want you to pay your feelings. I want you to pay attention to me and my feelings. Well, attention to me and my feelings. Well, attention to me and my feelings. Well, is that a step up? I mean, a little bit, is that a step up? I mean, a little bit, is that a step up? I mean, a little bit, but it's not where I want to leave you. but it's not where I want to leave you. but it's not where I want to leave you. Uh so, what I want men to move beyond is Uh so, what I want men to move beyond is Uh so, what I want men to move beyond is our selfishness. our selfishness. our selfishness. And because it's in our interests to And because it's in our interests to And because it's in our interests to move beyond our selfishness move beyond our selfishness move beyond our selfishness and so recovering feeling being stoic or and so recovering feeling being stoic or and so recovering feeling being stoic or having feelings. Sure. That's good. having feelings. Sure. That's good. having feelings. Sure. That's good. That's important. The way we connect is That's important. The way we connect is That's important. The way we connect is through feelings. The way we connect is through feelings. The way we connect is through feelings. The way we connect is through vulnerability. So I was nervous through vulnerability. So I was nervous through vulnerability. So I was nervous coming here talking to you. coming here talking to you. coming here talking to you. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Me? &gt;&gt; Me? &gt;&gt; Me? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I hard to imagine, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I hard to imagine, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I hard to imagine, right? But it's true. But it's true. But it's true. &gt;&gt; Well, it's true. I spent a lot of time &gt;&gt; Well, it's true. I spent a lot of time &gt;&gt; Well, it's true. I spent a lot of time here, so it's a very familiar here, so it's a very familiar here, so it's a very familiar place. But I would hope that's not place. But I would hope that's not place. But I would hope that's not because uh I'm intimidating. No, it's because uh I'm intimidating. No, it's because uh I'm intimidating. No, it's not that. It's more like um there are a not that. It's more like um there are a not that. It's more like um there are a lot of people listening to us right now. lot of people listening to us right now. lot of people listening to us right now. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Who are intensely interested &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Who are intensely interested &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Who are intensely interested in these issues. Men and women, young in these issues. Men and women, young in these issues. Men and women, young and old, are really interested in these and old, are really interested in these and old, are really interested in these issues. &gt;&gt; Yeah. As we should be. &gt;&gt; Yeah. As we should be. &gt;&gt; Yeah. As we should be. &gt;&gt; And not just because men are killing &gt;&gt; And not just because men are killing &gt;&gt; And not just because men are killing themselves more. That too. But also themselves more. That too. But also themselves more. That too. But also because as you pointed out, we are a because as you pointed out, we are a because as you pointed out, we are a oldw world primate species and we are oldw world primate species and we are oldw world primate species and we are not going to go back to living in not going to go back to living in not going to go back to living in troops. Sorry folks. troops. Sorry folks. troops. Sorry folks. &gt;&gt; No. My colleague, &gt;&gt; No. My colleague, &gt;&gt; No. My colleague, &gt;&gt; I like to consider him a friend as well, &gt;&gt; I like to consider him a friend as well, &gt;&gt; I like to consider him a friend as well, Bob Sapolsky. You know, we talk about Bob Sapolsky. You know, we talk about Bob Sapolsky. You know, we talk about this from time to time. It's like, yeah, this from time to time. It's like, yeah, this from time to time. It's like, yeah, that's how we evolved. Guess what, that's how we evolved. Guess what, that's how we evolved. Guess what, folks? There's no little village where folks? There's no little village where folks? There's no little village where everyone moves to. everyone moves to. everyone moves to. &gt;&gt; I know. &gt;&gt; I know. &gt;&gt; I know. &gt;&gt; It's not happening. &gt;&gt; It's not happening. &gt;&gt; It's not happening. &gt;&gt; I know. Well, &gt;&gt; I know. Well, &gt;&gt; I know. Well, &gt;&gt; but we are also very adaptable old world &gt;&gt; but we are also very adaptable old world &gt;&gt; but we are also very adaptable old world primates. &gt;&gt; That's true. &gt;&gt; That's true. &gt;&gt; That's true. &gt;&gt; So, but that the circuitry is not &gt;&gt; So, but that the circuitry is not &gt;&gt; So, but that the circuitry is not going anywhere. We It's a need. So, if I going anywhere. We It's a need. So, if I going anywhere. We It's a need. So, if I could hopefully you're not feeling nervous hopefully you're not feeling nervous hopefully you're not feeling nervous anymore, but [laughter] anymore, but [laughter] anymore, but [laughter] &gt;&gt; Well, but let me ask you a question. &gt;&gt; Well, but let me ask you a question. &gt;&gt; Well, but let me ask you a question. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because what I did is I called our &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because what I did is I called our &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because what I did is I called our mutual friend Bea. mutual friend Bea. mutual friend Bea. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; And I said I was nervous. &gt;&gt; And I said I was nervous. &gt;&gt; And I said I was nervous. &gt;&gt; Is that right? &gt;&gt; Is that right? &gt;&gt; Is that right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And she's wonderful. &gt;&gt; And she's wonderful. &gt;&gt; And she's wonderful. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And she said he's wonderful. Let &gt;&gt; Yeah. And she said he's wonderful. Let &gt;&gt; Yeah. And she said he's wonderful. Let me tell you about Andrew and what's me tell you about Andrew and what's me tell you about Andrew and what's going to happen. And she like read me going to happen. And she like read me going to happen. And she like read me through the whole thing. And little uh through the whole thing. And little uh through the whole thing. And little uh I'm not going to get into it, but my I'm not going to get into it, but my I'm not going to get into it, but my fears about well we're going to disagree fears about well we're going to disagree fears about well we're going to disagree about this and No, you're not. Let me about this and No, you're not. Let me about this and No, you're not. Let me tell you how it is. And after I was done tell you how it is. And after I was done tell you how it is. And after I was done talking to her, I was chilled. talking to her, I was chilled. talking to her, I was chilled. Uh that's a that's a blessing that what Uh that's a that's a blessing that what Uh that's a that's a blessing that what men lose when we don't uh when we're men lose when we don't uh when we're men lose when we don't uh when we're not in touch with our vulnerabilities is not in touch with our vulnerabilities is not in touch with our vulnerabilities is we lose the capacity to ask somebody to we lose the capacity to ask somebody to we lose the capacity to ask somebody to help them but it's ask someone not help them but it's ask someone not help them but it's ask someone not demand and it's also reciprocal. It's demand and it's also reciprocal. It's demand and it's also reciprocal. It's not you know then Bea started talking not you know then Bea started talking not you know then Bea started talking about her relationship and I started about her relationship and I started about her relationship and I started supporting her and that's a relationship supporting her and that's a relationship supporting her and that's a relationship and yes I want men to come out of the and yes I want men to come out of the and yes I want men to come out of the straight jacket and have feelings. I straight jacket and have feelings. I straight jacket and have feelings. I want us to be whole and own our human want us to be whole and own our human want us to be whole and own our human vulnerabilities, but in a context but in a context but in a context in a context in which we're connected to in a context in which we're connected to in a context in which we're connected to other people and we're neither cut off other people and we're neither cut off other people and we're neither cut off from them nor are we imposing on them, from them nor are we imposing on them, from them nor are we imposing on them, but we've learned the art and it's but we've learned the art and it's but we've learned the art and it's virtually lost of how to be with simply virtually lost of how to be with simply virtually lost of how to be with simply how to be with how to ask them to be how to be with how to ask them to be how to be with how to ask them to be with us and how to reciprocate and be with us and how to reciprocate and be with us and how to reciprocate and be with them, you Well, so many women are with them, you Well, so many women are with them, you Well, so many women are angry at us. I mean, I deal I'm the angry at us. I mean, I deal I'm the angry at us. I mean, I deal I'm the medic in the gender war, you know. I medic in the gender war, you know. I medic in the gender war, you know. I deal my beat are couples on the brink of deal my beat are couples on the brink of deal my beat are couples on the brink of divorce that no one else has been able divorce that no one else has been able divorce that no one else has been able to help. That's my specialty. And um to help. That's my specialty. And um to help. That's my specialty. And um it's like it's like it's like we just don't know. I have a saying, and we just don't know. I have a saying, and we just don't know. I have a saying, and I may get into the trouble, but it's a I may get into the trouble, but it's a I may get into the trouble, but it's a broad generalization, but clinically I broad generalization, but clinically I broad generalization, but clinically I like to say an angry woman is a woman like to say an angry woman is a woman like to say an angry woman is a woman who doesn't feel heard. And so many men who doesn't feel heard. And so many men who doesn't feel heard. And so many men are like, "What is going on here? My are like, "What is going on here? My are like, "What is going on here? My marriage isn't that bad, but if you marriage isn't that bad, but if you marriage isn't that bad, but if you could just get her off my back, I don't could just get her off my back, I don't could just get her off my back, I don't understand what the problem is." Uh, and understand what the problem is." Uh, and understand what the problem is." Uh, and you we're hit with an angry Well, I'll you we're hit with an angry Well, I'll you we're hit with an angry Well, I'll double back on this, but we're hit with double back on this, but we're hit with double back on this, but we're hit with an angry woman and we either push back an angry woman and we either push back an angry woman and we either push back or get defensive or withdrawal. I have or get defensive or withdrawal. I have or get defensive or withdrawal. I have to lead men by the hand. Let me teach to lead men by the hand. Let me teach to lead men by the hand. Let me teach you something. Tell me why you're angry. you something. Tell me why you're angry. you something. Tell me why you're angry. Tell me what you would like. Tell me what you would like. Tell me what you would like. Let me give you, unless it's jumping off Let me give you, unless it's jumping off Let me give you, unless it's jumping off the bridge. I have a saying. I know the bridge. I have a saying. I know the bridge. I have a saying. I know how you can disarm an angry woman in how you can disarm an angry woman in how you can disarm an angry woman in five seconds 50% of the time, which is five seconds 50% of the time, which is five seconds 50% of the time, which is better than you're doing. Okay. How do better than you're doing. Okay. How do better than you're doing. Okay. How do you do it? Give her what she wants. Let you do it? Give her what she wants. Let you do it? Give her what she wants. Let me ask you what's going on with you and me ask you what's going on with you and me ask you what's going on with you and do what I can to help out. This is a do what I can to help out. This is a do what I can to help out. This is a skill that's brand new for our culture. skill that's brand new for our culture. skill that's brand new for our culture. And it if I may, it doubles back on And it if I may, it doubles back on And it if I may, it doubles back on the central issue which I hope we get to the central issue which I hope we get to the central issue which I hope we get to of men and self-esteem of men and self-esteem of men and self-esteem because most men in our culture have no because most men in our culture have no because most men in our culture have no idea what healthy self-esteem looks idea what healthy self-esteem looks idea what healthy self-esteem looks like. Well, we uh self-esteem like. Well, we uh self-esteem like. Well, we uh self-esteem comes from the inside out. I have worth comes from the inside out. I have worth comes from the inside out. I have worth because I'm here and I'm breathing. I because I'm here and I'm breathing. I because I'm here and I'm breathing. I don't have to earn it. I can't add to don't have to earn it. I can't add to don't have to earn it. I can't add to it. I can't subtract from it. You know, it. I can't subtract from it. You know, it. I can't subtract from it. You know, it's democracy. My worth is no better or it's democracy. My worth is no better or it's democracy. My worth is no better or worse than yours. I'm born with it. Men worse than yours. I'm born with it. Men worse than yours. I'm born with it. Men are taught outside in self-esteem and are taught outside in self-esteem and are taught outside in self-esteem and it's mostly performance. I have worth it's mostly performance. I have worth it's mostly performance. I have worth because of what I can do. I have big because of what I can do. I have big because of what I can do. I have big muscles. I can land I can give my wife muscles. I can land I can give my wife muscles. I can land I can give my wife an orgasm. I can land this job. I can an orgasm. I can land this job. I can an orgasm. I can land this job. I can hit this homer. hit this homer. hit this homer. That's great when you perform well, but That's great when you perform well, but That's great when you perform well, but when you don't perform well, you go into when you don't perform well, you go into when you don't perform well, you go into shame. What happened to your worth? And shame. What happened to your worth? And shame. What happened to your worth? And so healthy self-esteem, if I may, and I so healthy self-esteem, if I may, and I so healthy self-esteem, if I may, and I may double back and talk more about it, may double back and talk more about it, may double back and talk more about it, which I have to teach men, is the which I have to teach men, is the which I have to teach men, is the capacity to feel proportionally bad capacity to feel proportionally bad capacity to feel proportionally bad about bad behavior. I screwed up. I hurt about bad behavior. I screwed up. I hurt about bad behavior. I screwed up. I hurt you. I'm sorry. And at the same time, you. I'm sorry. And at the same time, you. I'm sorry. And at the same time, hold yourself in warm regard as the hold yourself in warm regard as the hold yourself in warm regard as the imperfect person. And what we do is imperfect person. And what we do is imperfect person. And what we do is we either don't feel bad about bad we either don't feel bad about bad we either don't feel bad about bad behavior. That's shameless. That's behavior. That's shameless. That's behavior. That's shameless. That's grandiose, sociopathic even. Or if we do feel bad, sociopathic even. Or if we do feel bad, sociopathic even. Or if we do feel bad, we go right into shame. I'm a useless we go right into shame. I'm a useless we go right into shame. I'm a useless piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I feel terrible. I have piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I feel terrible. I have piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I feel terrible. I have to teach men to come up out of shame and to teach men to come up out of shame and to teach men to come up out of shame and not be obsessed with the, you know, one not be obsessed with the, you know, one not be obsessed with the, you know, one of the things I say is when you go from of the things I say is when you go from of the things I say is when you go from shameless bad behavior, irresponsible, shameless bad behavior, irresponsible, shameless bad behavior, irresponsible, selfish, insensitive to, oh my god, selfish, insensitive to, oh my god, selfish, insensitive to, oh my god, that's terrible. I'm a big [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I that's terrible. I'm a big [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I that's terrible. I'm a big [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I should just beat the hell out of myself. should just beat the hell out of myself. should just beat the hell out of myself. You're you're trading one form of You're you're trading one form of You're you're trading one form of self-reoccupation or guess what? Another self-reoccupation or guess what? Another self-reoccupation or guess what? Another form of self-p preoccupation. I form of self-p preoccupation. I form of self-p preoccupation. I definitely want to get into self-esteem, definitely want to get into self-esteem, definitely want to get into self-esteem, but I just want to um for my sake and but I just want to um for my sake and but I just want to um for my sake and for some of the listeners, make sure for some of the listeners, make sure for some of the listeners, make sure that I summarize uh two what I think are that I summarize uh two what I think are that I summarize uh two what I think are conclusions and then you can modify conclusions and then you can modify conclusions and then you can modify these &gt;&gt; as it relates to expression of emotion &gt;&gt; as it relates to expression of emotion &gt;&gt; as it relates to expression of emotion which you I and I totally agree. I which you I and I totally agree. I which you I and I totally agree. I mean, you have to be able to feel your mean, you have to be able to feel your mean, you have to be able to feel your feelings. If for no other reason, one feelings. If for no other reason, one feelings. If for no other reason, one good reason, great reason to get started good reason, great reason to get started good reason, great reason to get started on that trajectory is it's great for on that trajectory is it's great for on that trajectory is it's great for your physical health. It's also great your physical health. It's also great your physical health. It's also great for your mental health and your for your mental health and your for your mental health and your relational health, but oftentimes um as relational health, but oftentimes um as relational health, but oftentimes um as you know um men need to be kind of like you know um men need to be kind of like you know um men need to be kind of like led to the trough for a particular led to the trough for a particular led to the trough for a particular carrot and then there additional carrots carrot and then there additional carrots carrot and then there additional carrots in there. But it's holding everything in there. But it's holding everything in there. But it's holding everything inside will kill you. inside will kill you. inside will kill you. &gt;&gt; Yes, it will kill you. &gt;&gt; Yes, it will kill you. &gt;&gt; Yes, it will kill you. &gt;&gt; And it makes everyone else around you &gt;&gt; And it makes everyone else around you &gt;&gt; And it makes everyone else around you miserable too even if you think you're miserable too even if you think you're miserable too even if you think you're protecting them from it. But as you very protecting them from it. But as you very protecting them from it. But as you very importantly pointed out, it can't be a importantly pointed out, it can't be a importantly pointed out, it can't be a dumping of emotion on other people. So dumping of emotion on other people. So dumping of emotion on other people. So what I heard from you was a at least two what I heard from you was a at least two what I heard from you was a at least two very healthy ways to engage emotionally very healthy ways to engage emotionally very healthy ways to engage emotionally for men is one to ask for help. for men is one to ask for help. for men is one to ask for help. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the help from your example, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the help from your example, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the help from your example, you're referring to also a very talented you're referring to also a very talented you're referring to also a very talented therapist, Bea Voce, uh when you called therapist, Bea Voce, uh when you called therapist, Bea Voce, uh when you called Bea was to ask for help by expressing Bea was to ask for help by expressing Bea was to ask for help by expressing what is on your mind as the point of what is on your mind as the point of what is on your mind as the point of concern. Like one is nervous or one is concern. Like one is nervous or one is concern. Like one is nervous or one is sad or um and sad or um and sad or um and &gt;&gt; and I think in my experience, women &gt;&gt; and I think in my experience, women &gt;&gt; and I think in my experience, women naturally reach out to help when you naturally reach out to help when you naturally reach out to help when you couch. &gt;&gt; Everybody does, right? And then the &gt;&gt; Everybody does, right? And then the &gt;&gt; Everybody does, right? And then the &gt;&gt; Can I slow that down for a second, &gt;&gt; Can I slow that down for a second, &gt;&gt; Can I slow that down for a second, Andrew? What we have is what I call the What we have is what I call the What we have is what I call the icorus syndrome. In the absence of icorus syndrome. In the absence of icorus syndrome. In the absence of worthiness, so many of us feel we have to earn love. so many of us feel we have to earn love. so many of us feel we have to earn love. We have to earn worthiness We have to earn worthiness We have to earn worthiness and I like to say guys leave their and I like to say guys leave their and I like to say guys leave their wives. I'll be heterero for a moment. wives. I'll be heterero for a moment. wives. I'll be heterero for a moment. Guys leave their wives and kids go fly Guys leave their wives and kids go fly Guys leave their wives and kids go fly off into the sun to be worthy of love. off into the sun to be worthy of love. off into the sun to be worthy of love. And meanwhile, their wives and kids are And meanwhile, their wives and kids are And meanwhile, their wives and kids are saying, "Where the hell is dad? What saying, "Where the hell is dad? What saying, "Where the hell is dad? What what's going on here?" Well, I I'm off what's going on here?" Well, I I'm off what's going on here?" Well, I I'm off trying to win your love. Well, sit down trying to win your love. Well, sit down trying to win your love. Well, sit down and play Monopoly with us for Christ's and play Monopoly with us for Christ's and play Monopoly with us for Christ's sake. You don't have to do that. It's sake. You don't have to do that. It's sake. You don't have to do that. It's like it's a bill of goods. It's it's a like it's a bill of goods. It's it's a like it's a bill of goods. It's it's a scam that we've all bought. Just sit scam that we've all bought. Just sit scam that we've all bought. Just sit down and be still and be connected. down and be still and be connected. down and be still and be connected. That's all you need to do. But we don't That's all you need to do. But we don't That's all you need to do. But we don't we're not taught that, we're not taught that, we're not taught that, &gt;&gt; right? And uh we'll get back to this &gt;&gt; right? And uh we'll get back to this &gt;&gt; right? And uh we'll get back to this later, but the demands of also and later, but the demands of also and later, but the demands of also and the joy frankly of being a provider and the joy frankly of being a provider and the joy frankly of being a provider and protector many times, not always, involve having many times, not always, involve having many times, not always, involve having to leave the home and go do work. And to leave the home and go do work. And to leave the home and go do work. And frankly, all my friends with kids and uh you all my friends with kids and uh you all my friends with kids and uh you know, and I've certainly experienced know, and I've certainly experienced know, and I've certainly experienced this. It's when you're not able to be this. It's when you're not able to be this. It's when you're not able to be home because you're working, it's home because you're working, it's home because you're working, it's this weird pain. It's like because it's this weird pain. It's like because it's this weird pain. It's like because you I certainly love my work. Being a you I certainly love my work. Being a you I certainly love my work. Being a provider is wonderful and at the same provider is wonderful and at the same provider is wonderful and at the same time there's this pain of not being able time there's this pain of not being able time there's this pain of not being able to be there for things and we can get to be there for things and we can get to be there for things and we can get back to that. but asking for help and back to that. but asking for help and back to that. but asking for help and then in terms of then in terms of then in terms of responding in a in the in a non-gressive responding in a in the in a non-gressive responding in a in the in a non-gressive non um non um non um uh you know entitled way privileged way uh you know entitled way privileged way uh you know entitled way privileged way as you said is as you said is as you said is when a woman is upset the words what do when a woman is upset the words what do when a woman is upset the words what do you need? H that is water in the desert. you need? H that is water in the desert. you need? H that is water in the desert. &gt;&gt; And uh perhaps also what do you need &gt;&gt; And uh perhaps also what do you need &gt;&gt; And uh perhaps also what do you need from me right now? from me right now? from me right now? &gt;&gt; What do you need from me right now? &gt;&gt; What do you need from me right now? &gt;&gt; What do you need from me right now? &gt;&gt; Okay, great. I'm just trying to um put &gt;&gt; Okay, great. I'm just trying to um put &gt;&gt; Okay, great. I'm just trying to um put some structure on this because as there some structure on this because as there some structure on this because as there is also something about the Y chromosome is also something about the Y chromosome is also something about the Y chromosome like we respond well to simple like we respond well to simple like we respond well to simple instructions. &gt;&gt; Okay, I'll take that. &gt;&gt; Okay, I'll take that. &gt;&gt; Okay, I'll take that. &gt;&gt; I believe that I have a whole theory &gt;&gt; I believe that I have a whole theory &gt;&gt; I believe that I have a whole theory about why chromosomes and how men about why chromosomes and how men about why chromosomes and how men evolve to be the way that we are. We can evolve to be the way that we are. We can evolve to be the way that we are. We can talk about maybe at the end for fun talk about maybe at the end for fun talk about maybe at the end for fun because it's somewhat facicious but not because it's somewhat facicious but not because it's somewhat facicious but not really. And then the next thing that really. And then the next thing that really. And then the next thing that you were saying, and I think this is so you were saying, and I think this is so you were saying, and I think this is so critical about self-esteem, critical about self-esteem, critical about self-esteem, is the ability to is the ability to is the ability to accept responsibility when we screw up accept responsibility when we screw up accept responsibility when we screw up and at the same time not and at the same time not and at the same time not take ourselves into a place of shame, to take ourselves into a place of shame, to take ourselves into a place of shame, to be able to still hold on to one sense of be able to still hold on to one sense of be able to still hold on to one sense of goodness. &gt;&gt; I'm a good guy who screwed up. I'm a &gt;&gt; I'm a good guy who screwed up. I'm a &gt;&gt; I'm a good guy who screwed up. I'm a good guy who behaved badly. What if the good guy who behaved badly. What if the good guy who behaved badly. What if the words coming at you are not of that? words coming at you are not of that? words coming at you are not of that? It's not, "Hey, listen. I'm upset cuz It's not, "Hey, listen. I'm upset cuz It's not, "Hey, listen. I'm upset cuz you really dropped the ball on this you really dropped the ball on this you really dropped the ball on this thing." It's, "I'm upset cuz you really thing." It's, "I'm upset cuz you really thing." It's, "I'm upset cuz you really dropped the ball on this thing." And dropped the ball on this thing." And dropped the ball on this thing." And you're and it becomes character uh, you you're and it becomes character uh, you you're and it becomes character uh, you know, characterological know, characterological know, characterological assassination. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That takes an extra level of work. &gt;&gt; That takes an extra level of work. &gt;&gt; That takes an extra level of work. &gt;&gt; It does. &gt;&gt; It does. &gt;&gt; It does. &gt;&gt; And in that case, is your recommendation &gt;&gt; And in that case, is your recommendation &gt;&gt; And in that case, is your recommendation to try and counter that or to just sit to try and counter that or to just sit to try and counter that or to just sit with it and do the work internally to with it and do the work internally to with it and do the work internally to say that's not true? Well, good luck say that's not true? Well, good luck say that's not true? Well, good luck countering it. How's that working? countering it. How's that working? countering it. How's that working? Listen, uh, this is a trap. And look, Listen, uh, this is a trap. And look, Listen, uh, this is a trap. And look, I'm a First of all, the thing is this, I'm a First of all, the thing is this, I'm a First of all, the thing is this, the lack of self-esteem leads us guys to the lack of self-esteem leads us guys to the lack of self-esteem leads us guys to be unaccountable in our relationships. be unaccountable in our relationships. be unaccountable in our relationships. When we're confronted with an When we're confronted with an When we're confronted with an imperfection, we're going to go into shame. We don't we're going to go into shame. We don't we're going to go into shame. We don't have the capacity to feel have the capacity to feel have the capacity to feel proportionately bad about the proportionately bad about the proportionately bad about the imperfection. Okay, you're right. I imperfection. Okay, you're right. I imperfection. Okay, you're right. I screwed up. What can I do to help? It's screwed up. What can I do to help? It's screwed up. What can I do to help? It's like, oh, you mean I didn't hit a homer like, oh, you mean I didn't hit a homer like, oh, you mean I didn't hit a homer and that means I'm a loser. And we and that means I'm a loser. And we and that means I'm a loser. And we defend against the overwhelm of our own defend against the overwhelm of our own defend against the overwhelm of our own lack of selfworth. lack of selfworth. lack of selfworth. What do you mean I'm not perfect? We What do you mean I'm not perfect? We What do you mean I'm not perfect? We defend against that awful feeling. And defend against that awful feeling. And defend against that awful feeling. And it's an awful feeling by warding off the it's an awful feeling by warding off the it's an awful feeling by warding off the criticism. Well, wait a minute. You have criticism. Well, wait a minute. You have criticism. Well, wait a minute. You have to understand. Well, you I mean, you to understand. Well, you I mean, you to understand. Well, you I mean, you know, we do all these defensive things know, we do all these defensive things know, we do all these defensive things that women always complain we do and we that women always complain we do and we that women always complain we do and we do because we're protecting oursel from do because we're protecting oursel from do because we're protecting oursel from the overwhelm of getting swamped. I'm a the overwhelm of getting swamped. I'm a the overwhelm of getting swamped. I'm a bad guy. So, bad guy. So, bad guy. So, interestingly, I teach men self-esteem interestingly, I teach men self-esteem interestingly, I teach men self-esteem as a way of helping them be accountable as a way of helping them be accountable as a way of helping them be accountable in their relationship. in their relationship. in their relationship. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; If you don't have healthy self-esteem, &gt;&gt; If you don't have healthy self-esteem, &gt;&gt; If you don't have healthy self-esteem, you can't afford to be accountable you can't afford to be accountable you can't afford to be accountable because it's too overwhelming to admit because it's too overwhelming to admit because it's too overwhelming to admit how imperfect you are. how imperfect you are. how imperfect you are. &gt;&gt; This is so important what you're saying. &gt;&gt; This is so important what you're saying. &gt;&gt; This is so important what you're saying. Um, also for people who aren't in romantic also for people who aren't in romantic also for people who aren't in romantic relationship, for men it's so critical relationship, for men it's so critical relationship, for men it's so critical because look, we could, in my mind, we because look, we could, in my mind, we because look, we could, in my mind, we could easily transpose boss or feedback. could easily transpose boss or feedback. could easily transpose boss or feedback. Absolutely. And there's I feel like, and Absolutely. And there's I feel like, and Absolutely. And there's I feel like, and again, forgive me for kind of going slow again, forgive me for kind of going slow again, forgive me for kind of going slow here. Um, but I feel like parsing some here. Um, but I feel like parsing some here. Um, but I feel like parsing some of this into a structure is going to of this into a structure is going to of this into a structure is going to help me and hopefully help other people. help me and hopefully help other people. help me and hopefully help other people. They're kind of two forms of criticism They're kind of two forms of criticism They're kind of two forms of criticism that perhaps I've experienced in life. that perhaps I've experienced in life. that perhaps I've experienced in life. I'm being I'm joking. Of course I've I'm being I'm joking. Of course I've I'm being I'm joking. Of course I've experienced it. One is experienced it. One is experienced it. One is someone is upset about what I did. someone is upset about what I did. someone is upset about what I did. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. And I hear you loud and clear even &gt;&gt; Okay. And I hear you loud and clear even &gt;&gt; Okay. And I hear you loud and clear even if it's coming at me with if it's coming at me with if it's coming at me with characterological assassination to have the internal assassination to have the internal assassination to have the internal reservoir of self-esteem that I can hear reservoir of self-esteem that I can hear reservoir of self-esteem that I can hear that what happens to us. And look, I that what happens to us. And look, I that what happens to us. And look, I I've been married 40 years. It's me too. I've been married 40 years. It's me too. I've been married 40 years. It's me too. We get caught in the horrible delivery We get caught in the horrible delivery We get caught in the horrible delivery and we react to the horrible delivery. and we react to the horrible delivery. and we react to the horrible delivery. You know, come on. It's not that bad. Or You know, come on. It's not that bad. Or You know, come on. It's not that bad. Or well, hey, you're talking horrible. well, hey, you're talking horrible. well, hey, you're talking horrible. [gasps] Uh, a black belt in a relational guy. You a black belt in a relational guy. You a black belt in a relational guy. You duck under the horrible delivery. I'm duck under the horrible delivery. I'm duck under the horrible delivery. I'm not saying it's not horrible. It is. But not saying it's not horrible. It is. But not saying it's not horrible. It is. But you try and get to the point that the you try and get to the point that the you try and get to the point that the person's trying to make. Why? It's person's trying to make. Why? It's person's trying to make. Why? It's jiu-jitsu. You duck under the horrible jiu-jitsu. You duck under the horrible jiu-jitsu. You duck under the horrible delivery. You deal with their ouch. And delivery. You deal with their ouch. And delivery. You deal with their ouch. And guess what happens? They calm down. guess what happens? They calm down. guess what happens? They calm down. &gt;&gt; Sure. You react to the horrible &gt;&gt; Sure. You react to the horrible &gt;&gt; Sure. You react to the horrible delivery. That's exaggerated. Blah blah delivery. That's exaggerated. Blah blah delivery. That's exaggerated. Blah blah blah. You're and well, you're off to the blah. You're and well, you're off to the blah. You're and well, you're off to the races. So, but oh my god, what an races. So, but oh my god, what an races. So, but oh my god, what an enlightened man. Your your partner or enlightened man. Your your partner or enlightened man. Your your partner or your boss or your kid is saying, "You're your boss or your kid is saying, "You're your boss or your kid is saying, "You're a shitty human being. You know, this a shitty human being. You know, this a shitty human being. You know, this isn't about your bad behavior. You're isn't about your bad behavior. You're isn't about your bad behavior. You're just a rotten person." That's shame. You just a rotten person." That's shame. You just a rotten person." That's shame. You have enough boundaries. You have enough have enough boundaries. You have enough have enough boundaries. You have enough self-esteem to go, "Well, they're being self-esteem to go, "Well, they're being self-esteem to go, "Well, they're being abusive. This is not the best part of abusive. This is not the best part of abusive. This is not the best part of them." But rather than react to that, them." But rather than react to that, them." But rather than react to that, what are you so upset about, honey? What what are you so upset about, honey? What what are you so upset about, honey? What can I give you right now? And oof, the can I give you right now? And oof, the can I give you right now? And oof, the beauty of these skills is that they beauty of these skills is that they beauty of these skills is that they work. You know, you react to the bad behavior You know, you react to the bad behavior You know, you react to the bad behavior on your partner's part and you're off. on your partner's part and you're off. on your partner's part and you're off. This goes on for hours, days. You duck This goes on for hours, days. You duck This goes on for hours, days. You duck under that and go, "Okay, you're upset. under that and go, "Okay, you're upset. under that and go, "Okay, you're upset. What can I do to help you?" and you that What can I do to help you?" and you that What can I do to help you?" and you that all of that toxicity just passes through all of that toxicity just passes through all of that toxicity just passes through you. That's a real man. And it's like you. That's a real man. And it's like you. That's a real man. And it's like something that could have been misery something that could have been misery something that could have been misery for a day to a week, it calms down in for a day to a week, it calms down in for a day to a week, it calms down in 10, 15 minutes because it's a good job. 10, 15 minutes because it's a good job. 10, 15 minutes because it's a good job. And when I talk to guys, And when I talk to guys, And when I talk to guys, I want to redefine I want to redefine I want to redefine strength. strength in the way we normally think strength in the way we normally think strength in the way we normally think of, you know, it's the rumble and of, you know, it's the rumble and of, you know, it's the rumble and you give me your best shot. I give you give me your best shot. I give you give me your best shot. I give you my best shot. I like jiu-jitsu. my best shot. I like jiu-jitsu. my best shot. I like jiu-jitsu. Duck under it. Duck under the wave. And Duck under it. Duck under the wave. And Duck under it. Duck under the wave. And at the at the end, instead of saying, "I at the at the end, instead of saying, "I at the at the end, instead of saying, "I was really strong. I didn't put up with was really strong. I didn't put up with was really strong. I didn't put up with that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I stood up." No, I want that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I stood up." No, I want that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I stood up." No, I want you to say, "I was really elegant. I you to say, "I was really elegant. I you to say, "I was really elegant. I just sidestepped that whole thing." And just sidestepped that whole thing." And just sidestepped that whole thing." And what might have been a struggle that what might have been a struggle that what might have been a struggle that would go on for days, I just diffused in would go on for days, I just diffused in would go on for days, I just diffused in 10 minutes. Aren't I cool? That's a real 10 minutes. Aren't I cool? That's a real 10 minutes. Aren't I cool? That's a real man in my book. man in my book. man in my book. By now, I'm sure that many of you have By now, I'm sure that many of you have By now, I'm sure that many of you have heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 for more than a decade. And indeed, for more than a decade. And indeed, for more than a decade. And indeed, that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most the highest quality and most the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to drinka1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away six free sample packs of is giving away six free sample packs of is giving away six free sample packs of AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, which by the way is fantastic. It's the which by the way is fantastic. It's the which by the way is fantastic. It's the only sleep supplement I take. It only sleep supplement I take. It only sleep supplement I take. It eliminates [snorts] the need for all eliminates [snorts] the need for all eliminates [snorts] the need for all these pills, and my sleep has never been these pills, and my sleep has never been these pills, and my sleep has never been better. The special offer gives you six better. The special offer gives you six better. The special offer gives you six free samples of that AGZ as well as free samples of that AGZ as well as free samples of that AGZ as well as three AG1 travel packs and a bottle of three AG1 travel packs and a bottle of three AG1 travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your first vitamin D3 K2 with your first vitamin D3 K2 with your first subscription. Just go to subscription. Just go to subscription. Just go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get started. to get started. to get started. Two questions about this scenario that Two questions about this scenario that Two questions about this scenario that we've kind of got um structured here. Um we've kind of got um structured here. Um we've kind of got um structured here. Um there are at least two general types of there are at least two general types of there are at least two general types of uh criticism. One is you did something uh criticism. One is you did something uh criticism. One is you did something you screwed up. you screwed up. you screwed up. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like it you screwed up. You you did the &gt;&gt; Like it you screwed up. You you did the &gt;&gt; Like it you screwed up. You you did the wrong thing. You did the bad thing. You wrong thing. You did the bad thing. You wrong thing. You did the bad thing. You did something poorly. The other is upset did something poorly. The other is upset did something poorly. The other is upset about what you didn't do. about what you didn't do. about what you didn't do. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; And in my limit I'm not a clinician &gt;&gt; And in my limit I'm not a clinician &gt;&gt; And in my limit I'm not a clinician obviously, you know, but in my um obviously, you know, but in my um obviously, you know, but in my um limited number of uh interactions with limited number of uh interactions with limited number of uh interactions with men where they share about a men where they share about a men where they share about a frustration could be from a boss, could frustration could be from a boss, could frustration could be from a boss, could be from um a partner. [clears throat] be from um a partner. [clears throat] be from um a partner. [clears throat] oftentime it's what about it's what oftentime it's what about it's what oftentime it's what about it's what they didn't do. they didn't do. they didn't do. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And they'll confide that the reason they &gt;&gt; And they'll confide that the reason they &gt;&gt; And they'll confide that the reason they didn't do it, the reason it seemed like didn't do it, the reason it seemed like didn't do it, the reason it seemed like they didn't think about it is because they didn't think about it is because they didn't think about it is because they are awfully busy doing all the they are awfully busy doing all the they are awfully busy doing all the other things that come with being a other things that come with being a other things that come with being a provider and a partner uh entails. provider and a partner uh entails. provider and a partner uh entails. Um and there's the real world Um and there's the real world Um and there's the real world constraints of time, right? And and so constraints of time, right? And and so constraints of time, right? And and so it's not like, oh, you know, you forgot it's not like, oh, you know, you forgot it's not like, oh, you know, you forgot the anniversary or you forgot the anniversary or you forgot the anniversary or you forgot the present. It's not this. It's the present. It's not this. It's the present. It's not this. It's the it's the things that never get asked it's the things that never get asked it's the things that never get asked for that someone doesn't just naturally for that someone doesn't just naturally for that someone doesn't just naturally see. But I'm a vision scientist first see. But I'm a vision scientist first see. But I'm a vision scientist first and a neuroscientist second really. And and a neuroscientist second really. And and a neuroscientist second really. And um we have giant blind spots about um we have giant blind spots about um we have giant blind spots about certain things. Women see and hear certain things. Women see and hear certain things. Women see and hear things that we just don't. things that we just don't. things that we just don't. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; And men see and hear things that women &gt;&gt; And men see and hear things that women &gt;&gt; And men see and hear things that women just cannot see. No, you're not allowed just cannot see. No, you're not allowed just cannot see. No, you're not allowed to say that. It's very politically to say that. It's very politically to say that. It's very politically incorrect. But like men see things in incorrect. But like men see things in incorrect. But like men see things in women that they can't see. Women see women that they can't see. Women see women that they can't see. Women see things in men that they can't see. This things in men that they can't see. This things in men that they can't see. This idea that women are all knowing and men idea that women are all knowing and men idea that women are all knowing and men are dopes are dopes are dopes &gt;&gt; is part of what it's part of what got us &gt;&gt; is part of what it's part of what got us &gt;&gt; is part of what it's part of what got us here. &gt;&gt; That's true. That's true. &gt;&gt; That's true. That's true. &gt;&gt; That's true. That's true. &gt;&gt; You know, this notion of like, you know, &gt;&gt; You know, this notion of like, you know, &gt;&gt; You know, this notion of like, you know, the Homer Simpson type thing, the Homer Simpson type thing, the Homer Simpson type thing, &gt;&gt; you know. Um, now there are certainly &gt;&gt; you know. Um, now there are certainly &gt;&gt; you know. Um, now there are certainly men like that, but I would say there's a men like that, but I would say there's a men like that, but I would say there's a real world version of Homer Simpson that real world version of Homer Simpson that real world version of Homer Simpson that was actually working very steadily at was actually working very steadily at was actually working very steadily at his job trying to make things work, you his job trying to make things work, you his job trying to make things work, you know, to, you know, uh, so when it comes know, to, you know, uh, so when it comes know, to, you know, uh, so when it comes to dealing with criticism about what one to dealing with criticism about what one to dealing with criticism about what one did not do, did not do, did not do, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; I can imagine same rules apply, but I &gt;&gt; I can imagine same rules apply, but I &gt;&gt; I can imagine same rules apply, but I think it's only fair to say what think it's only fair to say what think it's only fair to say what aspect of this falls on the partner and aspect of this falls on the partner and aspect of this falls on the partner and the way They raise an issue. the way They raise an issue. the way They raise an issue. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; obviously characterological &gt;&gt; obviously characterological &gt;&gt; obviously characterological assassinations are not going to help. assassinations are not going to help. assassinations are not going to help. &gt;&gt; They make the jiu-jitsu harder. &gt;&gt; They make the jiu-jitsu harder. &gt;&gt; They make the jiu-jitsu harder. &gt;&gt; It makes it harder to accept &gt;&gt; It makes it harder to accept &gt;&gt; It makes it harder to accept responsibility, but it's going to responsibility, but it's going to responsibility, but it's going to happen. It's going to scale with how bad happen. It's going to scale with how bad happen. It's going to scale with how bad the infraction was. Right. Okay. Um, but the infraction was. Right. Okay. Um, but the infraction was. Right. Okay. Um, but what is a healthy delivery of a what is a healthy delivery of a what is a healthy delivery of a criticism? Is it all eye statements? Is criticism? Is it all eye statements? Is criticism? Is it all eye statements? Is it purely based on how one feels? Um, it purely based on how one feels? Um, it purely based on how one feels? Um, I'm not trying to distribute I'm not trying to distribute I'm not trying to distribute responsibility here, but let's be responsibility here, but let's be responsibility here, but let's be honest, it's a two-way street. honest, it's a two-way street. honest, it's a two-way street. &gt;&gt; It's more than a two-way street. And &gt;&gt; It's more than a two-way street. And &gt;&gt; It's more than a two-way street. And again, let's own these are broad again, let's own these are broad again, let's own these are broad generalities. We we both understand generalities. We we both understand generalities. We we both understand that, but we we're speaking simply that, but we we're speaking simply that, but we we're speaking simply because we got to start somewhere. because we got to start somewhere. because we got to start somewhere. &gt;&gt; So, I teach women, too, how to be &gt;&gt; So, I teach women, too, how to be &gt;&gt; So, I teach women, too, how to be relational. I'm not saying men aren't relational. I'm not saying men aren't relational. I'm not saying men aren't relational, and women are. We're both relational, and women are. We're both relational, and women are. We're both pretty screwed up in this in this pretty screwed up in this in this pretty screwed up in this in this culture. And uh the tough news for a culture. And uh the tough news for a culture. And uh the tough news for a lot of women uh I have 8 million lot of women uh I have 8 million lot of women uh I have 8 million sayings and one of them is you don't sayings and one of them is you don't sayings and one of them is you don't have the right to get mad about not have the right to get mad about not have the right to get mad about not getting what you never asked for. getting what you never asked for. getting what you never asked for. &gt;&gt; Could you repeat that? &gt;&gt; Could you repeat that? &gt;&gt; Could you repeat that? &gt;&gt; You don't have the right to get mad &gt;&gt; You don't have the right to get mad &gt;&gt; You don't have the right to get mad about not getting what you never asked about not getting what you never asked about not getting what you never asked for. And that's a that's women stepping for. And that's a that's women stepping for. And that's a that's women stepping out of their traditional role. What do out of their traditional role. What do out of their traditional role. What do you mean I have to tell them? like you mean I have to tell them? like you mean I have to tell them? like Prince Charming should just know if I Prince Charming should just know if I Prince Charming should just know if I have to tell him it doesn't count. I have to tell him it doesn't count. I have to tell him it doesn't count. I mean, I literally hear that. And you mean, I literally hear that. And you mean, I literally hear that. And you know what I say is, "Well, gals, uh, know what I say is, "Well, gals, uh, know what I say is, "Well, gals, uh, Cinderella's dead. Uh, Prince Charming Cinderella's dead. Uh, Prince Charming Cinderella's dead. Uh, Prince Charming probably just came out of rehab, and I probably just came out of rehab, and I probably just came out of rehab, and I hate to tell you, but I know it's not hate to tell you, but I know it's not hate to tell you, but I know it's not romantic, but if you want something from romantic, but if you want something from romantic, but if you want something from your guy, you're going to have to roll your guy, you're going to have to roll your guy, you're going to have to roll up your sleeves and fight for it. You're up your sleeves and fight for it. You're up your sleeves and fight for it. You're going to have to assert what you want going to have to assert what you want going to have to assert what you want and then teach him what you want." And and then teach him what you want." And and then teach him what you want." And there are three steps of getting more of there are three steps of getting more of there are three steps of getting more of what you want in a relationship. And what you want in a relationship. And what you want in a relationship. And this particularly true for women because this particularly true for women because this particularly true for women because they're the ones carrying the they're the ones carrying the they're the ones carrying the dissatisfaction. One, dare to rock the dissatisfaction. One, dare to rock the dissatisfaction. One, dare to rock the boat. Honey, this is really important to boat. Honey, this is really important to boat. Honey, this is really important to me. I don't think you've been listening. me. I don't think you've been listening. me. I don't think you've been listening. You better pay attention. Two, once the You better pay attention. Two, once the You better pay attention. Two, once the guy is on board, okay, what do you what guy is on board, okay, what do you what guy is on board, okay, what do you what do I need? Teach him. Don't expect them do I need? Teach him. Don't expect them do I need? Teach him. Don't expect them to know. I've been listening to women to know. I've been listening to women to know. I've been listening to women for 40 years tell me men don't know how for 40 years tell me men don't know how for 40 years tell me men don't know how to be relational. Guess what? I believe to be relational. Guess what? I believe to be relational. Guess what? I believe you. So, how are they going to know how you. So, how are they going to know how you. So, how are they going to know how to be relational if you don't tell them? to be relational if you don't tell them? to be relational if you don't tell them? Not that you're the objective teacher. Not that you're the objective teacher. Not that you're the objective teacher. That's a trap. But subjectively with That's a trap. But subjectively with That's a trap. But subjectively with humility, this is Sally instructions. humility, this is Sally instructions. humility, this is Sally instructions. This is what I want from you to make me This is what I want from you to make me This is what I want from you to make me happy. But roll up your sleeves and show happy. But roll up your sleeves and show happy. But roll up your sleeves and show them what you want and then reward them what you want and then reward them what you want and then reward them when they try and give it to you. People when they try and give it to you. People when they try and give it to you. People don't do any of that in this culture. don't do any of that in this culture. don't do any of that in this culture. You know, the concrete example is You know, the concrete example is You know, the concrete example is uh John Gray, God bless him, made uh John Gray, God bless him, made uh John Gray, God bless him, made millions of dollars on this. Men problem millions of dollars on this. Men problem millions of dollars on this. Men problem solve listening and women want empathic solve listening and women want empathic solve listening and women want empathic listening. There's nothing wrong with listening. There's nothing wrong with listening. There's nothing wrong with either. What's wrong is it doesn't get either. What's wrong is it doesn't get either. What's wrong is it doesn't get negotiated up front. So, I teach women negotiated up front. So, I teach women negotiated up front. So, I teach women to say, "Listen, I'm going to talk to say, "Listen, I'm going to talk to say, "Listen, I'm going to talk to you about a fight I had with a you about a fight I had with a you about a fight I had with a girlfriend. 10, 15 minutes." First of girlfriend. 10, 15 minutes." First of girlfriend. 10, 15 minutes." First of all, it helps to limit it. Guys here, we all, it helps to limit it. Guys here, we all, it helps to limit it. Guys here, we have to talk. They think they're in to 4 have to talk. They think they're in to 4 have to talk. They think they're in to 4 in the morning. 15 minutes. In that 15 in the morning. 15 minutes. In that 15 in the morning. 15 minutes. In that 15 minutes, I want you to be like a minutes, I want you to be like a minutes, I want you to be like a girlfriend. I want there. That sucks. girlfriend. I want there. That sucks. girlfriend. I want there. That sucks. Tell me more about I want you to do Tell me more about I want you to do Tell me more about I want you to do empathically. This is what it looks empathically. This is what it looks empathically. This is what it looks like. We're passive in our like. We're passive in our like. We're passive in our relationships. We let we let each other relationships. We let we let each other relationships. We let we let each other do what we do and then we complain about do what we do and then we complain about do what we do and then we complain about it. We can do shape it up. More it. We can do shape it up. More it. We can do shape it up. More assertion up front, less resentment on assertion up front, less resentment on assertion up front, less resentment on the back end. So roll up your sleeves the back end. So roll up your sleeves the back end. So roll up your sleeves and teach your guy what you want. I and teach your guy what you want. I and teach your guy what you want. I don't want you to solve my problems. I don't want you to solve my problems. I don't want you to solve my problems. I want you to do this instead. as a favor want you to do this instead. as a favor want you to do this instead. as a favor to me, would you do it? Not, I'm God's to me, would you do it? Not, I'm God's to me, would you do it? Not, I'm God's gift to relationship. This is what you gift to relationship. This is what you gift to relationship. This is what you need. No, as a favor to me, would you do need. No, as a favor to me, would you do need. No, as a favor to me, would you do it? And then three, once the guy starts it? And then three, once the guy starts it? And then three, once the guy starts to do it, encourage him. Don't to do it, encourage him. Don't to do it, encourage him. Don't discourage him. We all, oh, too little, discourage him. We all, oh, too little, discourage him. We all, oh, too little, too late. You did a half. I tell women, too late. You did a half. I tell women, too late. You did a half. I tell women, celebrate the glass 14% full. It was celebrate the glass 14% full. It was celebrate the glass 14% full. It was only 5% full a week ago. Hey, you did a only 5% full a week ago. Hey, you did a only 5% full a week ago. Hey, you did a halfass job. Good for you. what are we halfass job. Good for you. what are we halfass job. Good for you. what are we going to do to get the other half on? Uh going to do to get the other half on? Uh going to do to get the other half on? Uh but we're discouraging people because we but we're discouraging people because we but we're discouraging people because we don't want to be vulnerable and receive. don't want to be vulnerable and receive. don't want to be vulnerable and receive. There's an art to receiving. So there's There's an art to receiving. So there's There's an art to receiving. So there's an art on both sides of how to work a an art on both sides of how to work a an art on both sides of how to work a relationship. And um I have to teach women how to be And um I have to teach women how to be And um I have to teach women how to be more um empowering of their partner and more um empowering of their partner and more um empowering of their partner and less complaining of them. Uh, and I less complaining of them. Uh, and I less complaining of them. Uh, and I believe in that and that's often believe in that and that's often believe in that and that's often their work. Uh, but you can't sit around their work. Uh, but you can't sit around their work. Uh, but you can't sit around and wait for your partner to do it and wait for your partner to do it and wait for your partner to do it right. You have to be able to respond right. You have to be able to respond right. You have to be able to respond whether on Tuesday they do it whether on Tuesday they do it whether on Tuesday they do it beautifully. On Thursday, they're a beautifully. On Thursday, they're a beautifully. On Thursday, they're a goddamn [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but you still have to goddamn [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but you still have to goddamn [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but you still have to respond well. This is your own respond well. This is your own respond well. This is your own integrity. And it's a great freedom to integrity. And it's a great freedom to integrity. And it's a great freedom to uh take it upon yourself to behave with uh take it upon yourself to behave with uh take it upon yourself to behave with integrity and skill integrity and skill integrity and skill independent of what your partner's doing independent of what your partner's doing independent of what your partner's doing on their side of the seessaw. It doesn't on their side of the seessaw. It doesn't on their side of the seessaw. It doesn't always work, but it's your best shot. always work, but it's your best shot. always work, but it's your best shot. And uh you don't have to be a slave to And uh you don't have to be a slave to And uh you don't have to be a slave to their immaturity. If every time they're their immaturity. If every time they're their immaturity. If every time they're immature, you jump in the mud pit with immature, you jump in the mud pit with immature, you jump in the mud pit with them. You're a flag in their wind. It's them. You're a flag in their wind. It's them. You're a flag in their wind. It's liberating. You're immature right now. liberating. You're immature right now. liberating. You're immature right now. I could be immature five minutes from I could be immature five minutes from I could be immature five minutes from now, but I'm going to meet your now, but I'm going to meet your now, but I'm going to meet your immaturity with my maturity right now. immaturity with my maturity right now. immaturity with my maturity right now. That is a very beautiful thing. That is a very beautiful thing. That is a very beautiful thing. Amazing. uh question about Amazing. uh question about Amazing. uh question about childhood patterns, but rather than get right into patterns, but rather than get right into patterns, but rather than get right into the parents piece of it, the parents piece of it, the parents piece of it, &gt;&gt; Mhm. which I want to um have this very &gt;&gt; Mhm. which I want to um have this very &gt;&gt; Mhm. which I want to um have this very crude model in my head that goes crude model in my head that goes crude model in my head that goes something like we all have an like an something like we all have an like an something like we all have an like an inner child or a childlike part of inner child or a childlike part of inner child or a childlike part of ourselves and there's a healthy part and ourselves and there's a healthy part and ourselves and there's a healthy part and an unhealthy part because it's kind of an unhealthy part because it's kind of an unhealthy part because it's kind of wonderful at least in my experience um wonderful at least in my experience um wonderful at least in my experience um to be in the company of someone to be in the company of someone to be in the company of someone especially a romantic partner where you especially a romantic partner where you especially a romantic partner where you can be in your kind of like childlike uh can be in your kind of like childlike uh can be in your kind of like childlike uh &gt;&gt; I call that the natural child &gt;&gt; I call that the natural child &gt;&gt; I call that the natural child &gt;&gt; the natural child right it's healthy &gt;&gt; the natural child right it's healthy &gt;&gt; the natural child right it's healthy it's explorative it's fun it's explorative it's fun it's explorative it's fun it's sweet and um and um and sometimes it's sweet and um and um and sometimes it's sweet and um and um and sometimes it's mischievous. Um I've certainly observed mischievous. Um I've certainly observed mischievous. Um I've certainly observed that. Um that. Um that. Um &gt;&gt; but it's lovable. &gt;&gt; but it's lovable. &gt;&gt; but it's lovable. &gt;&gt; It's very lovable. Uh and then there's &gt;&gt; It's very lovable. Uh and then there's &gt;&gt; It's very lovable. Uh and then there's the unhealthy uh child and that could the unhealthy uh child and that could the unhealthy uh child and that could take the form of, you know, brattiness, take the form of, you know, brattiness, take the form of, you know, brattiness, entitlement, um whatever, closing up. I entitlement, um whatever, closing up. I entitlement, um whatever, closing up. I mean, it could be any variety of things. mean, it could be any variety of things. mean, it could be any variety of things. Um I imagine that a great number of people I imagine that a great number of people I imagine that a great number of people listening to this conversation are in listening to this conversation are in listening to this conversation are in relationship and a great number of them relationship and a great number of them relationship and a great number of them are not. how much work and what kind of are not. how much work and what kind of are not. how much work and what kind of work can be done to understand those two work can be done to understand those two work can be done to understand those two parts of oneself on one's own maybe even parts of oneself on one's own maybe even parts of oneself on one's own maybe even if you're in a relationship because uh if you're in a relationship because uh if you're in a relationship because uh that unhealthy child is a very uh that unhealthy child is a very uh that unhealthy child is a very uh dangerous thing to show up dangerous thing to show up dangerous thing to show up &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; in relationship it can be very &gt;&gt; in relationship it can be very &gt;&gt; in relationship it can be very destructive very fast destructive very fast destructive very fast &gt;&gt; um so if I were a patient [laughter] &gt;&gt; um so if I were a patient [laughter] &gt;&gt; um so if I were a patient [laughter] &gt;&gt; uh client I don't know what you call &gt;&gt; uh client I don't know what you call &gt;&gt; uh client I don't know what you call them do you call them clients them do you call them clients them do you call them clients &gt;&gt; customer no client &gt;&gt; customer no client &gt;&gt; customer no client &gt;&gt; client if I were a client and I just &gt;&gt; client if I were a client and I just &gt;&gt; client if I were a client and I just said okay yeah I don't want to talk said okay yeah I don't want to talk said okay yeah I don't want to talk about my parents right now. We about my parents right now. We about my parents right now. We can do that later. Um, but I know the can do that later. Um, but I know the can do that later. Um, but I know the healthy childlike part of myself and I healthy childlike part of myself and I healthy childlike part of myself and I think I know the unhealthy one and then think I know the unhealthy one and then think I know the unhealthy one and then like what's some good work that I could like what's some good work that I could like what's some good work that I could do to have those understood and have do to have those understood and have do to have those understood and have them in their proper place. them in their proper place. them in their proper place. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So that I make sure that I keep like the &gt;&gt; So that I make sure that I keep like the &gt;&gt; So that I make sure that I keep like the bad child like Andrew locked away and bad child like Andrew locked away and bad child like Andrew locked away and the good child like Andrew the good child like Andrew the good child like Andrew &gt;&gt; at appropriate times let him out to &gt;&gt; at appropriate times let him out to &gt;&gt; at appropriate times let him out to play. Right. I mean, I'm very fortunate play. Right. I mean, I'm very fortunate play. Right. I mean, I'm very fortunate that my girlfriend now like she's very that my girlfriend now like she's very that my girlfriend now like she's very good at expressing that healthy child, good at expressing that healthy child, good at expressing that healthy child, the natural child part of her and she's the natural child part of her and she's the natural child part of her and she's also a woman and that part just shuts also a woman and that part just shuts also a woman and that part just shuts down and then she can be in that mode or down and then she can be in that mode or down and then she can be in that mode or and they uh you know I've seen this and they uh you know I've seen this and they uh you know I've seen this before. It's really wonderful to before. It's really wonderful to before. It's really wonderful to experience to and when those mesh very experience to and when those mesh very experience to and when those mesh very seamlessly it's also just awesome. seamlessly it's also just awesome. seamlessly it's also just awesome. You're like wow it's like total ninja You're like wow it's like total ninja You're like wow it's like total ninja virtuoso of this. virtuoso of this. virtuoso of this. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Let's say I'm not then what does the &gt;&gt; Let's say I'm not then what does the &gt;&gt; Let's say I'm not then what does the work look like? Okay. So, first of all, work look like? Okay. So, first of all, work look like? Okay. So, first of all, it um you're in relationships. Anybody it um you're in relationships. Anybody it um you're in relationships. Anybody listening to this podcast is in a listening to this podcast is in a listening to this podcast is in a relationship. It may not be an intimate relationship. It may not be an intimate relationship. It may not be an intimate sexual relationship, but you've got a sexual relationship, but you've got a sexual relationship, but you've got a boss, you've got colleagues, you've got boss, you've got colleagues, you've got boss, you've got colleagues, you've got aunts and uncles, you have cousins, you aunts and uncles, you have cousins, you aunts and uncles, you have cousins, you have a dog. We're all embedded in have a dog. We're all embedded in have a dog. We're all embedded in relationships. And the work is the same relationships. And the work is the same relationships. And the work is the same uh no matter what. Uh relational skills uh no matter what. Uh relational skills uh no matter what. Uh relational skills are relational skills. So, I don't care are relational skills. So, I don't care are relational skills. So, I don't care whether you're single or whether you've whether you're single or whether you've whether you're single or whether you've been married for 40 years. That's the been married for 40 years. That's the been married for 40 years. That's the same thing that that's a. So here's my same thing that that's a. So here's my same thing that that's a. So here's my model. That natural child, leave him be, model. That natural child, leave him be, model. That natural child, leave him be, enjoy, let him play, enjoy, let him play, enjoy, let him play, love him, enjoy him. That's our love him, enjoy him. That's our love him, enjoy him. That's our creativity. And and interestingly creativity. And and interestingly creativity. And and interestingly enough, that's erotic in the broadest enough, that's erotic in the broadest enough, that's erotic in the broadest sense of the word. It's that's the life sense of the word. It's that's the life sense of the word. It's that's the life force. That's spontaneity. And you know, force. That's spontaneity. And you know, force. That's spontaneity. And you know, that's unhampered, that's unhampered, that's unhampered, unwounded. Uh that's a beautiful part of unwounded. Uh that's a beautiful part of unwounded. Uh that's a beautiful part of us. Um that's fine. Leave it alone. us. Um that's fine. Leave it alone. us. Um that's fine. Leave it alone. Celebrate it. Celebrate it. Celebrate it. What you call the unhealthy child. What you call the unhealthy child. What you call the unhealthy child. Here's my model. Here's my model. Here's my model. And uh interestingly, this jibes with And uh interestingly, this jibes with And uh interestingly, this jibes with Dan Seagull, the neuro uh scientist. Um Dan Seagull, the neuro uh scientist. Um Dan Seagull, the neuro uh scientist. Um so I talk about the wise adult part of so I talk about the wise adult part of so I talk about the wise adult part of us, prefrontal cortex us, prefrontal cortex us, prefrontal cortex that can stop and think and reason and that can stop and think and reason and that can stop and think and reason and choose. That's the part I'm trying to choose. That's the part I'm trying to choose. That's the part I'm trying to grow and cultivate and give skills to. grow and cultivate and give skills to. grow and cultivate and give skills to. The issue is when the heat comes on uh The issue is when the heat comes on uh The issue is when the heat comes on uh and it really has to do with trauma. and it really has to do with trauma. and it really has to do with trauma. When something happens in the present When something happens in the present When something happens in the present that is similar to what was dangerous or that is similar to what was dangerous or that is similar to what was dangerous or injured us in the past could be a injured us in the past could be a injured us in the past could be a violation, could be abandonment. It violation, could be abandonment. It violation, could be abandonment. It could be either an act of uh could be either an act of uh could be either an act of uh mistreatment or neglect. either mistreatment or neglect. either mistreatment or neglect. either when something in the present, you know when something in the present, you know when something in the present, you know this, of course, we don't remember this, of course, we don't remember this, of course, we don't remember trauma, we relive it. So the combat bit trauma, we relive it. So the combat bit trauma, we relive it. So the combat bit hears a car backfire and turns around hears a car backfire and turns around hears a car backfire and turns around like she's got a gun in her hand. She's like she's got a gun in her hand. She's like she's got a gun in her hand. She's not thinking, I'm walking down Main not thinking, I'm walking down Main not thinking, I'm walking down Main Street remembering combat. She's in Street remembering combat. She's in Street remembering combat. She's in combat. The the present goes away combat. The the present goes away combat. The the present goes away and it's subcortical lyic system amydala and it's subcortical lyic system amydala and it's subcortical lyic system amydala and you get flooded. and you get flooded. and you get flooded. That's what we call the wounded child. That's what we call the wounded child. That's what we call the wounded child. Very young when I do experiential work Very young when I do experiential work Very young when I do experiential work with somebody first minutes of life with somebody first minutes of life with somebody first minutes of life through four or five years old. And through four or five years old. And through four or five years old. And that's all feeling that that's the part that's all feeling that that's the part that's all feeling that that's the part of you that just experienced it. Between of you that just experienced it. Between of you that just experienced it. Between this very mature present-based part of this very mature present-based part of this very mature present-based part of us and this totally flooded, very us and this totally flooded, very us and this totally flooded, very primitive part of us is the part you primitive part of us is the part you primitive part of us is the part you call the bad child. I call it the call the bad child. I call it the call the bad child. I call it the adaptive child. adaptive child. adaptive child. This is the you This is the you This is the you that you learn to be to cope with that you learn to be to cope with that you learn to be to cope with whatever was going on with you. And it's whatever was going on with you. And it's whatever was going on with you. And it's neither, you know, fight, flight, or neither, you know, fight, flight, or neither, you know, fight, flight, or fawn. Uh, it's automatic. It's fawn. Uh, it's automatic. It's fawn. Uh, it's automatic. It's subcortical. And it's utterly subcortical. And it's utterly subcortical. And it's utterly compelling. I've got to stand up for compelling. I've got to stand up for compelling. I've got to stand up for myself. I've got to shut this down. I've myself. I've got to shut this down. I've myself. I've got to shut this down. I've got to fix you if you're upset or I got to fix you if you're upset or I got to fix you if you're upset or I won't. These are basic, you know, these won't. These are basic, you know, these won't. These are basic, you know, these are animal survival instincts. are animal survival instincts. are animal survival instincts. And when you're in the adaptive child, And when you're in the adaptive child, And when you're in the adaptive child, you won't use relational skills because you won't use relational skills because you won't use relational skills because you're not interested in relationship. you're not interested in relationship. you're not interested in relationship. You're interested in survival. It's You're interested in survival. It's You're interested in survival. It's literally a different part of our literally a different part of our literally a different part of our neurology. And the work I do, I call it relational And the work I do, I call it relational And the work I do, I call it relational mindfulness. When you're flooded, you got to bring When you're flooded, you got to bring When you're flooded, you got to bring the prefrontal cortex back online. Take the prefrontal cortex back online. Take the prefrontal cortex back online. Take a walk. Take 10 breaths. Go around the a walk. Take 10 breaths. Go around the a walk. Take 10 breaths. Go around the block. Take a break. I'm a big fan of block. Take a break. I'm a big fan of block. Take a break. I'm a big fan of breaks. Get reentered in the more breaks. Get reentered in the more breaks. Get reentered in the more thoughtful, non- flooded part of you. thoughtful, non- flooded part of you. thoughtful, non- flooded part of you. Dan calls it the responsive brain Dan calls it the responsive brain Dan calls it the responsive brain instead of the reactive brain. When instead of the reactive brain. When instead of the reactive brain. When you're reentered, I call it remembering you're reentered, I call it remembering you're reentered, I call it remembering love. You remember the person you're love. You remember the person you're love. You remember the person you're talking to as someone you care about. talking to as someone you care about. talking to as someone you care about. Then you go back and you try. Then you go back and you try. Then you go back and you try. But we all struggle with these adaptive But we all struggle with these adaptive But we all struggle with these adaptive child parts. I deal with couples on the child parts. I deal with couples on the child parts. I deal with couples on the brink of divorce. Almost all of them brink of divorce. Almost all of them brink of divorce. Almost all of them have been living in their adaptive child have been living in their adaptive child have been living in their adaptive child thinking that that's an adult. And the thinking that that's an adult. And the thinking that that's an adult. And the world will reward you. The world will world will reward you. The world will world will reward you. The world will reward an adaptive child, but you'll reward an adaptive child, but you'll reward an adaptive child, but you'll make a hash in your family life. So make a hash in your family life. So make a hash in your family life. So fight, flight, or fix. Anybody listening today, flight, or fix. Anybody listening today, flight, or fix. Anybody listening today, when you're flooded, when you're an when you're flooded, when you're an when you're flooded, when you're an automatic, because that's the hallmark automatic, because that's the hallmark automatic, because that's the hallmark of the adaptive child is automatic. of the adaptive child is automatic. of the adaptive child is automatic. Fight, flight, or fix. What are you and Fight, flight, or fix. What are you and Fight, flight, or fix. What are you and what's your partner? And then what's the what's your partner? And then what's the what's your partner? And then what's the dance between you? The more I fight, the dance between you? The more I fight, the dance between you? The more I fight, the more they fix. The more they fix. Okay. more they fix. The more they fix. Okay. more they fix. The more they fix. Okay. The way out of this is to bring your The way out of this is to bring your The way out of this is to bring your thinking brain back online. And the thinking brain back online. And the thinking brain back online. And the beauty here is that capacity. I call it beauty here is that capacity. I call it beauty here is that capacity. I call it relational mindfulness. That capacity to relational mindfulness. That capacity to relational mindfulness. That capacity to remember to think to bring yourself back remember to think to bring yourself back remember to think to bring yourself back into the present can be cultivated and into the present can be cultivated and into the present can be cultivated and grown. So can I give you a story? Enough grown. So can I give you a story? Enough grown. So can I give you a story? Enough talk. Let me tell talk. Let me tell talk. Let me tell &gt;&gt; I Yes, please. Uh before I just want &gt;&gt; I Yes, please. Uh before I just want &gt;&gt; I Yes, please. Uh before I just want to make sure I ask one question about to make sure I ask one question about to make sure I ask one question about when one enters this adaptive child. I when one enters this adaptive child. I when one enters this adaptive child. I think that's how the which is reactive think that's how the which is reactive think that's how the which is reactive in the moment at worst and one can learn in the moment at worst and one can learn in the moment at worst and one can learn to dance with that and uh turn on their to dance with that and uh turn on their to dance with that and uh turn on their prefrontal cortex and remind prefrontal cortex and remind prefrontal cortex and remind themselves this is a relationship that I themselves this is a relationship that I themselves this is a relationship that I care about and there's etc. um taking care about and there's etc. um taking care about and there's etc. um taking space a break is something space a break is something space a break is something &gt;&gt; essential &gt;&gt; essential &gt;&gt; essential &gt;&gt; is essential. &gt;&gt; is essential. &gt;&gt; is essential. &gt;&gt; What's the best way to ask for that? &gt;&gt; What's the best way to ask for that? &gt;&gt; What's the best way to ask for that? Because here's perhaps something I've Because here's perhaps something I've Because here's perhaps something I've observed. Um observed. Um observed. Um things are getting ratcheted up things are getting ratcheted up things are getting ratcheted up internally, maybe both people, and internally, maybe both people, and internally, maybe both people, and you need space. you need space. you need space. &gt;&gt; Yes. You ask for space like, "Hey, I &gt;&gt; Yes. You ask for space like, "Hey, I &gt;&gt; Yes. You ask for space like, "Hey, I need to take a break to be able to hear need to take a break to be able to hear need to take a break to be able to hear this." Or and then the other person gets this." Or and then the other person gets this." Or and then the other person gets very upset because it activates their very upset because it activates their very upset because it activates their sense of abandonment. sense of abandonment. sense of abandonment. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; And it runs countercurrent to this idea &gt;&gt; And it runs countercurrent to this idea &gt;&gt; And it runs countercurrent to this idea that we need to stand in the face of it, that we need to stand in the face of it, that we need to stand in the face of it, jiu-jitsu it, etc. Like that it's a it's jiu-jitsu it, etc. Like that it's a it's jiu-jitsu it, etc. Like that it's a it's a pause. We're not talking about like, a pause. We're not talking about like, a pause. We're not talking about like, hey, I'm leaving for a week. We're not hey, I'm leaving for a week. We're not hey, I'm leaving for a week. We're not talking about I'm leaving for an hour talking about I'm leaving for an hour talking about I'm leaving for an hour even. It's just need to decompress this. even. It's just need to decompress this. even. It's just need to decompress this. Um, if that's met with additional criticism if that's met with additional criticism if that's met with additional criticism about the request, um, that can be about the request, um, that can be about the request, um, that can be problematic. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And common is mud. So, here's what &gt;&gt; Yeah. And common is mud. So, here's what &gt;&gt; Yeah. And common is mud. So, here's what you do. you do. you do. Contract for it when the heat is not on. Contract for it when the heat is not on. Contract for it when the heat is not on. Listen, honey. I get flooded and you Listen, honey. I get flooded and you Listen, honey. I get flooded and you don't want me flooded. I'm not nice. I don't want me flooded. I'm not nice. I don't want me flooded. I'm not nice. I won't be nice. I won't be skilled when won't be nice. I won't be skilled when won't be nice. I won't be skilled when I'm flooded. I need to collect myself. I'm flooded. I need to collect myself. I'm flooded. I need to collect myself. It's in your interest to let me go It's in your interest to let me go It's in your interest to let me go collect yourself. collect yourself. collect yourself. Um, I have a skill for everything. And Um, I have a skill for everything. And Um, I have a skill for everything. And this is a skill I call responsible this is a skill I call responsible this is a skill I call responsible distance taking. Most of us take distance taking. Most of us take distance taking. Most of us take unilateral. I'm just I'm gone. No, I'm unilateral. I'm just I'm gone. No, I'm unilateral. I'm just I'm gone. No, I'm gone. Here's why. And here's when I'm gone. Here's why. And here's when I'm gone. Here's why. And here's when I'm coming back. It's not a rupture. It's a coming back. It's not a rupture. It's a coming back. It's not a rupture. It's a break. So, if I have a partner who's break. So, if I have a partner who's break. So, if I have a partner who's vulnerable to abandonment, vulnerable to abandonment, vulnerable to abandonment, if I go, I'm gone. Boom. They're chasing if I go, I'm gone. Boom. They're chasing if I go, I'm gone. Boom. They're chasing me. This is a good example of relational This is a good example of relational This is a good example of relational skill. If I want distance, let me take skill. If I want distance, let me take skill. If I want distance, let me take care of my partner so she'll give me care of my partner so she'll give me care of my partner so she'll give me distance. If I don't take care of you, distance. If I don't take care of you, distance. If I don't take care of you, I'm going to get chased. Is in my I'm going to get chased. Is in my I'm going to get chased. Is in my interest to behave with skill. So I say interest to behave with skill. So I say interest to behave with skill. So I say to you, when we're not flooded, to you, when we're not flooded, to you, when we're not flooded, let's have a contract. I get flooded. We let's have a contract. I get flooded. We let's have a contract. I get flooded. We don't like it when I get flooded. I want don't like it when I get flooded. I want don't like it when I get flooded. I want to take a break. Here's what it looks to take a break. Here's what it looks to take a break. Here's what it looks like. 15, 20 minutes and then I'm back. like. 15, 20 minutes and then I'm back. like. 15, 20 minutes and then I'm back. If I'm not in control, I'll text you or If I'm not in control, I'll text you or If I'm not in control, I'll text you or call you and say, "I need another I'll call you and say, "I need another I'll call you and say, "I need another I'll negotiate with you, but I'm not going to negotiate with you, but I'm not going to negotiate with you, but I'm not going to leave you. I'm not going to be leave you. I'm not going to be leave you. I'm not going to be irresponsible. It's not unilateral and irresponsible. It's not unilateral and irresponsible. It's not unilateral and it's not forever. I will be back. it's not forever. I will be back. it's not forever. I will be back. What do you need in order to be calm What do you need in order to be calm What do you need in order to be calm enough to let me go?" enough to let me go?" enough to let me go?" Uh, and nine out of 10en times is like, Uh, and nine out of 10en times is like, Uh, and nine out of 10en times is like, "This contract is fine. Remind me of the "This contract is fine. Remind me of the "This contract is fine. Remind me of the contract. I'm taking a time out so I can contract. I'm taking a time out so I can contract. I'm taking a time out so I can be with you. be with you. be with you. 20 minutes I'll be back. Here's why. 20 minutes I'll be back. Here's why. 20 minutes I'll be back. Here's why. Here's when I'm coming back." Okay. No Here's when I'm coming back." Okay. No Here's when I'm coming back." Okay. No abandonment. Leave those steps out. You abandonment. Leave those steps out. You abandonment. Leave those steps out. You get abandonment. So, it's a really good get abandonment. So, it's a really good get abandonment. So, it's a really good example of how using relational skills example of how using relational skills example of how using relational skills in your interests. in your interests. in your interests. &gt;&gt; That's very helpful. Thank you. I also &gt;&gt; That's very helpful. Thank you. I also &gt;&gt; That's very helpful. Thank you. I also realize that how resourced realize that how resourced realize that how resourced one shows up to interactions like this one shows up to interactions like this one shows up to interactions like this is a big part of it. I mean, if you're is a big part of it. I mean, if you're is a big part of it. I mean, if you're sleepd deprived, overworked. I mean, sleepd deprived, overworked. I mean, sleepd deprived, overworked. I mean, you've got stuff coming at you from you've got stuff coming at you from you've got stuff coming at you from other angles. kid has been up all night, other angles. kid has been up all night, other angles. kid has been up all night, you know, it financial issues, you know, you know, it financial issues, you know, you know, it financial issues, you know, if the well is low, if the well is low, if the well is low, um, access to these skills becomes um, access to these skills becomes um, access to these skills becomes infinitely harder infinitely harder infinitely harder &gt;&gt; harder and &gt;&gt; harder and &gt;&gt; harder and I don't believe in pleading special I don't believe in pleading special I don't believe in pleading special circumstances. This [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is relentless. circumstances. This [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is relentless. circumstances. This [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is relentless. You don't get a pass. I don't care if You don't get a pass. I don't care if You don't get a pass. I don't care if you're up all night with the kids. I be you're up all night with the kids. I be you're up all night with the kids. I be immature. be unskilled. be immature. be unskilled. be immature. be unskilled. I can understand why you would be and I can understand why you would be and I can understand why you would be and brother, you'll pay the price. So, yeah, brother, you'll pay the price. So, yeah, brother, you'll pay the price. So, yeah, I get it. You're sleepd deprived. It's I get it. You're sleepd deprived. It's I get it. You're sleepd deprived. It's harder to be mature. And when you behave harder to be mature. And when you behave harder to be mature. And when you behave immaturely, this is the crap you're immaturely, this is the crap you're immaturely, this is the crap you're going to wind up with. It's instant going to wind up with. It's instant going to wind up with. It's instant karma. So, the beauty in this is karma. So, the beauty in this is karma. So, the beauty in this is remembering it's in my interest to remembering it's in my interest to remembering it's in my interest to behave artfully. It's not for them. And behave artfully. It's not for them. And behave artfully. It's not for them. And one of my sons is uh in residency right one of my sons is uh in residency right one of my sons is uh in residency right now and he's out of his mind and he's now and he's out of his mind and he's now and he's out of his mind and he's sleepd deprived. And so we don't hear sleepd deprived. And so we don't hear sleepd deprived. And so we don't hear from him for, you know, a week. And um from him for, you know, a week. And um from him for, you know, a week. And um uh and his mom calls. I'm worried about uh and his mom calls. I'm worried about uh and his mom calls. I'm worried about you. I've been calling. You don't text. you. I've been calling. You don't text. you. I've been calling. You don't text. I'm worried you're like dead on the I'm worried you're like dead on the I'm worried you're like dead on the street. You know, I know I'm crazy, but street. You know, I know I'm crazy, but street. You know, I know I'm crazy, but I'm worried about you. He says, "You I'm worried about you. He says, "You I'm worried about you. He says, "You know, I called know, I called know, I called uh and you weren't there." I said, uh and you weren't there." I said, uh and you weren't there." I said, "Well, did you leave a message?" "No." I "Well, did you leave a message?" "No." I "Well, did you leave a message?" "No." I said, 'Well, why didn't you leave a said, 'Well, why didn't you leave a said, 'Well, why didn't you leave a message? You don't understand what it's message? You don't understand what it's message? You don't understand what it's like in I didn't have it in me. And like in I didn't have it in me. And like in I didn't have it in me. And okay, listen, pal. Leave a 10second okay, listen, pal. Leave a 10second okay, listen, pal. Leave a 10second message. I'm alive. I'm fine. Don't message. I'm alive. I'm fine. Don't message. I'm alive. I'm fine. Don't worry about me. You'll you'll wind up worry about me. You'll you'll wind up worry about me. You'll you'll wind up having less to deal with. If you put 10 having less to deal with. If you put 10 having less to deal with. If you put 10 seconds into it, then if you don't put seconds into it, then if you don't put seconds into it, then if you don't put the 10 seconds into it, and then you've the 10 seconds into it, and then you've the 10 seconds into it, and then you've got mom on the phone talking to you for got mom on the phone talking to you for got mom on the phone talking to you for 20 minutes about, you know, why can't 20 minutes about, you know, why can't 20 minutes about, you know, why can't you be a more responsible? It's up to you be a more responsible? It's up to you be a more responsible? It's up to you. But it's an investment in your you. But it's an investment in your you. But it's an investment in your future, your well-being. It's what the future, your well-being. It's what the future, your well-being. It's what the prefrontal cortex knows that the lyic prefrontal cortex knows that the lyic prefrontal cortex knows that the lyic system doesn't is it's in my interest to system doesn't is it's in my interest to system doesn't is it's in my interest to behave well because I'll get less [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] behave well because I'll get less [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] behave well because I'll get less [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] for it. I don't mean to jump into family for it. I don't mean to jump into family for it. I don't mean to jump into family matters, but uh having come from the not matters, but uh having come from the not matters, but uh having come from the not medical but science profession, your son medical but science profession, your son medical but science profession, your son had some overlap with places I've been had some overlap with places I've been had some overlap with places I've been and people we know. Um I don't know him, and people we know. Um I don't know him, and people we know. Um I don't know him, but I'm about to advocate for him here. but I'm about to advocate for him here. but I'm about to advocate for him here. I suspect maybe ask him. I suspect I suspect maybe ask him. I suspect I suspect maybe ask him. I suspect that the that the that the &gt;&gt; could be wrong, but part of the reason &gt;&gt; could be wrong, but part of the reason &gt;&gt; could be wrong, but part of the reason he didn't leave a message is when you he didn't leave a message is when you he didn't leave a message is when you get like your son got three degrees from get like your son got three degrees from get like your son got three degrees from &gt;&gt; an elite university. He is a doing his &gt;&gt; an elite university. He is a doing his &gt;&gt; an elite university. He is a doing his residency in medicine. Uh he's clearly a residency in medicine. Uh he's clearly a residency in medicine. Uh he's clearly a high achiever. Uh and he's involved in high achiever. Uh and he's involved in high achiever. Uh and he's involved in other things as well. Um other things as well. Um other things as well. Um &gt;&gt; the 10-second message is very hard for a &gt;&gt; the 10-second message is very hard for a &gt;&gt; the 10-second message is very hard for a high achiever. It's like you either do high achiever. It's like you either do high achiever. It's like you either do things really well or you don't do them. things really well or you don't do them. things really well or you don't do them. And this is I I'm probably just And this is I I'm probably just And this is I I'm probably just projecting myself into this here. projecting myself into this here. projecting myself into this here. Sometimes the reason I don't respond to Sometimes the reason I don't respond to Sometimes the reason I don't respond to things is I'm like, I can't do it well. things is I'm like, I can't do it well. things is I'm like, I can't do it well. So I'm not going to do it at all. They So I'm not going to do it at all. They So I'm not going to do it at all. They told us that if you're not going to do told us that if you're not going to do told us that if you're not going to do something well, don't do it. You know something well, don't do it. You know something well, don't do it. You know how you do one thing. And it turns out how you do one thing. And it turns out how you do one thing. And it turns out it's so silly, right? Because not doing it's so silly, right? Because not doing it's so silly, right? Because not doing it for 10 seconds is clearly way worse it for 10 seconds is clearly way worse it for 10 seconds is clearly way worse than doing it 10 seconds becomes perfect than doing it 10 seconds becomes perfect than doing it 10 seconds becomes perfect under the circumstances. But high under the circumstances. But high under the circumstances. But high achievers don't hear that. So here I am achievers don't hear that. So here I am achievers don't hear that. So here I am advocating for your son. I don't even uh advocating for your son. I don't even uh advocating for your son. I don't even uh [laughter] really know him. But but I'm going to really know him. But but I'm going to really know him. But but I'm going to but and I don't do it because I want to but and I don't do it because I want to but and I don't do it because I want to bail him out. I think everything you're bail him out. I think everything you're bail him out. I think everything you're saying is spoton. I just what I felt saying is spoton. I just what I felt saying is spoton. I just what I felt in that example like oh gosh like I in that example like oh gosh like I in that example like oh gosh like I can't help but I know that feeling. You can't help but I know that feeling. You can't help but I know that feeling. You want to do it so badly, but you don't want to do it so badly, but you don't want to do it so badly, but you don't want to do it poorly, so you don't do want to do it poorly, so you don't do want to do it poorly, so you don't do it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But that's not relational. Sure. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But that's not relational. Sure. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But that's not relational. Sure. And medicine is saturated with And medicine is saturated with And medicine is saturated with patriarchy. This is all, you know, the patriarchy. This is all, you know, the patriarchy. This is all, you know, the hazing that goes on. This is all hazing that goes on. This is all hazing that goes on. This is all masculinity. It's just like boot camp. masculinity. It's just like boot camp. masculinity. It's just like boot camp. And for the Marines and this notion that And for the Marines and this notion that And for the Marines and this notion that you either do it excellently or you either do it excellently or you either do it excellently or you don't do it all is another, it don't do it all is another, it don't do it all is another, it deprivives us of being human beings with deprivives us of being human beings with deprivives us of being human beings with each other. It's it really gets in the each other. It's it really gets in the each other. It's it really gets in the way. So, yeah, you're right. I'm sure that's So, yeah, you're right. I'm sure that's So, yeah, you're right. I'm sure that's what he's thinking. And also, take a what he's thinking. And also, take a what he's thinking. And also, take a step back. What is in my interest? A step back. What is in my interest? A step back. What is in my interest? A 10-second message or a 20-minute 10-second message or a 20-minute 10-second message or a 20-minute conversation? I'm busy. What do I want conversation? I'm busy. What do I want conversation? I'm busy. What do I want to do here? And this is how we have to do here? And this is how we have to do here? And this is how we have to start thinking. We we're not start thinking. We we're not start thinking. We we're not individuals. That's the great fallacy. We're living That's the great fallacy. We're living That's the great fallacy. We're living in a context. in a context. in a context. &gt;&gt; Our relationships are our biospheres. &gt;&gt; Our relationships are our biospheres. &gt;&gt; Our relationships are our biospheres. We're not we're not separated from them. We're not we're not separated from them. We're not we're not separated from them. We're in them. And it's in my interest We're in them. And it's in my interest We're in them. And it's in my interest to do what the biosphere needs because to do what the biosphere needs because to do what the biosphere needs because I'm incited. I'm incited. I'm incited. That's the new news. That's my message That's the new news. That's my message That's the new news. That's my message to the world. The great mistake this to the world. The great mistake this to the world. The great mistake this culture has made. the father of culture has made. the father of culture has made. the father of family therapy, Gregory Bas, an family therapy, Gregory Bas, an family therapy, Gregory Bas, an anthropologist married to Margaret me, anthropologist married to Margaret me, anthropologist married to Margaret me, genius man, called it humankind's uh genius man, called it humankind's uh genius man, called it humankind's uh epistemological philosophical mistake epistemological philosophical mistake epistemological philosophical mistake that we stand outside of nature. You that we stand outside of nature. You that we stand outside of nature. You know, I get these big burly I tough I know, I get these big burly I tough I know, I get these big burly I tough I deal with tough guys. I get these gly I deal with tough guys. I get these gly I deal with tough guys. I get these gly why should I have to work so hard to why should I have to work so hard to why should I have to work so hard to please my wife? I go knock you live with please my wife? I go knock you live with please my wife? I go knock you live with her. It's like we have lost the wisdom her. It's like we have lost the wisdom her. It's like we have lost the wisdom of ecology. You're in this together. You of ecology. You're in this together. You of ecology. You're in this together. You know, indigenous people around the world know, indigenous people around the world know, indigenous people around the world understand this. We don't. We're not understand this. We don't. We're not understand this. We don't. We're not above nature dominating it. And for above nature dominating it. And for above nature dominating it. And for traditional women, we're not below traditional women, we're not below traditional women, we're not below nature upregulating it enabling code. nature upregulating it enabling code. nature upregulating it enabling code. No, we're in it. is in my interest to do No, we're in it. is in my interest to do No, we're in it. is in my interest to do what the biosphere needs because I'm what the biosphere needs because I'm what the biosphere needs because I'm breathing it. This is a whole new world breathing it. This is a whole new world breathing it. This is a whole new world for most of the people that I work with. for most of the people that I work with. for most of the people that I work with. And by the way, this to me is the And by the way, this to me is the And by the way, this to me is the essence of the new masculinity essence of the new masculinity essence of the new masculinity &gt;&gt; to understand life as a human as &gt;&gt; to understand life as a human as &gt;&gt; to understand life as a human as relational &gt;&gt; relational and ecological. &gt;&gt; relational and ecological. &gt;&gt; relational and ecological. &gt;&gt; I'm not above it. I'm in it and I'm a &gt;&gt; I'm not above it. I'm in it and I'm a &gt;&gt; I'm not above it. I'm in it and I'm a steward of it. It's in my interest to steward of it. It's in my interest to steward of it. It's in my interest to give to my biosphere. That is wisdom. give to my biosphere. That is wisdom. give to my biosphere. That is wisdom. &gt;&gt; There must be a place &gt;&gt; There must be a place &gt;&gt; There must be a place for men to develop some of these skills in men to develop some of these skills in men to develop some of these skills in the company of other men because that the company of other men because that the company of other men because that traditionally was the way it was done, traditionally was the way it was done, traditionally was the way it was done, right? Even if we look back to the you right? Even if we look back to the you right? Even if we look back to the you know um not so much the ' 40s um because know um not so much the ' 40s um because know um not so much the ' 40s um because the world was in a different sort of the world was in a different sort of the world was in a different sort of duress um but in the 50s and 60s um duress um but in the 50s and 60s um duress um but in the 50s and 60s um there was a certain kind of socializing there was a certain kind of socializing there was a certain kind of socializing that &gt;&gt; men did. It was &gt;&gt; men did. It was &gt;&gt; men did. It was &gt;&gt; still today. &gt;&gt; still today. &gt;&gt; still today. &gt;&gt; It was it was often around alcohol um &gt;&gt; It was it was often around alcohol um &gt;&gt; It was it was often around alcohol um &gt;&gt; and sports. &gt;&gt; and sports. &gt;&gt; and sports. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Brief brief uh anecdote around &gt;&gt; Yeah. Brief brief uh anecdote around &gt;&gt; Yeah. Brief brief uh anecdote around that. When I started graduate school, um that. When I started graduate school, um that. When I started graduate school, um it was amazing that every Friday they it was amazing that every Friday they it was amazing that every Friday they would do a seminar and then people they' would do a seminar and then people they' would do a seminar and then people they' have some food and people would go home. have some food and people would go home. have some food and people would go home. And I was told by a chair of department, And I was told by a chair of department, And I was told by a chair of department, he said, "Do you know that for something he said, "Do you know that for something he said, "Do you know that for something like 30 years in this room, it was like 30 years in this room, it was like 30 years in this room, it was called the beach room named after Frank called the beach room named after Frank called the beach room named after Frank Beach at UC Berkeley, one of the Beach at UC Berkeley, one of the Beach at UC Berkeley, one of the great biocsychologists and great biocsychologists and great biocsychologists and endocrinologists. Frank Beach and colleagues would get Frank Beach and colleagues would get Frank Beach and colleagues would get together. It was all men then. um together. It was all men then. um together. It was all men then. um every single evening, not Fridays, every single evening, not Fridays, every single evening, not Fridays, every single evening and get trashed. single evening and get trashed. single evening and get trashed. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And then basically stagger home to their &gt;&gt; And then basically stagger home to their &gt;&gt; And then basically stagger home to their families. This was like how it was done. families. This was like how it was done. families. This was like how it was done. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Very very different time. And it was &gt;&gt; Very very different time. And it was &gt;&gt; Very very different time. And it was standard. &gt;&gt; It was standard. People smoked men &gt;&gt; It was standard. People smoked men &gt;&gt; It was standard. People smoked men smoked and drank and then smoked and drank and then smoked and drank and then &gt;&gt; got drunk and went home. Okay. That was &gt;&gt; got drunk and went home. Okay. That was &gt;&gt; got drunk and went home. Okay. That was real. &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And obviously that's not the way it is now. obviously that's not the way it is now. obviously that's not the way it is now. And I said, "Well, what would you guys And I said, "Well, what would you guys And I said, "Well, what would you guys talk about?" And you imagine that it talk about?" And you imagine that it talk about?" And you imagine that it would all be about, you know, um kind of would all be about, you know, um kind of would all be about, you know, um kind of like fraternity talk and locker room like fraternity talk and locker room like fraternity talk and locker room talk. He said, "No, we would talk about talk. He said, "No, we would talk about talk. He said, "No, we would talk about science. We'd talk about grants." Um science. We'd talk about grants." Um science. We'd talk about grants." Um occasionally people would talk about occasionally people would talk about occasionally people would talk about what was going on with their families, what was going on with their families, what was going on with their families, but I said, "Why did people do it?" And but I said, "Why did people do it?" And but I said, "Why did people do it?" And he said, "It just felt really good to be he said, "It just felt really good to be he said, "It just felt really good to be able to relax and say whatever you able to relax and say whatever you able to relax and say whatever you wanted." Obviously, there were no phones wanted." Obviously, there were no phones wanted." Obviously, there were no phones then or even the internet. And it was then or even the internet. And it was then or even the internet. And it was kind of an end of day catharsis. And I kind of an end of day catharsis. And I kind of an end of day catharsis. And I said, "On average, do you think those said, "On average, do you think those said, "On average, do you think those men showed up drunk? Obviously, better men showed up drunk? Obviously, better men showed up drunk? Obviously, better or worse when they got home?" And he or worse when they got home?" And he or worse when they got home?" And he said, "Oh, that was our therapy. That said, "Oh, that was our therapy. That said, "Oh, that was our therapy. That was absolutely our therapy." Now, I was absolutely our therapy." Now, I was absolutely our therapy." Now, I don't doubt that there were elements of don't doubt that there were elements of don't doubt that there were elements of abuse and all sorts of things that go abuse and all sorts of things that go abuse and all sorts of things that go with alcoholism. I've been very vocal with alcoholism. I've been very vocal with alcoholism. I've been very vocal about the fact that I'm discouraging about the fact that I'm discouraging about the fact that I'm discouraging of people to drink, certainly if they of people to drink, certainly if they of people to drink, certainly if they want to be healthier in very low want to be healthier in very low want to be healthier in very low moderation perhaps, but zero is better moderation perhaps, but zero is better moderation perhaps, but zero is better than any. But where do men go now to than any. But where do men go now to than any. But where do men go now to relate to one another in a way that relate to one another in a way that relate to one another in a way that builds healthy relating builds healthy relating builds healthy relating with romantic partners? Builds healthy with romantic partners? Builds healthy with romantic partners? Builds healthy relating at work because I'll tell you relating at work because I'll tell you relating at work because I'll tell you just even the notion I know because I've just even the notion I know because I've just even the notion I know because I've been told just the notion of men been told just the notion of men been told just the notion of men gathering scares the hell out of a lot gathering scares the hell out of a lot gathering scares the hell out of a lot of people. The immediate assumption is of people. The immediate assumption is of people. The immediate assumption is when guys get together bad things when guys get together bad things when guys get together bad things happen. This is this is the idea. But I happen. This is this is the idea. But I happen. This is this is the idea. But I also think that we've um also think that we've um also think that we've um erased some very powerful vessels for erased some very powerful vessels for erased some very powerful vessels for self-standing and for relating and for self-standing and for relating and for self-standing and for relating and for and also for throwing off some of the and also for throwing off some of the and also for throwing off some of the stresses of the day that frankly don't stresses of the day that frankly don't stresses of the day that frankly don't need to walk in the door at home. And so need to walk in the door at home. And so need to walk in the door at home. And so guys are trying to do it all alone or on guys are trying to do it all alone or on guys are trying to do it all alone or on their phones. And then people wonder, their phones. And then people wonder, their phones. And then people wonder, and there are a lot of reasons for this, and there are a lot of reasons for this, and there are a lot of reasons for this, but then people wonder why there's so but then people wonder why there's so but then people wonder why there's so much dissociation and distraction and much dissociation and distraction and much dissociation and distraction and worse by way of social media. It's and worse by way of social media. It's and worse by way of social media. It's like if guys can't hang out and talk, like if guys can't hang out and talk, like if guys can't hang out and talk, they not say drink, but if they can't they not say drink, but if they can't they not say drink, but if they can't hang out and talk, then how are they hang out and talk, then how are they hang out and talk, then how are they supposed to be their best selves when supposed to be their best selves when supposed to be their best selves when they go back to their families? they go back to their families? they go back to their families? &gt;&gt; You're dead right. And you know, we talk &gt;&gt; You're dead right. And you know, we talk &gt;&gt; You're dead right. And you know, we talk about the epidemic of loneliness. We're about the epidemic of loneliness. We're about the epidemic of loneliness. We're talking about men, talking about men, talking about men, you know, um heterero couple, uh the you know, um heterero couple, uh the you know, um heterero couple, uh the man dies, women do okay. The woman dies, man dies, women do okay. The woman dies, man dies, women do okay. The woman dies, men are in deep trouble. The single men are in deep trouble. The single men are in deep trouble. The single men uh are the greatest public health crisis uh are the greatest public health crisis uh are the greatest public health crisis uh around. And we've talked about uh around. And we've talked about uh around. And we've talked about relational skills with your family, your relational skills with your family, your relational skills with your family, your woman, your partner if you're gay. Um, woman, your partner if you're gay. Um, woman, your partner if you're gay. Um, how about relational skills with pals? how about relational skills with pals? how about relational skills with pals? And I work with men around getting And I work with men around getting And I work with men around getting friends. Uh, many of the men that I work with Uh, many of the men that I work with Uh, many of the men that I work with have few to no friends. And I have, it's have few to no friends. And I have, it's have few to no friends. And I have, it's part of my therapy. I want you to start part of my therapy. I want you to start part of my therapy. I want you to start having friends. And I want them deeper. having friends. And I want them deeper. having friends. And I want them deeper. And I teach men. Okay. So, the six guys And I teach men. Okay. So, the six guys And I teach men. Okay. So, the six guys you go golfing with and you talk about you go golfing with and you talk about you go golfing with and you talk about sports and politics and maybe [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sports and politics and maybe [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sports and politics and maybe [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about your wives a little bit. about your wives a little bit. about your wives a little bit. I want you to try pick one I want you to try pick one I want you to try pick one that you think might be most receptive that you think might be most receptive that you think might be most receptive and share something a little more and share something a little more and share something a little more vulnerable with them. You know, I've vulnerable with them. You know, I've vulnerable with them. You know, I've been uh I've had chronic back pain and I'm uh I've had chronic back pain and I'm uh I've had chronic back pain and I'm getting old. I'm getting old. I'm getting old. It's a little scary. Or if you're a It's a little scary. Or if you're a It's a little scary. Or if you're a young man, I've been out of work for 14 young man, I've been out of work for 14 young man, I've been out of work for 14 months and I'm getting show some vulner Oh yeah, what about those socks? Well, Oh yeah, what about those socks? Well, Oh yeah, what about those socks? Well, he ain't having it. Okay, nice he ain't having it. Okay, nice he ain't having it. Okay, nice experiment. You're done with Steve. Go experiment. You're done with Steve. Go experiment. You're done with Steve. Go back to your superficial relationship. back to your superficial relationship. back to your superficial relationship. Enjoy it. [gasps] You talk to Dave and Enjoy it. [gasps] You talk to Dave and Enjoy it. [gasps] You talk to Dave and Dave, you know, I can really hear you, Dave, you know, I can really hear you, Dave, you know, I can really hear you, man. That's tough. I I've been worried man. That's tough. I I've been worried man. That's tough. I I've been worried too about blah my too about blah my too about blah my dick ain't working the way it used to dick ain't working the way it used to dick ain't working the way it used to and all of a sudden you're having a and all of a sudden you're having a and all of a sudden you're having a hearttohe heart in a way that you may hearttohe heart in a way that you may hearttohe heart in a way that you may never have had in your life before. So I never have had in your life before. So I never have had in your life before. So I teach men to experiment and to try and teach men to experiment and to try and teach men to experiment and to try and drive their relationships deeper by drive their relationships deeper by drive their relationships deeper by sharing more and seeing what they get. sharing more and seeing what they get. sharing more and seeing what they get. It's not a shoe in this guy may be great It's not a shoe in this guy may be great It's not a shoe in this guy may be great that you have to be discriminating. that you have to be discriminating. that you have to be discriminating. It's just in brain death. Protect It's just in brain death. Protect It's just in brain death. Protect yourself. Be discriminating, but also be yourself. Be discriminating, but also be yourself. Be discriminating, but also be courageous. Open up and try a little courageous. Open up and try a little courageous. Open up and try a little more. Uh the crisis of men being alone more. Uh the crisis of men being alone more. Uh the crisis of men being alone and not having other men to support them and not having other men to support them and not having other men to support them and share uh is one of the great and share uh is one of the great and share uh is one of the great problems in modern society. Uh on the problems in modern society. Uh on the problems in modern society. Uh on the other hand, [snorts] I had the privilege other hand, [snorts] I had the privilege other hand, [snorts] I had the privilege of being and many of your uh listeners of being and many of your uh listeners of being and many of your uh listeners are too young for this, but uh there was are too young for this, but uh there was are too young for this, but uh there was a great guy, Robert Bllye. Uh he wrote a great guy, Robert Bllye. Uh he wrote a great guy, Robert Bllye. Uh he wrote Iron John and he was a Iron John and he was a Iron John and he was a &gt;&gt; great book. &gt;&gt; great book. &gt;&gt; great book. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And amazing book. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And amazing book. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And amazing book. &gt;&gt; He was like the Mr. Men's movement, guys &gt;&gt; He was like the Mr. Men's movement, guys &gt;&gt; He was like the Mr. Men's movement, guys drumming in the woods. drumming in the woods. drumming in the woods. &gt;&gt; And I went to Moose uh Lodge and I was &gt;&gt; And I went to Moose uh Lodge and I was &gt;&gt; And I went to Moose uh Lodge and I was invited. &gt;&gt; So you met him? I did one of the one of &gt;&gt; So you met him? I did one of the one of &gt;&gt; So you met him? I did one of the one of the men's weekends drumming in the woods the men's weekends drumming in the woods the men's weekends drumming in the woods with Robert and the guys. with Robert and the guys. with Robert and the guys. &gt;&gt; I love the book. I think that has some &gt;&gt; I love the book. I think that has some &gt;&gt; I love the book. I think that has some brilliant insight about um all boys's brilliant insight about um all boys's brilliant insight about um all boys's relationship to their fathers, even if relationship to their fathers, even if relationship to their fathers, even if they didn't know their fathers. And uh they didn't know their fathers. And uh they didn't know their fathers. And uh there's this wonderful there's this wonderful there's this wonderful and terrifying passage in there. and terrifying passage in there. and terrifying passage in there. Wonderful because it's so astute. Wonderful because it's so astute. Wonderful because it's so astute. terrifying because it's terrifying which terrifying because it's terrifying which terrifying because it's terrifying which is it is the places of absence of the is it is the places of absence of the is it is the places of absence of the father that the demons enter a young father that the demons enter a young father that the demons enter a young boy. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's absolutely true. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's absolutely true. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's absolutely true. &gt;&gt; And something like that. And Bllye is a &gt;&gt; And something like that. And Bllye is a &gt;&gt; And something like that. And Bllye is a great writer and I didn't capture it great writer and I didn't capture it great writer and I didn't capture it well. But that whether or not someone well. But that whether or not someone well. But that whether or not someone had a close relationship with their had a close relationship with their had a close relationship with their father and he was very present or they father and he was very present or they father and he was very present or they didn't there are these like um I didn't there are these like um I didn't there are these like um I think of them as actual like physical think of them as actual like physical think of them as actual like physical shards of shadow shards of shadow shards of shadow &gt;&gt; a wound, &gt;&gt; a wound, &gt;&gt; a wound, &gt;&gt; right? that that's where addiction &gt;&gt; right? that that's where addiction &gt;&gt; right? that that's where addiction shows up later. That's where all sorts shows up later. That's where all sorts shows up later. That's where all sorts of things show. It depends on the of things show. It depends on the of things show. It depends on the circumstances. But BL Bllye um BL was circumstances. But BL Bllye um BL was circumstances. But BL Bllye um BL was really ahead of his time. It's awesome really ahead of his time. It's awesome really ahead of his time. It's awesome that you trained with him. that you trained with him. that you trained with him. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, we dance we did Sufi dances &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, we dance we did Sufi dances &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, we dance we did Sufi dances together and together and together and &gt;&gt; Oh, so he was into the hippie thing too. &gt;&gt; Oh, so he was into the hippie thing too. &gt;&gt; Oh, so he was into the hippie thing too. &gt;&gt; Drumming in the woods and he was &gt;&gt; Drumming in the woods and he was &gt;&gt; Drumming in the woods and he was tribal. &gt;&gt; Tribal. So forgive me. I wasn't trying &gt;&gt; Tribal. So forgive me. I wasn't trying &gt;&gt; Tribal. So forgive me. I wasn't trying to be pjorative. I'm from Palo Alto. The to be pjorative. I'm from Palo Alto. The to be pjorative. I'm from Palo Alto. The Grateful Dead are from Palto. I get a Grateful Dead are from Palto. I get a Grateful Dead are from Palto. I get a hippie pass. hippie pass. hippie pass. &gt;&gt; Anyway, listen. Um, so there was a &gt;&gt; Anyway, listen. Um, so there was a &gt;&gt; Anyway, listen. Um, so there was a wonderful shaman. I got to tell you this wonderful shaman. I got to tell you this wonderful shaman. I got to tell you this story. We've been so straight, but I story. We've been so straight, but I story. We've been so straight, but I just love this story. So he brought in just love this story. So he brought in just love this story. So he brought in BL um adolescence. He had all these guys BL um adolescence. He had all these guys BL um adolescence. He had all these guys boomer guys in their 50s and 60s, me boomer guys in their 50s and 60s, me boomer guys in their 50s and 60s, me included. And he trucked in Bloods and included. And he trucked in Bloods and included. And he trucked in Bloods and Crips, not only teenagers, but teenagers from not only teenagers, but teenagers from not only teenagers, but teenagers from urban gangs to do this thing. And he urban gangs to do this thing. And he urban gangs to do this thing. And he really strongly believed that older men really strongly believed that older men really strongly believed that older men needed to teach younger men how to be in needed to teach younger men how to be in needed to teach younger men how to be in on the planet that there was an on the planet that there was an on the planet that there was an initiation that was missing in our initiation that was missing in our initiation that was missing in our culture. And Martin Prel the shaman culture. And Martin Prel the shaman culture. And Martin Prel the shaman as these kids were getting off the bus. as these kids were getting off the bus. as these kids were getting off the bus. I love this. He told I wasn't there. He I love this. He told I wasn't there. He I love this. He told I wasn't there. He told the story though I was in he told the story though I was in he told the story though I was in he give me a sheet. He held out a big sheet give me a sheet. He held out a big sheet give me a sheet. He held out a big sheet on the ground. He goes old cre shaman on the ground. He goes old cre shaman on the ground. He goes old cre shaman custom. This is a sacred weekend. We custom. This is a sacred weekend. We custom. This is a sacred weekend. We must divest of all metal. All metal goes must divest of all metal. All metal goes must divest of all metal. All metal goes on the sheet. And these gang members are on the sheet. And these gang members are on the sheet. And these gang members are like knives, brass knuckles, chains, like knives, brass knuckles, chains, like knives, brass knuckles, chains, guns. All of their weapons were all guns. All of their weapons were all guns. All of their weapons were all good. Good. There wasn't an old that's good. Good. There wasn't an old that's good. Good. There wasn't an old that's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] It was just made up. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] It was just made up. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] It was just made up. &gt;&gt; He was just divesting them of their &gt;&gt; He was just divesting them of their &gt;&gt; He was just divesting them of their weapons for the weekend. But anyway, but weapons for the weekend. But anyway, but weapons for the weekend. But anyway, but even there, I mean, you can go on even there, I mean, you can go on even there, I mean, you can go on YouTube and see this. When I when it was YouTube and see this. When I when it was YouTube and see this. When I when it was my turn to speak to the men, I said, my turn to speak to the men, I said, my turn to speak to the men, I said, "This is beautiful what we're doing with "This is beautiful what we're doing with "This is beautiful what we're doing with each other. It's beautiful. It's each other. It's beautiful. It's each other. It's beautiful. It's necessary. And now we have to take it necessary. And now we have to take it necessary. And now we have to take it home to our families. It's great for us home to our families. It's great for us home to our families. It's great for us to be intimate with each other, but we to be intimate with each other, but we to be intimate with each other, but we can't be intimate with each other for can't be intimate with each other for can't be intimate with each other for the weekend and go home and be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the weekend and go home and be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the weekend and go home and be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] to our wives and kids." It's an amazing to our wives and kids." It's an amazing to our wives and kids." It's an amazing story at so many levels and it brings to story at so many levels and it brings to story at so many levels and it brings to mind something I've been thinking about mind something I've been thinking about mind something I've been thinking about for a number of years which is okay I for a number of years which is okay I for a number of years which is okay I wasn't in a university fraternity but I wasn't in a university fraternity but I wasn't in a university fraternity but I sort of uh I entered a fraternity of way sort of uh I entered a fraternity of way sort of uh I entered a fraternity of way back when and got involved in back when and got involved in back when and got involved in skateboarding when there were no parents skateboarding when there were no parents skateboarding when there were no parents involved there no girls or women involved there no girls or women involved there no girls or women involved there was like one or two but involved there was like one or two but involved there was like one or two but it was like just a bunch of it was like just a bunch of it was like just a bunch of &gt;&gt; guy territory &gt;&gt; guy territory &gt;&gt; guy territory &gt;&gt; it was all guys and the interesting &gt;&gt; it was all guys and the interesting &gt;&gt; it was all guys and the interesting thing about skateboarding is it's um to thing about skateboarding is it's um to thing about skateboarding is it's um to this day you can be 13 and you're this day you can be 13 and you're this day you can be 13 and you're hanging out with people that are in hanging out with people that are in hanging out with people that are in their 30s and 40s right so that was their 30s and 40s right so that was their 30s and 40s right so that was First I used to say non-biological First I used to say non-biological First I used to say non-biological family but it was a fraternity of sorts. family but it was a fraternity of sorts. family but it was a fraternity of sorts. You sort of like I want to be in and You sort of like I want to be in and You sort of like I want to be in and then there's a bunch of tests or not then there's a bunch of tests or not then there's a bunch of tests or not tests and you're part of it and tests and you're part of it and tests and you're part of it and then eventually I joined the fraternity then eventually I joined the fraternity then eventually I joined the fraternity of science and research which is its own of science and research which is its own of science and research which is its own very interesting different podcast topic very interesting different podcast topic very interesting different podcast topic fraternity um with its own great aspects fraternity um with its own great aspects fraternity um with its own great aspects and its own complete [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and uh you and its own complete [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and uh you and its own complete [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and uh you know etc. is like any fraternity, know etc. is like any fraternity, know etc. is like any fraternity, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; When you talk about the crisis of &gt;&gt; When you talk about the crisis of &gt;&gt; When you talk about the crisis of loneliness, especially among men, but loneliness, especially among men, but loneliness, especially among men, but even for people who are perhaps happily even for people who are perhaps happily even for people who are perhaps happily or at least amicably in relationship, I or at least amicably in relationship, I or at least amicably in relationship, I feel like what's missing are these quote feel like what's missing are these quote feel like what's missing are these quote unquote fraternities unquote fraternities unquote fraternities &gt;&gt; that, you know, they don't they're &gt;&gt; that, you know, they don't they're &gt;&gt; that, you know, they don't they're harder to access now. Um, and people harder to access now. Um, and people harder to access now. Um, and people have gone online. I actually think part have gone online. I actually think part have gone online. I actually think part of the success of podcasts um of the success of podcasts um of the success of podcasts um certain podcasts in particular has been certain podcasts in particular has been certain podcasts in particular has been because um you know if you didn't uh you because um you know if you didn't uh you because um you know if you didn't uh you know go to the military or something you know go to the military or something you know go to the military or something you watch a Jaco Willing podcast and I mean watch a Jaco Willing podcast and I mean watch a Jaco Willing podcast and I mean Jaco Willing looks like the modern Jaco Willing looks like the modern Jaco Willing looks like the modern general Patton general Patton general Patton &gt;&gt; and he's a very nice guy but he's a &gt;&gt; and he's a very nice guy but he's a &gt;&gt; and he's a very nice guy but he's a nononsense guy. I mean he's a very kind nononsense guy. I mean he's a very kind nononsense guy. I mean he's a very kind amazing father amazing husband to his amazing father amazing husband to his amazing father amazing husband to his wife and great friend and it but wife and great friend and it but wife and great friend and it but he's a he's a warrior. He's a legitimate he's a he's a warrior. He's a legitimate he's a he's a warrior. He's a legitimate warrior. And so warrior. And so warrior. And so young men and old men uh now go online young men and old men uh now go online young men and old men uh now go online to be to feel like part of a fraternity to be to feel like part of a fraternity to be to feel like part of a fraternity to access these different fraternity so to access these different fraternity so to access these different fraternity so to speak. to speak. to speak. &gt;&gt; But I think there's real value in the &gt;&gt; But I think there's real value in the &gt;&gt; But I think there's real value in the in-person um work and collaboration and in-person um work and collaboration and in-person um work and collaboration and to some extent what I described before to some extent what I described before to some extent what I described before about the excessive drinking at about the excessive drinking at about the excessive drinking at the end of the day in the beach room and the end of the day in the beach room and the end of the day in the beach room and Tolman Hall at Berkeley that took place Tolman Hall at Berkeley that took place Tolman Hall at Berkeley that took place in the you know 40s 50s and 60s that was in the you know 40s 50s and 60s that was in the you know 40s 50s and 60s that was a fraternity. a fraternity. a fraternity. &gt;&gt; I had it in family therapy. &gt;&gt; I had it in family therapy. &gt;&gt; I had it in family therapy. &gt;&gt; Yeah. and but it was an important &gt;&gt; Yeah. and but it was an important &gt;&gt; Yeah. and but it was an important part of learning part of learning part of learning not just the conventions of the job not just the conventions of the job not just the conventions of the job you're in but where you sit in this you you're in but where you sit in this you you're in but where you sit in this you know it's a very touchy word it's like a know it's a very touchy word it's like a know it's a very touchy word it's like a third rail word nowadays this the third rail word nowadays this the third rail word nowadays this the hierarchy right but the way I see the hierarchy right but the way I see the hierarchy right but the way I see hierarchy among men is very different I hierarchy among men is very different I hierarchy among men is very different I feel like within a fraternity you figure feel like within a fraternity you figure feel like within a fraternity you figure out not where you sit on a kind of out not where you sit on a kind of out not where you sit on a kind of staircase you figure out what you're staircase you figure out what you're staircase you figure out what you're good at what you're less good at what good at what you're less good at what good at what you're less good at what you might get better at and what you'll you might get better at and what you'll you might get better at and what you'll never get good at. And then you kind of never get good at. And then you kind of never get good at. And then you kind of arrange yourselves in a group that you arrange yourselves in a group that you arrange yourselves in a group that you go, "This is great. I'm really good at go, "This is great. I'm really good at go, "This is great. I'm really good at certain things, terrible at others, and certain things, terrible at others, and certain things, terrible at others, and so at others." Fortunately, there's so at others." Fortunately, there's so at others." Fortunately, there's complimentarity here. They're really complimentarity here. They're really complimentarity here. They're really good at other things, and so you can good at other things, and so you can good at other things, and so you can learn, and you feel empowered in the learn, and you feel empowered in the learn, and you feel empowered in the best sense of the word because you're best sense of the word because you're best sense of the word because you're like, "Yeah, we're kind of a force like, "Yeah, we're kind of a force like, "Yeah, we're kind of a force because there's no there's no major gaps because there's no there's no major gaps because there's no there's no major gaps here, but not because everyone's here, but not because everyone's here, but not because everyone's validating each other and you're validating each other and you're validating each other and you're interested in going out and doing bad interested in going out and doing bad interested in going out and doing bad things." I actually think this is why things." I actually think this is why things." I actually think this is why people go into gangs. people go into gangs. people go into gangs. &gt;&gt; Gangs are &gt;&gt; Gangs are &gt;&gt; Gangs are &gt;&gt; It's a fraternity. &gt;&gt; It's a fraternity. &gt;&gt; It's a fraternity. &gt;&gt; Gangs are &gt;&gt; Gangs are &gt;&gt; Gangs are &gt;&gt; It's a fraternity. And and the home was &gt;&gt; It's a fraternity. And and the home was &gt;&gt; It's a fraternity. And and the home was never the place where you were supposed never the place where you were supposed never the place where you were supposed to feel fraternity. And I think this is to feel fraternity. And I think this is to feel fraternity. And I think this is a difficult one for men and women to a difficult one for men and women to a difficult one for men and women to understand and hear, but especially men understand and hear, but especially men understand and hear, but especially men nowadays where young guys will come to nowadays where young guys will come to nowadays where young guys will come to me and they'll be like, I don't know me and they'll be like, I don't know me and they'll be like, I don't know what to do. What should I study? What what to do. What should I study? What what to do. What should I study? What should I do? This is not the Stanford should I do? This is not the Stanford should I do? This is not the Stanford students. These are the some failure to students. These are the some failure to students. These are the some failure to launch or potential failure to launch or potential failure to launch or potential failure to launch kids. You know, parents now call me, kids. You know, parents now call me, kids. You know, parents now call me, text me, they get a hold of me. My kid text me, they get a hold of me. My kid text me, they get a hold of me. My kid is a and I'm like, they have no is a and I'm like, they have no is a and I'm like, they have no fraternity, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Their fraternity is video games. That's &gt;&gt; Their fraternity is video games. That's &gt;&gt; Their fraternity is video games. That's not a fraternity. They don't have a not a fraternity. They don't have a not a fraternity. They don't have a group that they can go to figure out group that they can go to figure out group that they can go to figure out what they're good at, what they suck at, what they're good at, what they suck at, what they're good at, what they suck at, and what they could get better at. And and what they could get better at. And and what they could get better at. And so they walk around, and I do, forgive so they walk around, and I do, forgive so they walk around, and I do, forgive me, but for going long, but I think that me, but for going long, but I think that me, but for going long, but I think that but because online you can see all the but because online you can see all the but because online you can see all the fraternities. What I also hear is fraternities. What I also hear is fraternities. What I also hear is they're overwhelmed. They're like, they're overwhelmed. They're like, they're overwhelmed. They're like, "Wait, I'm supposed to work out. I'm "Wait, I'm supposed to work out. I'm "Wait, I'm supposed to work out. I'm supposed to also eat right. I'm supposed to also eat right. I'm supposed to also eat right. I'm supposed to be empathically attuned. I'm supposed to be empathically attuned. I'm supposed to be empathically attuned. I'm supposed to be a provider and protector. I'm to be a provider and protector. I'm to be a provider and protector. I'm supposed to, you know, and they're like, supposed to, you know, and they're like, supposed to, you know, and they're like, "Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like this is really tough." "Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like this is really tough." "Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like this is really tough." I was fortunate that, and you were I was fortunate that, and you were I was fortunate that, and you were fortunate that we grew up in a time fortunate that we grew up in a time fortunate that we grew up in a time where the models were whatever we were where the models were whatever we were where the models were whatever we were interacting with, like when I decided to interacting with, like when I decided to interacting with, like when I decided to go into the fraternity of science. Sure, go into the fraternity of science. Sure, go into the fraternity of science. Sure, I kept exercising and stuff, but what I kept exercising and stuff, but what I kept exercising and stuff, but what I was like, "Okay, how do I get good at was like, "Okay, how do I get good at was like, "Okay, how do I get good at this thing? Who who are the good this thing? Who who are the good this thing? Who who are the good mentors? Who are the pieces of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mentors? Who are the pieces of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mentors? Who are the pieces of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mentors? we all talked and you're in mentors? we all talked and you're in mentors? we all talked and you're in this fraternity and you learn. Now, that this fraternity and you learn. Now, that this fraternity and you learn. Now, that fraternity included women because fraternity included women because fraternity included women because academia, at least in biology at that academia, at least in biology at that academia, at least in biology at that time, was about 50/50. time, was about 50/50. time, was about 50/50. &gt;&gt; Okay? &gt;&gt; Okay? &gt;&gt; Okay? &gt;&gt; At the faculty level, it it's a steep &gt;&gt; At the faculty level, it it's a steep &gt;&gt; At the faculty level, it it's a steep shift. That's changed somewhat now. But shift. That's changed somewhat now. But shift. That's changed somewhat now. But the point being, the point being, the point being, &gt;&gt; it was never about getting everything &gt;&gt; it was never about getting everything &gt;&gt; it was never about getting everything from your romantic relationship. The from your romantic relationship. The from your romantic relationship. The learning, the indoctrination, the learning, the indoctrination, the learning, the indoctrination, the learning of self learning of self learning of self &gt;&gt; and the kind of self-esteem and &gt;&gt; and the kind of self-esteem and &gt;&gt; and the kind of self-esteem and acceptance, a lot of that happened in acceptance, a lot of that happened in acceptance, a lot of that happened in this context. And I understand there's this context. And I understand there's this context. And I understand there's not a car carryover of skills to the not a car carryover of skills to the not a car carryover of skills to the home necessarily, but it filled a home necessarily, but it filled a home necessarily, but it filled a good fraction of the vessel of good fraction of the vessel of good fraction of the vessel of feeling like yeah, like I far from feeling like yeah, like I far from feeling like yeah, like I far from perfect. Believe me, I'm replete with perfect. Believe me, I'm replete with perfect. Believe me, I'm replete with flaws to this day. I say it over and flaws to this day. I say it over and flaws to this day. I say it over and over again. Uh and it's true, but where over again. Uh and it's true, but where over again. Uh and it's true, but where are the fraternities are the fraternities are the fraternities that young men and older men can go to that young men and older men can go to that young men and older men can go to if they don't have one? if they don't have one? if they don't have one? &gt;&gt; It's tough. Uh, I I'm a big fan of do a &gt;&gt; It's tough. Uh, I I'm a big fan of do a &gt;&gt; It's tough. Uh, I I'm a big fan of do a men's group. I love men's groups. Pure, men's group. I love men's groups. Pure, men's group. I love men's groups. Pure, you don't need a therapist to lead it. you don't need a therapist to lead it. you don't need a therapist to lead it. Get together with four other guys and Get together with four other guys and Get together with four other guys and just start talking about your lives. Um, just start talking about your lives. Um, just start talking about your lives. Um, do a bowling league. Um, the only do a bowling league. Um, the only do a bowling league. Um, the only thing I want to say two things. I want to say two things. I want to say two things. One is I want the fraternity to support One is I want the fraternity to support One is I want the fraternity to support your relationality, your relationality, your relationality, &gt;&gt; not your individual empowerment and &gt;&gt; not your individual empowerment and &gt;&gt; not your individual empowerment and entitlement. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I see fraternity as only being &gt;&gt; Yeah. I see fraternity as only being &gt;&gt; Yeah. I see fraternity as only being relational. Anything that you could do relational. Anything that you could do relational. Anything that you could do on your own is not really relational. on your own is not really relational. on your own is not really relational. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That in my mind it's sort of like &gt;&gt; Yeah. That in my mind it's sort of like &gt;&gt; Yeah. That in my mind it's sort of like &gt;&gt; Well, but to get together with four &gt;&gt; Well, but to get together with four &gt;&gt; Well, but to get together with four other guys and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about what a rotten other guys and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about what a rotten other guys and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about what a rotten life this is and how women are, you life this is and how women are, you life this is and how women are, you know, be an incel. No that know, be an incel. No that know, be an incel. No that &gt;&gt; well that that's happening online. I &gt;&gt; well that that's happening online. I &gt;&gt; well that that's happening online. I it might be happening in person but no I it might be happening in person but no I it might be happening in person but no I totally agree. I mean obviously it would totally agree. I mean obviously it would totally agree. I mean obviously it would be &gt;&gt; um to cultivate oneself. &gt;&gt; um to cultivate oneself. &gt;&gt; um to cultivate oneself. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Not to because there's something I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Not to because there's something I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Not to because there's something I mean we all do it. We all complain from mean we all do it. We all complain from mean we all do it. We all complain from time to time although I have friends who time to time although I have friends who time to time although I have friends who don't have the circuits. Um it's really don't have the circuits. Um it's really don't have the circuits. Um it's really impressive. But I think that complaining impressive. But I think that complaining impressive. But I think that complaining is a form of self abuse. I do. I think it's a form of self abuse. I do. I think it's a form of self abuse. I do. I think it's a I think the there's a threshold beyond a I think the there's a threshold beyond a I think the there's a threshold beyond which complaining becomes a form of which complaining becomes a form of which complaining becomes a form of self- abuse. self- abuse. self- abuse. &gt;&gt; Well, going back to having friends and &gt;&gt; Well, going back to having friends and &gt;&gt; Well, going back to having friends and training friends and cultivating training friends and cultivating training friends and cultivating friends, one of the things I teach guys friends, one of the things I teach guys friends, one of the things I teach guys is you want to train your friends to is you want to train your friends to is you want to train your friends to support your relationship, not your support your relationship, not your support your relationship, not your individual empowerment. individual empowerment. individual empowerment. So, oh my god, I had such a hard time So, oh my god, I had such a hard time So, oh my god, I had such a hard time with Belinda, blah blah. with Belinda, blah blah. with Belinda, blah blah. I don't want to hear you talk to me I don't want to hear you talk to me I don't want to hear you talk to me about what a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] she is. or maybe you about what a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] she is. or maybe you about what a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] she is. or maybe you can start that way, but pretty quickly can start that way, but pretty quickly can start that way, but pretty quickly what I want to hear is, okay, Terry, what I want to hear is, okay, Terry, what I want to hear is, okay, Terry, what did you do to contribute to that? what did you do to contribute to that? what did you do to contribute to that? And what might you do differently? I And what might you do differently? I And what might you do differently? I want you to support the mature part of want you to support the mature part of want you to support the mature part of me and the relational part of me, not my me and the relational part of me, not my me and the relational part of me, not my individual empowerment. And we have to individual empowerment. And we have to individual empowerment. And we have to train people to do that because our train people to do that because our train people to do that because our culture will gravitate toward individual culture will gravitate toward individual culture will gravitate toward individual empowerment. I wouldn't put up with that empowerment. I wouldn't put up with that empowerment. I wouldn't put up with that if I was you. That's not the support I if I was you. That's not the support I if I was you. That's not the support I want. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. to get early access to function. to get early access to function. Recently, I've been approached again, Recently, I've been approached again, Recently, I've been approached again, parents will reach out and I have a real parents will reach out and I have a real parents will reach out and I have a real soft spot for doing this and soft spot for doing this and soft spot for doing this and they'll say their son. It's their is they'll say their son. It's their is they'll say their son. It's their is always their son, right? They're no always their son, right? They're no always their son, right? They're no one's reaching out about their daughter. one's reaching out about their daughter. one's reaching out about their daughter. Um to me, they're saying, you know, my Um to me, they're saying, you know, my Um to me, they're saying, you know, my son is it's a real problem, right? Like son is it's a real problem, right? Like son is it's a real problem, right? Like he either graduated college and he's he either graduated college and he's he either graduated college and he's going nowhere. These are smart kids. Or going nowhere. These are smart kids. Or going nowhere. These are smart kids. Or they didn't graduate and it's like they didn't graduate and it's like they didn't graduate and it's like getting scary now. getting scary now. getting scary now. &gt;&gt; Yeah. uh and we had them checked out for &gt;&gt; Yeah. uh and we had them checked out for &gt;&gt; Yeah. uh and we had them checked out for the ADHD, the depression thing, and that the ADHD, the depression thing, and that the ADHD, the depression thing, and that nowadays there's all this information. nowadays there's all this information. nowadays there's all this information. People try a bunch of things. It's just People try a bunch of things. It's just People try a bunch of things. It's just very clear they're on not a good path. very clear they're on not a good path. very clear they're on not a good path. When I talk to these guys, When I talk to these guys, When I talk to these guys, 100% of the time, what they are asking 100% of the time, what they are asking 100% of the time, what they are asking for is not to figure out how to be in for is not to figure out how to be in for is not to figure out how to be in relationship. In fact, in more than a relationship. In fact, in more than a relationship. In fact, in more than a few cases, they're already in few cases, they're already in few cases, they're already in relationship and they have the really relationship and they have the really relationship and they have the really caring, wonderful partner. And sadly, a caring, wonderful partner. And sadly, a caring, wonderful partner. And sadly, a lot of these women have kind of gotten lot of these women have kind of gotten lot of these women have kind of gotten used to the fact that a lot of guys are used to the fact that a lot of guys are used to the fact that a lot of guys are kind of failure to launch and she's kind of failure to launch and she's kind of failure to launch and she's taking off and he's at home and we don't taking off and he's at home and we don't taking off and he's at home and we don't know how that's going to play out. But know how that's going to play out. But know how that's going to play out. But can't be good. Uh not in the long term. can't be good. Uh not in the long term. can't be good. Uh not in the long term. But the questions are always to me are But the questions are always to me are But the questions are always to me are about what do I do? How how can I find a what do I do? How how can I find a what do I do? How how can I find a group? How can I find work? How can I be group? How can I find work? How can I be group? How can I find work? How can I be part of something? They want to be part of something? They want to be part of something? They want to be part of something. and they're smart and of something. and they're smart and of something. and they're smart and their parents are smart. They're their parents are smart. They're their parents are smart. They're realizing that just podcasts are great, realizing that just podcasts are great, realizing that just podcasts are great, but ultimately, you know, I mean, this but ultimately, you know, I mean, this but ultimately, you know, I mean, this isn't going to happen, but maybe isn't going to happen, but maybe isn't going to happen, but maybe you watch one podcast a week and you get you watch one podcast a week and you get you watch one podcast a week and you get together with friends and you watch it together with friends and you watch it together with friends and you watch it and then you talk about it. Okay, that's and then you talk about it. Okay, that's and then you talk about it. Okay, that's not going to happen. That's not really not going to happen. That's not really not going to happen. That's not really how it works. But how it works. But how it works. But they're alone. They don't have male they're alone. They don't have male they're alone. They don't have male friends. &gt;&gt; They don't have the golf buddies. And &gt;&gt; They don't have the golf buddies. And &gt;&gt; They don't have the golf buddies. And this is, you know, this is a new thing this is, you know, this is a new thing this is, you know, this is a new thing to me like guys in these are guys in to me like guys in these are guys in to me like guys in these are guys in their 20s, sometimes in their 30s. And their 20s, sometimes in their 30s. And their 20s, sometimes in their 30s. And very often they no knock against very often they no knock against very often they no knock against anti-depressants where sometimes they anti-depressants where sometimes they anti-depressants where sometimes they have their use but very often there's a have their use but very often there's a have their use but very often there's a story about they've been on you know story about they've been on you know story about they've been on you know four different medications for high four different medications for high four different medications for high school and also for college they've got school and also for college they've got school and also for college they've got um sexual health issues maybe it's um sexual health issues maybe it's um sexual health issues maybe it's neurotic maybe it's biological related neurotic maybe it's biological related neurotic maybe it's biological related to the medications. Who knows? And to the medications. Who knows? And to the medications. Who knows? And they're stressed about their hair they're stressed about their hair they're stressed about their hair falling out. They're stressed about all falling out. They're stressed about all falling out. They're stressed about all this stuff and they're completely this stuff and they're completely this stuff and they're completely overwhelmed. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And my advice is always like, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. And my advice is always like, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. And my advice is always like, you know, to listen and it's not but I know, to listen and it's not but I know, to listen and it's not but I always think like the first thing is always think like the first thing is always think like the first thing is like again I have to be careful not to again I have to be careful not to again I have to be careful not to project what I did is like you have a project what I did is like you have a project what I did is like you have a driver's license. Yeah. All right. Do driver's license. Yeah. All right. Do driver's license. Yeah. All right. Do you know one person who's able-bodied you know one person who's able-bodied you know one person who's able-bodied who you trust? Yeah. All right. Go to who you trust? Yeah. All right. Go to who you trust? Yeah. All right. Go to Yusede and hike. Yusede and hike. Yusede and hike. Like that's my advice. It's not super Like that's my advice. It's not super Like that's my advice. It's not super sophisticated. Go. Like your phone won't sophisticated. Go. Like your phone won't sophisticated. Go. Like your phone won't work. Go to Twami Meadows. Don't freeze work. Go to Twami Meadows. Don't freeze work. Go to Twami Meadows. Don't freeze to death. like bring water. Don't be an to death. like bring water. Don't be an to death. like bring water. Don't be an idiot. Don't get Jardia. Like read a idiot. Don't get Jardia. Like read a idiot. Don't get Jardia. Like read a book or two online or like read a few book or two online or like read a few book or two online or like read a few things and just go to Yuseite and hike. things and just go to Yuseite and hike. things and just go to Yuseite and hike. Like make a friend by going and doing Like make a friend by going and doing Like make a friend by going and doing something. That's cool. something. That's cool. something. That's cool. &gt;&gt; And like &gt;&gt; And like &gt;&gt; And like &gt;&gt; cuz that's to be honest I know what &gt;&gt; cuz that's to be honest I know what &gt;&gt; cuz that's to be honest I know what they want. They want a job. They want to they want. They want a job. They want to they want. They want a job. They want to come work at the podcast. But they don't come work at the podcast. But they don't come work at the podcast. But they don't actually want that because you come here actually want that because you come here actually want that because you come here and we're working, right? And we hang and we're working, right? And we hang and we're working, right? And we hang out. But the I I've hearing this so out. But the I I've hearing this so out. But the I I've hearing this so often my phone I've got a list this long often my phone I've got a list this long often my phone I've got a list this long of guys. Some of them have tried to of guys. Some of them have tried to of guys. Some of them have tried to harm themselves. harm themselves. harm themselves. You know, I had a colleague kill himself You know, I had a colleague kill himself You know, I had a colleague kill himself recently. &gt;&gt; I'm sorry. &gt;&gt; I'm sorry. &gt;&gt; I'm sorry. &gt;&gt; Married two kids, kill himself. And I &gt;&gt; Married two kids, kill himself. And I &gt;&gt; Married two kids, kill himself. And I realized I didn't help him the right realized I didn't help him the right realized I didn't help him the right way. He reached out about some things. I way. He reached out about some things. I way. He reached out about some things. I should have said, "Get your stuff. We're should have said, "Get your stuff. We're should have said, "Get your stuff. We're going to Yeuseite." going to Yeuseite." going to Yeuseite." &gt;&gt; Like, you know, like we're taking a &gt;&gt; Like, you know, like we're taking a &gt;&gt; Like, you know, like we're taking a weekend and we're going hiking. weekend and we're going hiking. weekend and we're going hiking. &gt;&gt; And it's really wild because I feel &gt;&gt; And it's really wild because I feel &gt;&gt; And it's really wild because I feel like there are certain things that you like there are certain things that you like there are certain things that you just can't do on your own. just can't do on your own. just can't do on your own. &gt;&gt; Yeah. and all the stuff you're talking &gt;&gt; Yeah. and all the stuff you're talking &gt;&gt; Yeah. and all the stuff you're talking about, which is incredible about about, which is incredible about about, which is incredible about relating to romantic partner. These guys relating to romantic partner. These guys relating to romantic partner. These guys have romantic partners, but they're have romantic partners, but they're have romantic partners, but they're collapsing independent of that. independent of that. independent of that. &gt;&gt; That's not the only relationship you &gt;&gt; That's not the only relationship you &gt;&gt; That's not the only relationship you need to have. need to have. need to have. &gt;&gt; You need to have a place in the world &gt;&gt; You need to have a place in the world &gt;&gt; You need to have a place in the world and you need to have good work and you and you need to have good work and you and you need to have good work and you need to have a purpose and you need to need to have a purpose and you need to need to have a purpose and you need to have community and you need to have community and you need to have community and you need to have other buddies and you can also have other buddies and you can also have other buddies and you can also have buddies who are women too. I mean, buddies who are women too. I mean, buddies who are women too. I mean, &gt;&gt; sure. &gt;&gt; sure. &gt;&gt; sure. &gt;&gt; I don't want to get so narrow in the &gt;&gt; I don't want to get so narrow in the &gt;&gt; I don't want to get so narrow in the idea of fraternity. idea of fraternity. idea of fraternity. I'm going to say I want community. I'm going to say I want community. I'm going to say I want community. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Because you know why everybody's turning &gt;&gt; Because you know why everybody's turning &gt;&gt; Because you know why everybody's turning to you is like, will you be a good dad? to you is like, will you be a good dad? to you is like, will you be a good dad? You be a mentor. Here, take my kid. And You be a mentor. Here, take my kid. And You be a mentor. Here, take my kid. And [clears throat] they need you. Of [clears throat] they need you. Of [clears throat] they need you. Of course, they do. Uh, and course, they do. Uh, and course, they do. Uh, and you're right. Go be with somebody and you're right. Go be with somebody and you're right. Go be with somebody and you don't have to have a you don't have to have a you don't have to have a heart-to-heart. I don't want you to have heart-to-heart. I don't want you to have heart-to-heart. I don't want you to have nobody that you can have a heartto-he nobody that you can have a heartto-he nobody that you can have a heartto-he heart with. But let's start somewhere heart with. But let's start somewhere heart with. But let's start somewhere and just go be with someone. That's and just go be with someone. That's and just go be with someone. That's community. And yes, men with men, but community. And yes, men with men, but community. And yes, men with men, but also just community in general. Um, it also just community in general. Um, it also just community in general. Um, it doesn't have to be a man. And and I do doesn't have to be a man. And and I do doesn't have to be a man. And and I do want to say this. want to say this. want to say this. Men don't exclusively need men to teach Men don't exclusively need men to teach Men don't exclusively need men to teach them how to be men. Lesbian parents can them how to be men. Lesbian parents can them how to be men. Lesbian parents can teach boys how to be men. Single moms teach boys how to be men. Single moms teach boys how to be men. Single moms can teach boys how to be men. We get can teach boys how to be men. We get can teach boys how to be men. We get obsessed with this idea that only a man obsessed with this idea that only a man obsessed with this idea that only a man can raise a boy. And the research is can raise a boy. And the research is can raise a boy. And the research is clear. That's just not true. I talk clear. That's just not true. I talk clear. That's just not true. I talk about we need grown-ups to teach about we need grown-ups to teach about we need grown-ups to teach children how to be grown-ups. And uh children how to be grown-ups. And uh children how to be grown-ups. And uh yeah, I if you're a boy, you want to yeah, I if you're a boy, you want to yeah, I if you're a boy, you want to have a few men who you can look up to, have a few men who you can look up to, have a few men who you can look up to, who you can go, "Oh yeah, I want to be who you can go, "Oh yeah, I want to be who you can go, "Oh yeah, I want to be like him." Of course, he we need that. like him." Of course, he we need that. like him." Of course, he we need that. And let's not get so obsessed about it And let's not get so obsessed about it And let's not get so obsessed about it that we disempower other people to be. that we disempower other people to be. that we disempower other people to be. Some of my greatest mentors were women. Some of my greatest mentors were women. Some of my greatest mentors were women. &gt;&gt; No. Likewise, my graduate mentor was a &gt;&gt; No. Likewise, my graduate mentor was a &gt;&gt; No. Likewise, my graduate mentor was a woman. I learned more about life from woman. I learned more about life from woman. I learned more about life from her and science than I could have her and science than I could have her and science than I could have ever imagined. Right. Um, and actually ever imagined. Right. Um, and actually ever imagined. Right. Um, and actually moms of friends of mine when I was moms of friends of mine when I was moms of friends of mine when I was growing up were awesome examples and you growing up were awesome examples and you growing up were awesome examples and you know those weren't extensive rich know those weren't extensive rich know those weren't extensive rich conversations but you know I've got eyes conversations but you know I've got eyes conversations but you know I've got eyes and I got ears and you know I could and I got ears and you know I could and I got ears and you know I could observe oh that's a different way of observe oh that's a different way of observe oh that's a different way of relating or being you know I totally relating or being you know I totally relating or being you know I totally agree but there is something wonderful agree but there is something wonderful agree but there is something wonderful about guys going off and being guy you about guys going off and being guy you about guys going off and being guy you know uh Peggy Pap was a great family know uh Peggy Pap was a great family know uh Peggy Pap was a great family therapist married to uh Arthur um I mean therapist married to uh Arthur um I mean therapist married to uh Arthur um I mean Peggy Penn, married to Arthur Penn, the Peggy Penn, married to Arthur Penn, the Peggy Penn, married to Arthur Penn, the guy who did Bonnie and Clyde and uh she guy who did Bonnie and Clyde and uh she guy who did Bonnie and Clyde and uh she told a wonderful story about her told a wonderful story about her told a wonderful story about her husband. Every Sunday he would go out husband. Every Sunday he would go out husband. Every Sunday he would go out with the same guys in play golf. And he with the same guys in play golf. And he with the same guys in play golf. And he would come home and Peggy would say, would come home and Peggy would say, would come home and Peggy would say, "What talk about "What talk about "What talk about you know the lay of the green, what you know the lay of the green, what you know the lay of the green, what we're going to drink at the bar." And we're going to drink at the bar." And we're going to drink at the bar." And one day Peggy said, she said to her one day Peggy said, she said to her one day Peggy said, she said to her husband, "Look, Arthur, I'm a gender husband, "Look, Arthur, I'm a gender husband, "Look, Arthur, I'm a gender expert. I go around the world talking expert. I go around the world talking expert. I go around the world talking about, you know, next time you go off about, you know, next time you go off about, you know, next time you go off with your guys, I want you to come home with your guys, I want you to come home with your guys, I want you to come home and I want you to talk to me about and I want you to talk to me about and I want you to talk to me about feelings, about depth, about, you know, feelings, about depth, about, you know, feelings, about depth, about, you know, something more than the goddamn lay of something more than the goddamn lay of something more than the goddamn lay of the grain for Christ's sake. He comes, the grain for Christ's sake. He comes, the grain for Christ's sake. He comes, she comes home a week later. she comes home a week later. she comes home a week later. You went, "Yeah, I play. What did you You went, "Yeah, I play. What did you You went, "Yeah, I play. What did you guys talk about?" Oh, honey. Uh, Bill guys talk about?" Oh, honey. Uh, Bill guys talk about?" Oh, honey. Uh, Bill was incested by his nanny when he was incested by his nanny when he was incested by his nanny when he was four and Harry lost his dog when he was four and Harry lost his dog when he was four and Harry lost his dog when he was three and he never got over it. And three and he never got over it. And three and he never got over it. And Steve thinks he's got a really small Steve thinks he's got a really small Steve thinks he's got a really small penis and Peggy looked at him and go, penis and Peggy looked at him and go, penis and Peggy looked at him and go, "You're full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right?" We played "You're full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right?" We played "You're full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right?" We played golf. [laughter] golf. [laughter] golf. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, the great story. Um, yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, the great story. Um, yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, the great story. Um, yeah, I think that there's a um I'm a big fan I think that there's a um I'm a big fan I think that there's a um I'm a big fan of the movie Stand by Me. Oh, yeah. You of the movie Stand by Me. Oh, yeah. You of the movie Stand by Me. Oh, yeah. You know, sadly, you know, sadly, you know, sadly, you know, &gt;&gt; Reiner was murdered the other day, so &gt;&gt; Reiner was murdered the other day, so &gt;&gt; Reiner was murdered the other day, so just But that was brilliant movie. such just But that was brilliant movie. such just But that was brilliant movie. such an it's actually an important movie um an it's actually an important movie um an it's actually an important movie um despite it being a real- time piece um despite it being a real- time piece um despite it being a real- time piece um because it's that age right before boys because it's that age right before boys because it's that age right before boys they're either hitting puberty or they they're either hitting puberty or they they're either hitting puberty or they haven't hit puberty and there's this haven't hit puberty and there's this haven't hit puberty and there's this interesting thing that happens where interesting thing that happens where interesting thing that happens where they're sort of their self-concept is they're sort of their self-concept is they're sort of their self-concept is still in childhood like they're talking still in childhood like they're talking still in childhood like they're talking about superheroes and cartoons they have about superheroes and cartoons they have about superheroes and cartoons they have this argument about whether or not this argument about whether or not this argument about whether or not Mighty Mouse or Superman would win a Mighty Mouse or Superman would win a Mighty Mouse or Superman would win a fight and one of them goes that's fight and one of them goes that's fight and one of them goes that's ridiculous like Superman's a real person ridiculous like Superman's a real person ridiculous like Superman's a real person right you know it's awesome Um, and then right you know it's awesome Um, and then right you know it's awesome Um, and then one of them, the late River Phoenix, is one of them, the late River Phoenix, is one of them, the late River Phoenix, is just he's so clearly ahead of all of the just he's so clearly ahead of all of the just he's so clearly ahead of all of the other kids because of the rough other kids because of the rough other kids because of the rough environment, but also he's just environment, but also he's just environment, but also he's just developmentally more ahead of the game. developmentally more ahead of the game. developmentally more ahead of the game. So, it's an interesting thing about So, it's an interesting thing about So, it's an interesting thing about getting out and moving through space getting out and moving through space getting out and moving through space with people I think is good. Whether with people I think is good. Whether with people I think is good. Whether or not it's golf, which I consider a or not it's golf, which I consider a or not it's golf, which I consider a very slow movement, or it's hiking, or very slow movement, or it's hiking, or very slow movement, or it's hiking, or &gt;&gt; um, also the nice thing about walking &gt;&gt; um, also the nice thing about walking &gt;&gt; um, also the nice thing about walking and hiking is that it doesn't require and hiking is that it doesn't require and hiking is that it doesn't require any significant athleticism. any significant athleticism. any significant athleticism. Um, so as long as you bring water and Um, so as long as you bring water and Um, so as long as you bring water and some food and you know and if you're some food and you know and if you're some food and you know and if you're camping, you can camp or you can sleep camping, you can camp or you can sleep camping, you can camp or you can sleep in your car. Like it's just it's just in your car. Like it's just it's just in your car. Like it's just it's just like our day hike. It's just so simple. like our day hike. It's just so simple. like our day hike. It's just so simple. I will say um because I do want to talk I will say um because I do want to talk I will say um because I do want to talk about um substance use and abuse. about um substance use and abuse. about um substance use and abuse. &gt;&gt; Um anytime I hear &gt;&gt; Um anytime I hear &gt;&gt; Um anytime I hear &gt;&gt; um I always ask like are you smoking &gt;&gt; um I always ask like are you smoking &gt;&gt; um I always ask like are you smoking weed? Okay. I I'm not somebody who weed? Okay. I I'm not somebody who weed? Okay. I I'm not somebody who judges anyone if they're into it, but um judges anyone if they're into it, but um judges anyone if they're into it, but um young guys who are doing a lot of high young guys who are doing a lot of high young guys who are doing a lot of high THC cannabis seems from my experience, THC cannabis seems from my experience, THC cannabis seems from my experience, my data set, very highly correlated with my data set, very highly correlated with my data set, very highly correlated with a significant problems. Apathy being one a significant problems. Apathy being one a significant problems. Apathy being one of them and a bunch of other regulation of them and a bunch of other regulation of them and a bunch of other regulation issues, right? Same thing with drinking. issues, right? Same thing with drinking. issues, right? Same thing with drinking. Like if they're drinking too much, Like if they're drinking too much, Like if they're drinking too much, &gt;&gt; I'm like listening, go to a 12step &gt;&gt; I'm like listening, go to a 12step &gt;&gt; I'm like listening, go to a 12step meeting. You got you got to you can't be meeting. You got you got to you can't be meeting. You got you got to you can't be drinking smoking weed and not have a job drinking smoking weed and not have a job drinking smoking weed and not have a job cuz like it's just very clear how cuz like it's just very clear how cuz like it's just very clear how someone wants to put how that take plays someone wants to put how that take plays someone wants to put how that take plays out. So that I mean there are other out. So that I mean there are other out. So that I mean there are other things there. I feel like I have a things there. I feel like I have a things there. I feel like I have a responsibility to say that there are responsibility to say that there are responsibility to say that there are other points of suggestion. You usually other points of suggestion. You usually other points of suggestion. You usually it starts however with like what it starts however with like what it starts however with like what supplement should I take? Should I be supplement should I take? Should I be supplement should I take? Should I be taking creatine? I'm like you know how's taking creatine? I'm like you know how's taking creatine? I'm like you know how's your life? Oh it's a like it's a mess. your life? Oh it's a like it's a mess. your life? Oh it's a like it's a mess. Well you're in a relationship. Yeah I Well you're in a relationship. Yeah I Well you're in a relationship. Yeah I got a girlfriend. Is it great? Yeah got a girlfriend. Is it great? Yeah got a girlfriend. Is it great? Yeah she's super sweet. Are you working? No, she's super sweet. Are you working? No, she's super sweet. Are you working? No, she's working. She's at school. Okay. she's working. She's at school. Okay. she's working. She's at school. Okay. And then and then you start getting the And then and then you start getting the And then and then you start getting the picture and you're like, "Okay, creatine picture and you're like, "Okay, creatine picture and you're like, "Okay, creatine ain't gonna fix this." Yeah. You know, ain't gonna fix this." Yeah. You know, ain't gonna fix this." Yeah. You know, in fact, getting in shape can be in fact, getting in shape can be in fact, getting in shape can be empowering, but you're just spending all empowering, but you're just spending all empowering, but you're just spending all your time at the gym scrolling on social your time at the gym scrolling on social your time at the gym scrolling on social media taking pictures of your abs and media taking pictures of your abs and media taking pictures of your abs and then you don't have any friends. That's then you don't have any friends. That's then you don't have any friends. That's a disaster waiting to happen. and a disaster waiting to happen. and a disaster waiting to happen. and a place in the world, you know, our place in the world, you know, our place in the world, you know, our economy is not great and AI is going to economy is not great and AI is going to economy is not great and AI is going to come in and these kids are having a hard come in and these kids are having a hard come in and these kids are having a hard time finding a career and a job and time finding a career and a job and time finding a career and a job and meaning uh in the world. And you do get meaning uh in the world. And you do get meaning uh in the world. And you do get a dichotomy a lot of times where you a dichotomy a lot of times where you a dichotomy a lot of times where you have a man, a young man who is have a man, a young man who is have a man, a young man who is relationally skilled uh but not relationally skilled uh but not relationally skilled uh but not powerful, no place in the world. That powerful, no place in the world. That powerful, no place in the world. That that goes back to what I was talking that goes back to what I was talking that goes back to what I was talking about. you can have feelings and be a about. you can have feelings and be a about. you can have feelings and be a big baby about it. It's both. You have big baby about it. It's both. You have big baby about it. It's both. You have to you have to be relationally skilled to you have to be relationally skilled to you have to be relationally skilled and you have to be assertive and have and you have to be assertive and have and you have to be assertive and have meaning and have a spot in the world and meaning and have a spot in the world and meaning and have a spot in the world and a career. And uh a career. And uh a career. And uh I love to tell stories. Can I tell you a I love to tell stories. Can I tell you a I love to tell stories. Can I tell you a story? This is my quintessential story? This is my quintessential story? This is my quintessential &gt;&gt; what it means to be a man story. True &gt;&gt; what it means to be a man story. True &gt;&gt; what it means to be a man story. True story. So I had the privilege of going story. So I had the privilege of going story. So I had the privilege of going to Mas Island in Tanzania where we were to Mas Island in Tanzania where we were to Mas Island in Tanzania where we were we had to drive 10 hours to this very we had to drive 10 hours to this very we had to drive 10 hours to this very remote village which friends of mine remote village which friends of mine remote village which friends of mine were building a school with them. So were building a school with them. So were building a school with them. So they knew them and loved them. And so I they knew them and loved them. And so I they knew them and loved them. And so I had a men's group with the elders of had a men's group with the elders of had a men's group with the elders of this uh tribe for four nights and we this uh tribe for four nights and we this uh tribe for four nights and we talked about everything, God, women, talked about everything, God, women, talked about everything, God, women, death, whatever. And at one point I said death, whatever. And at one point I said death, whatever. And at one point I said to them, to them, to them, so there's a big debate in my country so there's a big debate in my country so there's a big debate in my country about what makes a good Morirani. Morani about what makes a good Morirani. Morani about what makes a good Morirani. Morani warrior man, one word, warrior man. That warrior man, one word, warrior man. That warrior man, one word, warrior man. That that's what it is. What makes Some that's what it is. What makes Some that's what it is. What makes Some people in America believe that a good people in America believe that a good people in America believe that a good morani is strong, morani is strong, morani is strong, uh, tough, don't mess with them. Other uh, tough, don't mess with them. Other uh, tough, don't mess with them. Other people believe that a good morani is people believe that a good morani is people believe that a good morani is sensitive and sweet and kind. What do sensitive and sweet and kind. What do sensitive and sweet and kind. What do you guys think? What makes a good you guys think? What makes a good you guys think? What makes a good morani? And uh it's absolutely true, Andrew. And uh it's absolutely true, Andrew. And uh it's absolutely true, Andrew. This this little guy must have been 300 This this little guy must have been 300 This this little guy must have been 300 years old. It had about 4 foot2 sticks years old. It had about 4 foot2 sticks years old. It had about 4 foot2 sticks his finger out and went from English to his finger out and went from English to his finger out and went from English to Swahili and Mai to Swahili to English. Swahili and Mai to Swahili to English. Swahili and Mai to Swahili to English. And he sounded pissed And he sounded pissed And he sounded pissed and he said, "I have no interest in and he said, "I have no interest in and he said, "I have no interest in talking to you about what makes a good talking to you about what makes a good talking to you about what makes a good Mirani." Couldn't care less. But I will Mirani." Couldn't care less. But I will Mirani." Couldn't care less. But I will talk to you about what makes a great talk to you about what makes a great talk to you about what makes a great Mirani. So now listen, when the moment Mirani. So now listen, when the moment Mirani. So now listen, when the moment calls for fierceness, calls for fierceness, calls for fierceness, a good Morirani is a killer. And they a good Morirani is a killer. And they a good Morirani is a killer. And they are they have swords and shields they are they have swords and shields they are they have swords and shields and they're warriors. They'll kill you. and they're warriors. They'll kill you. and they're warriors. They'll kill you. Don't cross them. When the moment calls Don't cross them. When the moment calls Don't cross them. When the moment calls for tenderness, a good Morani will lay for tenderness, a good Morani will lay for tenderness, a good Morani will lay down his sword and shield and be sweet down his sword and shield and be sweet down his sword and shield and be sweet like a baby. What makes a great Morirani like a baby. What makes a great Morirani like a baby. What makes a great Morirani is knowing which moment is which. is knowing which moment is which. is knowing which moment is which. That's what I want. I want adaptability, That's what I want. I want adaptability, That's what I want. I want adaptability, flexibility, and wholeness. Strong, flexibility, and wholeness. Strong, flexibility, and wholeness. Strong, vulnerable, related, vulnerable, related, vulnerable, related, firm. All of our human qualities kicked firm. All of our human qualities kicked firm. All of our human qualities kicked out in the moment that calls for them out in the moment that calls for them out in the moment that calls for them with flexibility. That's a man. with flexibility. That's a man. with flexibility. That's a man. It's clear that within romantic It's clear that within romantic It's clear that within romantic relationship and other um and other relationship and other um and other relationship and other um and other family type relationships that uh the family type relationships that uh the family type relationships that uh the softness, the kindness, but also what softness, the kindness, but also what softness, the kindness, but also what you referred to before as being skilled. you referred to before as being skilled. you referred to before as being skilled. Not hard, not soft. Skilled. That's what Not hard, not soft. Skilled. That's what Not hard, not soft. Skilled. That's what you're looking for in a point of you're looking for in a point of you're looking for in a point of friction. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; Think skill. Think be skilled. Don't &gt;&gt; Think skill. Think be skilled. Don't &gt;&gt; Think skill. Think be skilled. Don't think be hard. Don't think be soft. Be think be hard. Don't think be soft. Be think be hard. Don't think be soft. Be skilled. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's in your interest to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's in your interest to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's in your interest to be skilled. you're not giving in. skilled. you're not giving in. skilled. you're not giving in. &gt;&gt; You're being smart. &gt;&gt; You're being smart. &gt;&gt; You're being smart. &gt;&gt; The warrior piece, um, &gt;&gt; The warrior piece, um, &gt;&gt; The warrior piece, um, you know, here in the United States and you know, here in the United States and you know, here in the United States and other Western cultures, um, you know, other Western cultures, um, you know, other Western cultures, um, you know, it's what's happening right now, it it's what's happening right now, it it's what's happening right now, it is kind of scary, right? People are very is kind of scary, right? People are very is kind of scary, right? People are very concerned, men are very concerned about concerned, men are very concerned about concerned, men are very concerned about how to make a live a living. how to make a live a living. how to make a live a living. &gt;&gt; Yeah. probably to an extent that at &gt;&gt; Yeah. probably to an extent that at &gt;&gt; Yeah. probably to an extent that at least in my lifetime I've not never least in my lifetime I've not never least in my lifetime I've not never observed because like computers came observed because like computers came observed because like computers came along and you know there was the whole along and you know there was the whole along and you know there was the whole obnoxious like learn to code thing and obnoxious like learn to code thing and obnoxious like learn to code thing and you know f and it was like those you know f and it was like those you know f and it was like those you know but very quickly people realize know but very quickly people realize know but very quickly people realize okay you don't have to be a computer okay you don't have to be a computer okay you don't have to be a computer programmer to still make a living programmer to still make a living programmer to still make a living factories have closed but you know there factories have closed but you know there factories have closed but you know there are other things but that was a rough are other things but that was a rough are other things but that was a rough transition we forget right and then but transition we forget right and then but transition we forget right and then but now with AI there's this feeling that now with AI there's this feeling that now with AI there's this feeling that it's like a tidal wave of um work opport it's like a tidal wave of um work opport it's like a tidal wave of um work opport opportunity is going to be taken away opportunity is going to be taken away opportunity is going to be taken away from men. So in the context of your from men. So in the context of your from men. So in the context of your story is work the warrior piece in the story is work the warrior piece in the story is work the warrior piece in the United States. Okay. United States. Okay. United States. Okay. &gt;&gt; I would call it a place in the world. I &gt;&gt; I would call it a place in the world. I &gt;&gt; I would call it a place in the world. I would call it uh purpose. would call it uh purpose. would call it uh purpose. &gt;&gt; So what happens when &gt;&gt; So what happens when &gt;&gt; So what happens when there isn't work to do? there isn't work to do? there isn't work to do? &gt;&gt; I think that this is a big crisis for &gt;&gt; I think that this is a big crisis for &gt;&gt; I think that this is a big crisis for young men, younger men, millennial, young men, younger men, millennial, young men, younger men, millennial, genuine, what I don't even have all the genuine, what I don't even have all the genuine, what I don't even have all the alphabet. um they're nervous that there alphabet. um they're nervous that there alphabet. um they're nervous that there is no opening uh for them to step into is no opening uh for them to step into is no opening uh for them to step into the world and have a meaningful place. the world and have a meaningful place. the world and have a meaningful place. &gt;&gt; Well, for a long time the discussion was &gt;&gt; Well, for a long time the discussion was &gt;&gt; Well, for a long time the discussion was about finding work that you really love about finding work that you really love about finding work that you really love as opposed to just doing something as opposed to just doing something as opposed to just doing something because you make a good living. Yes. because you make a good living. Yes. because you make a good living. Yes. &gt;&gt; Now I think the conversation actually is &gt;&gt; Now I think the conversation actually is &gt;&gt; Now I think the conversation actually is switching to like what can I do to just switching to like what can I do to just switching to like what can I do to just make a living. make a living. make a living. &gt;&gt; I need to put bread on the table. I'm &gt;&gt; I need to put bread on the table. I'm &gt;&gt; I need to put bread on the table. I'm floundering. And also um women are I'm floundering. And also um women are I'm floundering. And also um women are in the workforce. in the workforce. in the workforce. &gt;&gt; You know uh men are feeling their &gt;&gt; You know uh men are feeling their &gt;&gt; You know uh men are feeling their position eroding position eroding position eroding uh in part because of changing economic uh in part because of changing economic uh in part because of changing economic circumstances but in part you know back circumstances but in part you know back circumstances but in part you know back in the 40s and 50s I slayed dragons came in the 40s and 50s I slayed dragons came in the 40s and 50s I slayed dragons came home and my wife met me with a martini home and my wife met me with a martini home and my wife met me with a martini and slippers. Nowadays I slay dragons I and slippers. Nowadays I slay dragons I and slippers. Nowadays I slay dragons I come home and my wife comes home from come home and my wife comes home from come home and my wife comes home from slaying dragons too. Uh uh one of the slaying dragons too. Uh uh one of the slaying dragons too. Uh uh one of the nice things about young man is that they nice things about young man is that they nice things about young man is that they understand that it's going to be a two understand that it's going to be a two understand that it's going to be a two career family and they're more career family and they're more career family and they're more egalitarian than we were. egalitarian than we were. egalitarian than we were. I have to help with the it's not fair I have to help with the it's not fair I have to help with the it's not fair for me to not help with the dishes. for me to not help with the dishes. for me to not help with the dishes. She's as tired as I am. And and her She's as tired as I am. And and her She's as tired as I am. And and her paycheck is as big as you know there was paycheck is as big as you know there was paycheck is as big as you know there was research there's a direct correlation research there's a direct correlation research there's a direct correlation between how much housework a man does between how much housework a man does between how much housework a man does and how big his wife's paycheck is. the and how big his wife's paycheck is. the and how big his wife's paycheck is. the bigger her paycheck, the more housework bigger her paycheck, the more housework bigger her paycheck, the more housework he does. And but that's not, you know, he does. And but that's not, you know, he does. And but that's not, you know, being whipped. That's like, yeah, she's being whipped. That's like, yeah, she's being whipped. That's like, yeah, she's tired, too. We both have to, we're a tired, too. We both have to, we're a tired, too. We both have to, we're a team. So, there is some of that with team. So, there is some of that with team. So, there is some of that with men. On the other hand, you know, with men. On the other hand, you know, with men. On the other hand, you know, this whipped up uh kind of hysteria this whipped up uh kind of hysteria this whipped up uh kind of hysteria about the crisis with men, boys are about the crisis with men, boys are about the crisis with men, boys are doing poorly in school and boys aren't doing poorly in school and boys aren't doing poorly in school and boys aren't doing this and boys, a lot of that is doing this and boys, a lot of that is doing this and boys, a lot of that is comparative. Uh boys are doing worse than women. Boys Uh boys are doing worse than women. Boys Uh boys are doing worse than women. Boys are uh not achieving the same grades as are uh not achieving the same grades as are uh not achieving the same grades as girls. And I haven't looked at this, but girls. And I haven't looked at this, but girls. And I haven't looked at this, but I'm wondering if some of this hyped up, I'm wondering if some of this hyped up, I'm wondering if some of this hyped up, oh, what's going on with boys? boys oh, what's going on with boys? boys oh, what's going on with boys? boys haven't boys aren't that much worse. haven't boys aren't that much worse. haven't boys aren't that much worse. It's that the girls and women are doing It's that the girls and women are doing It's that the girls and women are doing so much better. And in comparison, it so much better. And in comparison, it so much better. And in comparison, it looks like we're standing still and looks like we're standing still and looks like we're standing still and being passed. That is the feeling. There being passed. That is the feeling. There being passed. That is the feeling. There is a feeling in all aspects of is a feeling in all aspects of is a feeling in all aspects of privilege, white privilege, male privilege, white privilege, male privilege, white privilege, male privilege. Look, these other people are privilege. Look, these other people are privilege. Look, these other people are getting led in and they're going to eat getting led in and they're going to eat getting led in and they're going to eat my lunch and I'm nervous about that. my lunch and I'm nervous about that. my lunch and I'm nervous about that. You know, I um I observed in the You know, I um I observed in the You know, I um I observed in the 80s and 90s and 2000s, 80s and 90s and 2000s, 80s and 90s and 2000s, uh a lot of guys, mostly guys, become uh a lot of guys, mostly guys, become uh a lot of guys, mostly guys, become addicts. And not all of them came from traumatic And not all of them came from traumatic And not all of them came from traumatic homes. Not of the whatever the big tea homes. Not of the whatever the big tea homes. Not of the whatever the big tea type trauma, at least not that I'm aware type trauma, at least not that I'm aware type trauma, at least not that I'm aware of. Some did. Mostly it was um of. Some did. Mostly it was um of. Some did. Mostly it was um absent fathers tended to kind of predict absent fathers tended to kind of predict absent fathers tended to kind of predict addiction or addiction or addiction or &gt;&gt; That is true. or addict &gt;&gt; That is true. or addict &gt;&gt; That is true. or addict &gt;&gt; death that is trauma. &gt;&gt; death that is trauma. &gt;&gt; death that is trauma. &gt;&gt; It is trauma, right? I was just sort of &gt;&gt; It is trauma, right? I was just sort of &gt;&gt; It is trauma, right? I was just sort of big tea little like I'm not aware of any big tea little like I'm not aware of any big tea little like I'm not aware of any then they could exist. I don't know. Um then they could exist. I don't know. Um then they could exist. I don't know. Um specific I want to be clear about this specific I want to be clear about this specific I want to be clear about this because it's endemic to our culture. because it's endemic to our culture. because it's endemic to our culture. Absent dads, Absent dads, Absent dads, you know, is the norm for many people in you know, is the norm for many people in you know, is the norm for many people in this culture and uh absence can do more this culture and uh absence can do more this culture and uh absence can do more damage than violent presidents damage than violent presidents damage than violent presidents &gt;&gt; can. &gt;&gt; can. &gt;&gt; can. uh and we tend to not think about it uh and we tend to not think about it uh and we tend to not think about it that way. But neglect can be as that way. But neglect can be as that way. But neglect can be as wounding. You know, back to Bllye, he wounding. You know, back to Bllye, he wounding. You know, back to Bllye, he said this one, he's a beautiful poet. He said this one, he's a beautiful poet. He said this one, he's a beautiful poet. He said, "Every time a young man walks down said, "Every time a young man walks down said, "Every time a young man walks down the corridor and says hello to an older, the corridor and says hello to an older, the corridor and says hello to an older, more successful man, and that man does more successful man, and that man does more successful man, and that man does not say hello back, that's a wound in not say hello back, that's a wound in not say hello back, that's a wound in the soul of the young man." I love that. the soul of the young man." I love that. the soul of the young man." I love that. And absences uh speak as woundingly as And absences uh speak as woundingly as And absences uh speak as woundingly as uh violent presences do. And uh violent presences do. And uh violent presences do. And many men not being relational many men not being relational many men not being relational are absent and are absent and are absent and people suffer. The children suffer and people suffer. The children suffer and people suffer. The children suffer and the partners suffer. the partners suffer. the partners suffer. And then uh I talk about the unholy And then uh I talk about the unholy And then uh I talk about the unholy triad of patriarchy. You've got absent triad of patriarchy. You've got absent triad of patriarchy. You've got absent or irresponsible dad. You've got unhappy or irresponsible dad. You've got unhappy or irresponsible dad. You've got unhappy but accommodating mom and then you have but accommodating mom and then you have but accommodating mom and then you have a sweet, a sweet, a sweet, smart, sensitive little boy. And that smart, sensitive little boy. And that smart, sensitive little boy. And that boy feels his mother's pain. boy feels his mother's pain. boy feels his mother's pain. She doesn't have to do anything to quote She doesn't have to do anything to quote She doesn't have to do anything to quote imsh him. He feels it and he moves into imsh him. He feels it and he moves into imsh him. He feels it and he moves into caretaking her. And then his template caretaking her. And then his template caretaking her. And then his template for relationship is I'm a caretaker. for relationship is I'm a caretaker. for relationship is I'm a caretaker. It's not mutual. It's not mutual. It's not mutual. uh and then he has a very ambivalent uh and then he has a very ambivalent uh and then he has a very ambivalent relationship to being close to somebody relationship to being close to somebody relationship to being close to somebody because close means nobody cares about because close means nobody cares about because close means nobody cares about me. I'm taking care of them. That is me. I'm taking care of them. That is me. I'm taking care of them. That is endemic in our culture. Very common. And endemic in our culture. Very common. And endemic in our culture. Very common. And and I'm I appreciate the what is the and I'm I appreciate the what is the and I'm I appreciate the what is the redirect to this. I I'll come back to redirect to this. I I'll come back to redirect to this. I I'll come back to what I was the addiction piece. But what I was the addiction piece. But what I was the addiction piece. But what you're describing is everywhere you're describing is everywhere you're describing is everywhere &gt;&gt; everywhere &gt;&gt; everywhere &gt;&gt; everywhere &gt;&gt; everywhere. This is often why the I &gt;&gt; everywhere. This is often why the I &gt;&gt; everywhere. This is often why the I get the text from the mom of a kid say get the text from the mom of a kid say get the text from the mom of a kid say my kid, you know, he's got these my kid, you know, he's got these my kid, you know, he's got these issues, right? We talked about them. Um issues, right? We talked about them. Um issues, right? We talked about them. Um it's the phenotype you're describing. it's the phenotype you're describing. it's the phenotype you're describing. It's a scenario you're describing. Um It's a scenario you're describing. Um It's a scenario you're describing. Um there was a message in the early 90s there was a message in the early 90s there was a message in the early 90s that I think was very toxic, frankly. that I think was very toxic, frankly. that I think was very toxic, frankly. I'll take some heat for this because I'll take some heat for this because I'll take some heat for this because it's politically leaning, but like I it's politically leaning, but like I it's politically leaning, but like I don't I'm be very clear in my politics. don't I'm be very clear in my politics. don't I'm be very clear in my politics. I don't like political groups. I don't I don't like political groups. I don't I don't like political groups. I don't like groups that relate to uh politics, like groups that relate to uh politics, like groups that relate to uh politics, frankly. I just don't like them. Um I'm frankly. I just don't like them. Um I'm frankly. I just don't like them. Um I'm a sometimes a double hater and uh but I a sometimes a double hater and uh but I a sometimes a double hater and uh but I I'm just there's certain things on, you I'm just there's certain things on, you I'm just there's certain things on, you know, through the middle in both sides. know, through the middle in both sides. know, through the middle in both sides. Yes. No, no, definitely no. Yes. No, no, definitely no. Yes. No, no, definitely no. Definitely no. Okay, that's me. Definitely no. Okay, that's me. Definitely no. Okay, that's me. I'll just put it on the table. I'll just put it on the table. I'll just put it on the table. In the '9s, there were two messages that In the '9s, there were two messages that In the '9s, there were two messages that came about during the Clinton came about during the Clinton came about during the Clinton administration. Um, one was very useful, administration. Um, one was very useful, administration. Um, one was very useful, one was highly toxic in my opinion. The one was highly toxic in my opinion. The one was highly toxic in my opinion. The first one that was very useful was first one that was very useful was first one that was very useful was Hillary Clinton took data from was Hillary Clinton took data from was Hillary Clinton took data from was talking about data from my colleague talking about data from my colleague talking about data from my colleague Carla Shatz at Stanford who talked about Carla Shatz at Stanford who talked about Carla Shatz at Stanford who talked about fire together, wire together. She said fire together, wire together. She said fire together, wire together. She said that, not Donald. For the record, she that, not Donald. For the record, she that, not Donald. For the record, she said that, not Donald Heb. said that, not Donald Heb. said that, not Donald Heb. &gt;&gt; Um, and it had to do with brain &gt;&gt; Um, and it had to do with brain &gt;&gt; Um, and it had to do with brain plasticity. And they talked about plasticity. And they talked about plasticity. And they talked about this first six years. Okay. like Hillary this first six years. Okay. like Hillary this first six years. Okay. like Hillary Clinton or hater, the first six years is Clinton or hater, the first six years is Clinton or hater, the first six years is a real thing. And it attuned parents to a real thing. And it attuned parents to a real thing. And it attuned parents to the idea that the first six years of the idea that the first six years of the idea that the first six years of life are not the only important part of life are not the only important part of life are not the only important part of life, but there's a lot of brain life, but there's a lot of brain life, but there's a lot of brain plasticity happening there. And she plasticity happening there. And she plasticity happening there. And she talked to the right scientist, Carla, my talked to the right scientist, Carla, my talked to the right scientist, Carla, my colleague and friend, um, phenomenal colleague and friend, um, phenomenal colleague and friend, um, phenomenal neuroscientist, about the fact that neuroscientist, about the fact that neuroscientist, about the fact that playing your kid classical music isn't playing your kid classical music isn't playing your kid classical music isn't going to help. What they need is a going to help. What they need is a going to help. What they need is a certain amount of nurturing and certain amount of nurturing and certain amount of nurturing and stuff to really wire those circuits up. stuff to really wire those circuits up. stuff to really wire those circuits up. and then certain windows close and you and then certain windows close and you and then certain windows close and you can go back and do the work. But those can go back and do the work. But those can go back and do the work. But those first six years are absolutely critical. first six years are absolutely critical. first six years are absolutely critical. It should have been the first 50 years, It should have been the first 50 years, It should have been the first 50 years, but six was good. That was a great but six was good. That was a great but six was good. That was a great message. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; One that still I think carries forward &gt;&gt; One that still I think carries forward &gt;&gt; One that still I think carries forward today and we should acknowledge that. today and we should acknowledge that. today and we should acknowledge that. the other message and it was the other message and it was the other message and it was the Bill Clinton story was because he had a Bill Clinton story was because he had a Bill Clinton story was because he had a single mom and at least by Democrats he single mom and at least by Democrats he single mom and at least by Democrats he was highly revered was this idea and you was highly revered was this idea and you was highly revered was this idea and you can find this online that as long as can find this online that as long as can find this online that as long as there's one person that cares about you there's one person that cares about you there's one person that cares about you that you're going to be just fine. that you're going to be just fine. that you're going to be just fine. &gt;&gt; And I understand that it had benevolent &gt;&gt; And I understand that it had benevolent &gt;&gt; And I understand that it had benevolent motives. It was like look if you have no motives. It was like look if you have no motives. It was like look if you have no one clearly you're screwed. it's or one clearly you're screwed. it's or one clearly you're screwed. it's or life's going to be much harder. If life's going to be much harder. If life's going to be much harder. If you have multiple people that care about you have multiple people that care about you have multiple people that care about you and are nurturing you as a young you and are nurturing you as a young you and are nurturing you as a young person, becoming a young adult, etc., person, becoming a young adult, etc., person, becoming a young adult, etc., even better. But the notion was that if even better. But the notion was that if even better. But the notion was that if you just had one person, you're good. you just had one person, you're good. you just had one person, you're good. And I think that seeded this idea that And I think that seeded this idea that And I think that seeded this idea that sure, sometimes divorce saves families, sure, sometimes divorce saves families, sure, sometimes divorce saves families, sometimes it destroys families. There's sometimes it destroys families. There's sometimes it destroys families. There's all sorts of ideas, but that idea, I all sorts of ideas, but that idea, I all sorts of ideas, but that idea, I think, was highly toxic think, was highly toxic think, was highly toxic because it runs counter-current to because it runs counter-current to because it runs counter-current to everything we understand about what it everything we understand about what it everything we understand about what it takes to be takes to be takes to be nurtured properly. Doesn't mean you need nurtured properly. Doesn't mean you need nurtured properly. Doesn't mean you need two parents as you pointed out. You can two parents as you pointed out. You can two parents as you pointed out. You can get nurturing from men or from women, get nurturing from men or from women, get nurturing from men or from women, etc. But this idea that you just need etc. But this idea that you just need etc. But this idea that you just need one person who cares about you, that's one person who cares about you, that's one person who cares about you, that's what you just described. It's the what you just described. It's the what you just described. It's the mom who cares about the kid, the kid who mom who cares about the kid, the kid who mom who cares about the kid, the kid who sees the mom's pain, the absent dad. sees the mom's pain, the absent dad. sees the mom's pain, the absent dad. Sometimes it's the reverse. Usually it's Sometimes it's the reverse. Usually it's Sometimes it's the reverse. Usually it's the scenario you described. the scenario you described. the scenario you described. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I've just seen thousands of examples &gt;&gt; And I've just seen thousands of examples &gt;&gt; And I've just seen thousands of examples where that leads to very bad things. where that leads to very bad things. where that leads to very bad things. There should have been a an ellipse on There should have been a an ellipse on There should have been a an ellipse on that said in the case where it's that said in the case where it's that said in the case where it's just one person or parent, there need to just one person or parent, there need to just one person or parent, there need to be other people to fill the roles that be other people to fill the roles that be other people to fill the roles that person can't fill. person can't fill. person can't fill. &gt;&gt; Yes, of course. And &gt;&gt; Yes, of course. And &gt;&gt; Yes, of course. And there's also a difference between I'm a there's also a difference between I'm a there's also a difference between I'm a single mom raising my son. and we'll single mom raising my son. and we'll single mom raising my son. and we'll keep it to boys. Uh so I have a keep it to boys. Uh so I have a keep it to boys. Uh so I have a community of people around that boy to community of people around that boy to community of people around that boy to love him and it's not all me. Um that love him and it's not all me. Um that love him and it's not all me. Um that doesn't necessarily mean I need a doesn't necessarily mean I need a doesn't necessarily mean I need a surrogate father to bring him to bring surrogate father to bring him to bring surrogate father to bring him to bring him and to teach me how to be a man. him and to teach me how to be a man. him and to teach me how to be a man. Anybody in the This is good, but not Anybody in the This is good, but not Anybody in the This is good, but not just one person. Agreed. just one person. Agreed. just one person. Agreed. The other thing I want to say is there's The other thing I want to say is there's The other thing I want to say is there's a difference between I'm being raised by a difference between I'm being raised by a difference between I'm being raised by a single parent and I'm being raised by a single parent and I'm being raised by a single parent and I'm being raised by two parents, one of whom doesn't pay any two parents, one of whom doesn't pay any two parents, one of whom doesn't pay any attention to me. There's a difference attention to me. There's a difference attention to me. There's a difference between somebody who's really gone and between somebody who's really gone and between somebody who's really gone and someone who's physically there and someone who's physically there and someone who's physically there and emotionally gone. emotionally gone. emotionally gone. &gt;&gt; And that is a wound. And unfortunately, &gt;&gt; And that is a wound. And unfortunately, &gt;&gt; And that is a wound. And unfortunately, because so many men are so unreational, because so many men are so unreational, because so many men are so unreational, we're going to change that. Um, that's we're going to change that. Um, that's we're going to change that. Um, that's what you get. And if dad is distant from what you get. And if dad is distant from what you get. And if dad is distant from me, dad's also distant from mom and mom me, dad's also distant from mom and mom me, dad's also distant from mom and mom is brokenhearted. is brokenhearted. is brokenhearted. And traditionally, mom's brokenhearted And traditionally, mom's brokenhearted And traditionally, mom's brokenhearted and not doing much about it, just and not doing much about it, just and not doing much about it, just resenting it and suffering it. resenting it and suffering it. resenting it and suffering it. Downloading a lot of that feeling to me, Downloading a lot of that feeling to me, Downloading a lot of that feeling to me, whether she means to or not, I just pick whether she means to or not, I just pick whether she means to or not, I just pick it up. And then I move into some skewed it up. And then I move into some skewed it up. And then I move into some skewed relationship where I'm parenting her relationship where I'm parenting her relationship where I'm parenting her instead of being parented by her. She instead of being parented by her. She instead of being parented by her. She doesn't have to do a thing. doesn't have to do a thing. doesn't have to do a thing. She can be the world's greatest mom She can be the world's greatest mom She can be the world's greatest mom explicitly, but I'm feeling her distress explicitly, but I'm feeling her distress explicitly, but I'm feeling her distress and stepping in to that. And then I have and stepping in to that. And then I have and stepping in to that. And then I have a hard time with relationships as an a hard time with relationships as an a hard time with relationships as an adult man. We call this being a love adult man. We call this being a love adult man. We call this being a love avoidant. It's like my template for avoidant. It's like my template for avoidant. It's like my template for relationships is I'm caretaking you. You relationships is I'm caretaking you. You relationships is I'm caretaking you. You don't really care about me. So, I'll be don't really care about me. So, I'll be don't really care about me. So, I'll be in the relationship, but I don't want to in the relationship, but I don't want to in the relationship, but I don't want to get swallowed up by you. So I'll be in get swallowed up by you. So I'll be in get swallowed up by you. So I'll be in the relationship, but I'll also be very the relationship, but I'll also be very the relationship, but I'll also be very distant. In that way, the distance gets distant. In that way, the distance gets distant. In that way, the distance gets replicated generation by generation by replicated generation by generation by replicated generation by generation by generation. I'd like to take a brief break and I'd like to take a brief break and I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that offers hundreds of guided meditation offers hundreds of guided meditation offers hundreds of guided meditation programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga nidra sessions, and more. I started nidra sessions, and more. I started nidra sessions, and more. I started practicing meditation when I was about practicing meditation when I was about practicing meditation when I was about 15 years old, and it made a profound 15 years old, and it made a profound 15 years old, and it made a profound impact on my life. And by now, there are impact on my life. And by now, there are impact on my life. And by now, there are thousands of quality peer-reviewed thousands of quality peer-reviewed thousands of quality peer-reviewed studies that emphasize how useful studies that emphasize how useful studies that emphasize how useful mindfulness meditation can be for mindfulness meditation can be for mindfulness meditation can be for improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different meditations to choose from. And those meditations to choose from. And those meditations to choose from. And those meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up with your meditation practice, both from with your meditation practice, both from with your meditation practice, both from the perspective of novelty. You never the perspective of novelty. You never the perspective of novelty. You never get tired of those meditations. There's get tired of those meditations. There's get tired of those meditations. There's always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the effectiveness of meditation. And you can effectiveness of meditation. And you can effectiveness of meditation. And you can always fit meditation into your always fit meditation into your always fit meditation into your schedule, even if you only have two or schedule, even if you only have two or schedule, even if you only have two or three minutes per day in which to three minutes per day in which to three minutes per day in which to meditate. If you'd like to try the meditate. If you'd like to try the meditate. If you'd like to try the Waking Up app, please go to Waking Up app, please go to Waking Up app, please go to wakingup.com/huberman where you can access a free 30-day where you can access a free 30-day where you can access a free 30-day trial. Again, that's trial. Again, that's trial. Again, that's wakingup.com/huberman to access a free 30-day trial. I think I to access a free 30-day trial. I think I to access a free 30-day trial. I think I know the answer to the question I'm know the answer to the question I'm know the answer to the question I'm about to ask, but about to ask, but about to ask, but I'll ask it anyway. In your experience, I'll ask it anyway. In your experience, I'll ask it anyway. In your experience, are women just better at being are women just better at being are women just better at being relational than men? relational than men? relational than men? &gt;&gt; They're better. &gt;&gt; They're better. &gt;&gt; They're better. They ain't no angels. Women have to They ain't no angels. Women have to They ain't no angels. Women have to learn a few things, too. Um, they have learn a few things, too. Um, they have learn a few things, too. Um, they have to learn to be subjective. to learn to be subjective. to learn to be subjective. Um, it's really tempting because I do Um, it's really tempting because I do Um, it's really tempting because I do know more about relationships than my know more about relationships than my know more about relationships than my guy to start feeling like I'm his coach. guy to start feeling like I'm his coach. guy to start feeling like I'm his coach. I'm going to teach him what he needs to I'm going to teach him what he needs to I'm going to teach him what he needs to do. That's an arrogant position. That's do. That's an arrogant position. That's do. That's an arrogant position. That's a grandiose position. Stay humble. I can a grandiose position. Stay humble. I can a grandiose position. Stay humble. I can teach you what I need. I'm not your teach you what I need. I'm not your teach you what I need. I'm not your relational coach. That's a trap. Um, relational coach. That's a trap. Um, relational coach. That's a trap. Um, women have to learn how to speak women have to learn how to speak women have to learn how to speak relationally also. So, story, I love to relationally also. So, story, I love to relationally also. So, story, I love to tell stories. This true story and this tell stories. This true story and this tell stories. This true story and this is the example I give about stepping out is the example I give about stepping out is the example I give about stepping out of our usual cultural framework and of our usual cultural framework and of our usual cultural framework and learning how to think relationally. How learning how to think relationally. How learning how to think relationally. How many of people listening can relate to many of people listening can relate to many of people listening can relate to this one? She to him, you're a reckless this one? She to him, you're a reckless this one? She to him, you're a reckless driver. Him to her, you're overly driver. Him to her, you're overly driver. Him to her, you're overly nervous. Uh uh how many of us have sat nervous. Uh uh how many of us have sat nervous. Uh uh how many of us have sat through that one and they get into what through that one and they get into what through that one and they get into what I call an objectivity battle? You I call an objectivity battle? You I call an objectivity battle? You marshall your evidence. You argue your marshall your evidence. You argue your marshall your evidence. You argue your case. Well, you do this, you do that, case. Well, you do this, you do that, case. Well, you do this, you do that, you're reckless. Well, you're overly you're reckless. Well, you're overly you're reckless. Well, you're overly nervous about this. Harry thinks you're nervous about this. Harry thinks you're nervous about this. Harry thinks you're nervous, too. And it's what I call an nervous, too. And it's what I call an nervous, too. And it's what I call an objectivity battle. It can go on objectivity battle. It can go on objectivity battle. It can go on literally for decades. This is literally for decades. This is literally for decades. This is absolutely true. Andrew, one session absolutely true. Andrew, one session absolutely true. Andrew, one session with me, her to him. Honey, I know you with me, her to him. Honey, I know you with me, her to him. Honey, I know you love me. Let's start with that. Hold the love me. Let's start with that. Hold the love me. Let's start with that. Hold the phone there. Change the energy. phone there. Change the energy. phone there. Change the energy. Remember the biosphere. Remember that Remember the biosphere. Remember that Remember the biosphere. Remember that we're a team. I know you love me. we're a team. I know you love me. we're a team. I know you love me. When you drive on your own, I mean, I When you drive on your own, I mean, I When you drive on your own, I mean, I worry about you, but it's your life. Do worry about you, but it's your life. Do worry about you, but it's your life. Do what you do. When I'm in the car with what you do. When I'm in the car with what you do. When I'm in the car with you and you're tailgating and speeding you and you're tailgating and speeding you and you're tailgating and speeding and changing lanes, I don't know. Maybe and changing lanes, I don't know. Maybe and changing lanes, I don't know. Maybe I'm nervous. Maybe she takes the whole I'm nervous. Maybe she takes the whole I'm nervous. Maybe she takes the whole objectivity battle off the table. Maybe objectivity battle off the table. Maybe objectivity battle off the table. Maybe I am overly. I don't know. But I am overly. I don't know. But I am overly. I don't know. But nevertheless, when I'm sitting next to you and you be when I'm sitting next to you and you be when I'm sitting next to you and you be driving, I get crazy. I'm scared. driving, I get crazy. I'm scared. driving, I get crazy. I'm scared. You love me. You don't really want me to You love me. You don't really want me to You love me. You don't really want me to be scared out of my mind every time I'm be scared out of my mind every time I'm be scared out of my mind every time I'm sitting next to you when we're driving. sitting next to you when we're driving. sitting next to you when we're driving. As a favor to me when I'm in the car, As a favor to me when I'm in the car, As a favor to me when I'm in the car, could you please slow down and drive could you please slow down and drive could you please slow down and drive more conservatively so I don't have to more conservatively so I don't have to more conservatively so I don't have to be so nervous? True story, Andrew. Him be so nervous? True story, Andrew. Him be so nervous? True story, Andrew. Him to her. Um, uh, sure, honey. And he did. to her. Um, uh, sure, honey. And he did. to her. Um, uh, sure, honey. And he did. And what might have been a fight that And what might have been a fight that And what might have been a fight that lasted 40 years was done in 15 minutes. lasted 40 years was done in 15 minutes. lasted 40 years was done in 15 minutes. Why? Not objective. You're a reckless Why? Not objective. You're a reckless Why? Not objective. You're a reckless driver. Subjective. I get nervous. The driver. Subjective. I get nervous. The driver. Subjective. I get nervous. The beauty about speaking subjectively is beauty about speaking subjectively is beauty about speaking subjectively is nobody can argue with you. Well, you nobody can argue with you. Well, you nobody can argue with you. Well, you shouldn't get nerv. I know, but I do. shouldn't get nerv. I know, but I do. shouldn't get nerv. I know, but I do. &gt;&gt; It's nice. It also started with, "I know &gt;&gt; It's nice. It also started with, "I know &gt;&gt; It's nice. It also started with, "I know you love me. you love me. you love me. &gt;&gt; I know you love me." &gt;&gt; I know you love me." &gt;&gt; I know you love me." &gt;&gt; What a nice thing to hear right before a &gt;&gt; What a nice thing to hear right before a &gt;&gt; What a nice thing to hear right before a request. &gt;&gt; I know you love me. &gt;&gt; I know you love me. &gt;&gt; I know you love me. &gt;&gt; Assuming it's true. Well, of course. And &gt;&gt; Assuming it's true. Well, of course. And &gt;&gt; Assuming it's true. Well, of course. And and also a request, not a complaint. and also a request, not a complaint. and also a request, not a complaint. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I know you love me. This is what's &gt;&gt; I know you love me. This is what's &gt;&gt; I know you love me. This is what's happening to me. We're a team. As a happening to me. We're a team. As a happening to me. We're a team. As a favor to me, would you please? Humble, favor to me, would you please? Humble, favor to me, would you please? Humble, subjective, negotiating. subjective, negotiating. subjective, negotiating. Not I'm God's gift. I know how to drive. Not I'm God's gift. I know how to drive. Not I'm God's gift. I know how to drive. You're an idiot. Take all that energy You're an idiot. Take all that energy You're an idiot. Take all that energy away. And then, right, I do love you. away. And then, right, I do love you. away. And then, right, I do love you. Right. You do get nervous. You're a fool Right. You do get nervous. You're a fool Right. You do get nervous. You're a fool for getting nervous, but you get for getting nervous, but you get for getting nervous, but you get nervous. you're my wife. Sure, I'll do nervous. you're my wife. Sure, I'll do nervous. you're my wife. Sure, I'll do this for you. And I use this as an this for you. And I use this as an this for you. And I use this as an example of learning to speak example of learning to speak example of learning to speak relationally. It's not about who's right and who I say It's not about who's right and who I say It's not about who's right and who I say the relational answer to who's right and the relational answer to who's right and the relational answer to who's right and who's wrong is who cares. How are we as who's wrong is who cares. How are we as who's wrong is who cares. How are we as a team going to make this work? And a team going to make this work? And a team going to make this work? And that's a whole new world. Are women that's a whole new world. Are women that's a whole new world. Are women better at this than men? Not a lot. better at this than men? Not a lot. better at this than men? Not a lot. They're better at a lot of other things They're better at a lot of other things They're better at a lot of other things than men. But I have to teach women how than men. But I have to teach women how than men. But I have to teach women how to be more relational, too. Uh women are to be more relational, too. Uh women are to be more relational, too. Uh women are more relational than men, but uh they more relational than men, but uh they more relational than men, but uh they need to learn a few skills as well. need to learn a few skills as well. need to learn a few skills as well. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about addiction &gt;&gt; Let's talk about addiction &gt;&gt; Let's talk about addiction um or compulsion. I mean, we could have um or compulsion. I mean, we could have um or compulsion. I mean, we could have a two-hour discussion about where the a two-hour discussion about where the a two-hour discussion about where the line is, but line is, but line is, but &gt;&gt; I have a one sentence &gt;&gt; I have a one sentence &gt;&gt; I have a one sentence &gt;&gt; uh thing to say about addiction. &gt;&gt; uh thing to say about addiction. &gt;&gt; uh thing to say about addiction. What we self-medicate What we self-medicate What we self-medicate when we self-medicate when we self-medicate when we self-medicate is the pain of disconnection. is the pain of disconnection. is the pain of disconnection. And the cure for addiction is intimacy. And the cure for addiction is intimacy. And the cure for addiction is intimacy. Uh I'm a big 12step fan. I know you are Uh I'm a big 12step fan. I know you are Uh I'm a big 12step fan. I know you are too. One of my great mentors was PM too. One of my great mentors was PM too. One of my great mentors was PM Melody, a great light in 12step. Melody, a great light in 12step. Melody, a great light in 12step. &gt;&gt; Wrote the book about codependency. &gt;&gt; Wrote the book about codependency. &gt;&gt; Wrote the book about codependency. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I I'm saturated with 12step &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I I'm saturated with 12step &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I I'm saturated with 12step and 12step wisdom. There are things you and 12step wisdom. There are things you and 12step wisdom. There are things you can do to get sober. can do to get sober. can do to get sober. Intimacy will keep you sober. Intimacy will keep you sober. Intimacy will keep you sober. And I believe that what the pain, yes, And I believe that what the pain, yes, And I believe that what the pain, yes, [snorts] trauma, but trauma is [snorts] trauma, but trauma is [snorts] trauma, but trauma is disconnection, too. All trauma is the disconnection, too. All trauma is the disconnection, too. All trauma is the lack of relationality in, you know, lack of relationality in, you know, lack of relationality in, you know, whenever it happened. What we find whenever it happened. What we find whenever it happened. What we find intolerable is how lonely we are. and we intolerable is how lonely we are. and we intolerable is how lonely we are. and we turn to what I call a misery stabilizer turn to what I call a misery stabilizer turn to what I call a misery stabilizer to make our loneliness tolerable to make our loneliness tolerable to make our loneliness tolerable to ourselves but it just makes it I said in ourselves but it just makes it I said in ourselves but it just makes it I said in my first book I don't want to talk about my first book I don't want to talk about my first book I don't want to talk about it uh taking a substance for loneliness it uh taking a substance for loneliness it uh taking a substance for loneliness is like drinking salt water for thirst is like drinking salt water for thirst is like drinking salt water for thirst it makes you worse than you started but it makes you worse than you started but it makes you worse than you started but that's what we do so when I treat that's what we do so when I treat that's what we do so when I treat addictions they're levels level A the addiction they're levels level A the addiction they're levels level A the addiction itself I'm a big fan of 12 that gets itself I'm a big fan of 12 that gets itself I'm a big fan of 12 that gets sober. Level B, let's look at the sober. Level B, let's look at the sober. Level B, let's look at the immaturities of your personality that immaturities of your personality that immaturities of your personality that you're have to sort out. Level C, let's you're have to sort out. Level C, let's you're have to sort out. Level C, let's look at the early trauma that may be at look at the early trauma that may be at look at the early trauma that may be at the root of this. Let's deal with all the root of this. Let's deal with all the root of this. Let's deal with all three of those. And it's all wrapped in three of those. And it's all wrapped in three of those. And it's all wrapped in the circle of learning how to be the circle of learning how to be the circle of learning how to be connected and relational. connected and relational. connected and relational. That's the ouch that you're trying to That's the ouch that you're trying to That's the ouch that you're trying to get out of. And let's restore that. And get out of. And let's restore that. And get out of. And let's restore that. And that's all of that work. Trauma work, that's all of that work. Trauma work, that's all of that work. Trauma work, you have to make a connection with that you have to make a connection with that you have to make a connection with that little boy or girl that was so hurt. little boy or girl that was so hurt. little boy or girl that was so hurt. Personality work, you have to learn how Personality work, you have to learn how Personality work, you have to learn how to be mature. Uh it work on your to be mature. Uh it work on your to be mature. Uh it work on your grandiosity or self-medication. grandiosity or self-medication. grandiosity or self-medication. Do that per se. And then as you do all Do that per se. And then as you do all Do that per se. And then as you do all of those layers, the king of recovery is of those layers, the king of recovery is of those layers, the king of recovery is learning how to be connected to yourself learning how to be connected to yourself learning how to be connected to yourself first and foremost uh and to the people first and foremost uh and to the people first and foremost uh and to the people around you. That's the cure for around you. That's the cure for around you. That's the cure for addiction. &gt;&gt; The 12step piece is interesting as it &gt;&gt; The 12step piece is interesting as it &gt;&gt; The 12step piece is interesting as it relates to the relational piece too relates to the relational piece too relates to the relational piece too because um for people who have never because um for people who have never because um for people who have never been to a meeting, you know, maybe just been to a meeting, you know, maybe just been to a meeting, you know, maybe just uh put a little bit of contour on it. uh put a little bit of contour on it. uh put a little bit of contour on it. &gt;&gt; Cross that meetings are fellowship. Yes, &gt;&gt; Cross that meetings are fellowship. Yes, &gt;&gt; Cross that meetings are fellowship. Yes, it's fellowship and it's also a it's fellowship and it's also a it's fellowship and it's also a place where you at a very basic level place where you at a very basic level place where you at a very basic level you learn to listen and to be quiet you learn to listen and to be quiet you learn to listen and to be quiet and um I'll just mention this because I and um I'll just mention this because I and um I'll just mention this because I think a lot of people hear 12step they think a lot of people hear 12step they think a lot of people hear 12step they have different ideas about it but if have different ideas about it but if have different ideas about it but if anyone's ever curious about it they uh anyone's ever curious about it they uh anyone's ever curious about it they uh there's a it's a very welcoming there's a it's a very welcoming there's a it's a very welcoming community even non-addicts can go to community even non-addicts can go to community even non-addicts can go to what are called open AA meetings right what are called open AA meetings right what are called open AA meetings right &gt;&gt; and I even though there are lots of &gt;&gt; and I even though there are lots of &gt;&gt; and I even though there are lots of different um divisions of 12step that AA different um divisions of 12step that AA different um divisions of 12step that AA has been around the longest and has been around the longest and has been around the longest and those meetings tend to have the most those meetings tend to have the most those meetings tend to have the most structure and agreed. structure and agreed. structure and agreed. &gt;&gt; And so if you ever want to see what &gt;&gt; And so if you ever want to see what &gt;&gt; And so if you ever want to see what 12step is about, it's perfectly welcome. 12step is about, it's perfectly welcome. 12step is about, it's perfectly welcome. It's encouraged in fact to go to you can It's encouraged in fact to go to you can It's encouraged in fact to go to you can look it up online. They're in person or look it up online. They're in person or look it up online. They're in person or online and you can go to a has to be an online and you can go to a has to be an online and you can go to a has to be an open 12step meeting. Check to see if open 12step meeting. Check to see if open 12step meeting. Check to see if it's men only or women only or mixed. it's men only or women only or mixed. it's men only or women only or mixed. And you can go and um the format in very And you can go and um the format in very And you can go and um the format in very briefly is uh someone you know will read briefly is uh someone you know will read briefly is uh someone you know will read something out and then people will go something out and then people will go something out and then people will go around the room and typically so people around the room and typically so people around the room and typically so people will say their name and they'll say will say their name and they'll say will say their name and they'll say they're an alcoholic or an addict of they're an alcoholic or an addict of they're an alcoholic or an addict of because sometimes it's mixed addiction because sometimes it's mixed addiction because sometimes it's mixed addiction and if people are there just to observe and if people are there just to observe and if people are there just to observe they'll just say I'm it's always first they'll just say I'm it's always first they'll just say I'm it's always first names only will say I'm so and so and names only will say I'm so and so and names only will say I'm so and so and I'm just I'm just here to learn and it I'm just I'm just here to learn and it I'm just I'm just here to learn and it goes right past you. So if you think goes right past you. So if you think goes right past you. So if you think that like the microscope's going to be that like the microscope's going to be that like the microscope's going to be on you, you know, and then typically um on you, you know, and then typically um on you, you know, and then typically um typically somebody who's had a lot of typically somebody who's had a lot of typically somebody who's had a lot of time sober will speak for anywhere from time sober will speak for anywhere from time sober will speak for anywhere from 5 to 15 minutes, sometimes a little 5 to 15 minutes, sometimes a little 5 to 15 minutes, sometimes a little longer, and then there'll be a kind of longer, and then there'll be a kind of longer, and then there'll be a kind of roundroin where people can or cannot roundroin where people can or cannot roundroin where people can or cannot they can elect to share for 1 to 3 they can elect to share for 1 to 3 they can elect to share for 1 to 3 minutes and then there's some discussion minutes and then there's some discussion minutes and then there's some discussion about the traditions. And it's the about the traditions. And it's the about the traditions. And it's the reason um I think it's well so powerful reason um I think it's well so powerful reason um I think it's well so powerful for a number of reasons. Helps so many for a number of reasons. Helps so many for a number of reasons. Helps so many people get sober. It costs nothing. It's people get sober. It costs nothing. It's people get sober. It costs nothing. It's all over the world every day and all over the world every day and all over the world every day and all night and, you know, online and in night and, you know, online and in night and, you know, online and in person. But I think that at a minimum, person. But I think that at a minimum, person. But I think that at a minimum, it teaches you to just listen. it teaches you to just listen. it teaches you to just listen. Uh, if you want to share, you can share. Uh, if you want to share, you can share. Uh, if you want to share, you can share. And what it also teaches you, and this is what it also teaches you, and this is what it also teaches you, and this is kind of a more subtle layer, but it's a kind of a more subtle layer, but it's a kind of a more subtle layer, but it's a really important layer. Uh, someone said really important layer. Uh, someone said really important layer. Uh, someone said to me just yesterday, even if you don't to me just yesterday, even if you don't to me just yesterday, even if you don't think that you need to go to a meeting, think that you need to go to a meeting, think that you need to go to a meeting, if you've had some time sober and you go if you've had some time sober and you go if you've had some time sober and you go and you share, or even if you're and you share, or even if you're and you share, or even if you're struggling, you go, struggling, you go, struggling, you go, &gt;&gt; almost certainly there's someone there &gt;&gt; almost certainly there's someone there &gt;&gt; almost certainly there's someone there that's benefiting from what you're that's benefiting from what you're that's benefiting from what you're saying. &gt;&gt; You may never know it, but that's part &gt;&gt; You may never know it, but that's part &gt;&gt; You may never know it, but that's part of the fellowship service piece is it's of the fellowship service piece is it's of the fellowship service piece is it's &gt;&gt; it's sometimes people come up and say, &gt;&gt; it's sometimes people come up and say, &gt;&gt; it's sometimes people come up and say, "Hey, what you said really resonated." "Hey, what you said really resonated." "Hey, what you said really resonated." Always what other people share. there's Always what other people share. there's Always what other people share. there's a there's a grain or more of a there's a grain or more of a there's a grain or more of relational stuff there. So, it's a very relational stuff there. So, it's a very relational stuff there. So, it's a very interesting form of relating. It's not interesting form of relating. It's not interesting form of relating. It's not unlike the way Quakers get together. unlike the way Quakers get together. unlike the way Quakers get together. We'll just sit We'll just sit We'll just sit &gt;&gt; and then sometimes someone will speak. &gt;&gt; and then sometimes someone will speak. &gt;&gt; and then sometimes someone will speak. It's different. But anyway, I think It's different. But anyway, I think It's different. But anyway, I think that we want to pull back the veil a that we want to pull back the veil a that we want to pull back the veil a little bit on what happens at these little bit on what happens at these little bit on what happens at these meetings. And you'll also be very meetings. And you'll also be very meetings. And you'll also be very surprised. Sometimes people are really surprised. Sometimes people are really surprised. Sometimes people are really dejected and in a real life crisis. More dejected and in a real life crisis. More dejected and in a real life crisis. More often than not, you walk in, you're often than not, you walk in, you're often than not, you walk in, you're like, "Wow, these people are like, "Wow, these people are like, "Wow, these people are like &gt;&gt; very empowered." &gt;&gt; very empowered." &gt;&gt; very empowered." &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Because they're there and they've been &gt;&gt; Because they're there and they've been &gt;&gt; Because they're there and they've been going. These It's not like this dungeon going. These It's not like this dungeon going. These It's not like this dungeon of a place. There's a cheerfulness to of a place. There's a cheerfulness to of a place. There's a cheerfulness to it. Um often, not always, but there's a it. Um often, not always, but there's a it. Um often, not always, but there's a cheerfulness to it. And so anyway, I cheerfulness to it. And so anyway, I cheerfulness to it. And so anyway, I encourage anyone that's curious about encourage anyone that's curious about encourage anyone that's curious about it, if they think they're an addict, but it, if they think they're an addict, but it, if they think they're an addict, but also if they also just want to become also if they also just want to become also if they also just want to become more relational, uh these open AA more relational, uh these open AA more relational, uh these open AA meetings are a real um gift. Again, zero meetings are a real um gift. Again, zero meetings are a real um gift. Again, zero cost. They pass the hat, but nobody cost. They pass the hat, but nobody cost. They pass the hat, but nobody cares if you donate or not. nobody cares if you donate or not. nobody cares if you donate or not. &gt;&gt; And you don't have to talk and just go &gt;&gt; And you don't have to talk and just go &gt;&gt; And you don't have to talk and just go on and be. on and be. on and be. &gt;&gt; You know, my dear Pia, we've been &gt;&gt; You know, my dear Pia, we've been &gt;&gt; You know, my dear Pia, we've been talking about relationship. Pia said talking about relationship. Pia said talking about relationship. Pia said intimacy uh which is healing and spiritual is the uh which is healing and spiritual is the uh which is healing and spiritual is the conjunction of truth and love, conjunction of truth and love, conjunction of truth and love, the meeting of truth and love. And she the meeting of truth and love. And she the meeting of truth and love. And she said 12step meetings were her model for said 12step meetings were her model for said 12step meetings were her model for that. And I'll tell you two stories. Uh that. And I'll tell you two stories. Uh that. And I'll tell you two stories. Uh my friend Allan used to go to Alanon. I my friend Allan used to go to Alanon. I my friend Allan used to go to Alanon. I said, 'Wh do you go to Alanon? He said, 'Wh do you go to Alanon? He said, 'Wh do you go to Alanon? He said, "Well, I had a great-grandfather, but "Well, I had a great-grandfather, but "Well, I had a great-grandfather, but you got Noah." He said, "You know what? you got Noah." He said, "You know what? you got Noah." He said, "You know what? Every other week, Friday night, I go to Every other week, Friday night, I go to Every other week, Friday night, I go to an Alan meeting." And people will say an Alan meeting." And people will say an Alan meeting." And people will say things that are absolutely horrible. things that are absolutely horrible. things that are absolutely horrible. And not one person will lift a finger to And not one person will lift a finger to And not one person will lift a finger to make it better. We'll just be with each make it better. We'll just be with each make it better. We'll just be with each other. &gt;&gt; And I find that spiritually refreshing. &gt;&gt; And I find that spiritually refreshing. &gt;&gt; And I find that spiritually refreshing. And I remember being at a men's group And I remember being at a men's group And I remember being at a men's group that uh I you know after a conference I that uh I you know after a conference I that uh I you know after a conference I created a little a 12step men's group created a little a 12step men's group created a little a 12step men's group and I was sitting next to an older guy and I was sitting next to an older guy and I was sitting next to an older guy and he looked at us. I'll remember this and he looked at us. I'll remember this and he looked at us. I'll remember this forever and he said I've never been forever and he said I've never been forever and he said I've never been intimate with anybody in my life and I intimate with anybody in my life and I intimate with anybody in my life and I expect I'll die alone. expect I'll die alone. expect I'll die alone. and not one of us either pulled away and not one of us either pulled away and not one of us either pulled away from him or tried to make it better for from him or tried to make it better for from him or tried to make it better for him. We were just with him. We were just with him. We were just with him. That is intimate. That is intimate. That is intimate. And uh 12step has a lot of wisdom that And uh 12step has a lot of wisdom that And uh 12step has a lot of wisdom that goes beyond our general culture. It's goes beyond our general culture. It's goes beyond our general culture. It's not perfect, but it's a step up from the not perfect, but it's a step up from the not perfect, but it's a step up from the mores of our culture. mores of our culture. mores of our culture. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's definitely not perfect. There &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's definitely not perfect. There &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's definitely not perfect. There are meetings that people don't resonate are meetings that people don't resonate are meetings that people don't resonate with and they're occasionally you'll go with and they're occasionally you'll go with and they're occasionally you'll go to a meeting and you can tell the to a meeting and you can tell the to a meeting and you can tell the storytelling can get a little bit people storytelling can get a little bit people storytelling can get a little bit people getting a little high on other people's getting a little high on other people's getting a little high on other people's stories about getting high and but a stories about getting high and but a stories about getting high and but a good meeting which is 98% of meetings um good meeting which is 98% of meetings um good meeting which is 98% of meetings um the person leaning to meet will the person leaning to meet will the person leaning to meet will keep things in check and gosh keep things in check and gosh keep things in check and gosh there's so much wisdom there and there's so much wisdom there and there's so much wisdom there and I think especially in this time where I think especially in this time where I think especially in this time where people are struggling more than ever to people are struggling more than ever to people are struggling more than ever to make connection make connection make connection and online is clearly a very and online is clearly a very and online is clearly a very different form of connection or even different form of connection or even different form of connection or even leads to disconnection. Um, the leads to disconnection. Um, the leads to disconnection. Um, the in-person meetings have a real value to in-person meetings have a real value to in-person meetings have a real value to them. And of course, I also believe that them. And of course, I also believe that them. And of course, I also believe that many people are dealing with many people are dealing with many people are dealing with addiction now and they don't realize it. addiction now and they don't realize it. addiction now and they don't realize it. The the numbing out or the rage baiting The the numbing out or the rage baiting The the numbing out or the rage baiting that you can experience watching, you that you can experience watching, you that you can experience watching, you know, what is essentially 300 little know, what is essentially 300 little know, what is essentially 300 little short movies in the course of 20, 30 short movies in the course of 20, 30 short movies in the course of 20, 30 minutes, you know, when you could just minutes, you know, when you could just minutes, you know, when you could just think about like what's actually going think about like what's actually going think about like what's actually going on internally around you. I mean, on internally around you. I mean, on internally around you. I mean, &gt;&gt; well, or look at porn. I mean, &gt;&gt; well, or look at porn. I mean, &gt;&gt; well, or look at porn. I mean, &gt;&gt; you know, our young men, I mean, my wife &gt;&gt; you know, our young men, I mean, my wife &gt;&gt; you know, our young men, I mean, my wife Belinda is a certified sex addiction Belinda is a certified sex addiction Belinda is a certified sex addiction therapist, and uh a boy by the time therapist, and uh a boy by the time therapist, and uh a boy by the time he's 12 or 13 has seen thousands of he's 12 or 13 has seen thousands of he's 12 or 13 has seen thousands of vaginas, has seen thousands of sex vaginas, has seen thousands of sex vaginas, has seen thousands of sex scenes. That's average for America right scenes. That's average for America right scenes. That's average for America right now. &gt;&gt; That's so crazy. Yeah. When I was &gt;&gt; That's so crazy. Yeah. When I was &gt;&gt; That's so crazy. Yeah. When I was growing up, it was so different. So growing up, it was so different. So growing up, it was so different. So different. Uh so one of the things I say different. Uh so one of the things I say different. Uh so one of the things I say is that we talked about this earlier. Um is that we talked about this earlier. Um is that we talked about this earlier. Um it is an image between gratification and it is an image between gratification and it is an image between gratification and relational joy. And a lot of us relational joy. And a lot of us relational joy. And a lot of us substitute intensity for intimacy. substitute intensity for intimacy. substitute intensity for intimacy. &gt;&gt; And boy the internet. That's what they &gt;&gt; And boy the internet. That's what they &gt;&gt; And boy the internet. That's what they sell. That's the algorithm. And we sell. That's the algorithm. And we sell. That's the algorithm. And we intensity itself becomes like a drug. intensity itself becomes like a drug. intensity itself becomes like a drug. uh and it makes us feel alive and it's uh and it makes us feel alive and it's uh and it makes us feel alive and it's gratifying and it pulls us out of gratifying and it pulls us out of gratifying and it pulls us out of whatever depression we're feeling, but whatever depression we're feeling, but whatever depression we're feeling, but it's very short-lived. There's an it's very short-lived. There's an it's very short-lived. There's an example of intensity that comes to mind example of intensity that comes to mind example of intensity that comes to mind whenever we're talking about boys and whenever we're talking about boys and whenever we're talking about boys and men and addiction, but also just um men and addiction, but also just um men and addiction, but also just um languishing and just the idea languishing and just the idea languishing and just the idea that you know that you know that you know people can course correct, but it's hard people can course correct, but it's hard people can course correct, but it's hard when you know people have been in a when you know people have been in a when you know people have been in a current of numbing out or going for current of numbing out or going for current of numbing out or going for intensity and um here I am drinking intensity and um here I am drinking intensity and um here I am drinking yerba mate. I love caffeine, you know, yerba mate. I love caffeine, you know, yerba mate. I love caffeine, you know, but um you know, I see it at every level but um you know, I see it at every level but um you know, I see it at every level because of I'm about to um slam on because of I'm about to um slam on because of I'm about to um slam on energy drinks for a second, energy drinks for a second, energy drinks for a second, &gt;&gt; you know. you know, but just the idea &gt;&gt; you know. you know, but just the idea &gt;&gt; you know. you know, but just the idea that you're trying to pack more and more that you're trying to pack more and more that you're trying to pack more and more intensity into less and less space, you intensity into less and less space, you intensity into less and less space, you know, &gt;&gt; you know, that was one of the things I &gt;&gt; you know, that was one of the things I &gt;&gt; you know, that was one of the things I was nervous about coming on this podcast was nervous about coming on this podcast was nervous about coming on this podcast with you with you with you &gt;&gt; that we're all slamming energy drinks &gt;&gt; that we're all slamming energy drinks &gt;&gt; that we're all slamming energy drinks and &gt;&gt; No, no, not that, but this idea of &gt;&gt; No, no, not that, but this idea of &gt;&gt; No, no, not that, but this idea of optimizing every experience and you know optimizing every experience and you know optimizing every experience and you know having &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's a misconception &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's a misconception &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's a misconception unfortunately about um this podcast. I unfortunately about um this podcast. I unfortunately about um this podcast. I think maybe we used the word optimize think maybe we used the word optimize think maybe we used the word optimize without early on without explaining that without early on without explaining that without early on without explaining that optimization is really about making the optimization is really about making the optimization is really about making the best of each day. best of each day. best of each day. &gt;&gt; So, but that includes sit still. &gt;&gt; So, but that includes sit still. &gt;&gt; So, but that includes sit still. Totally. I started today with 10 minutes Totally. I started today with 10 minutes Totally. I started today with 10 minutes of meditation. Oh, absolutely. I mean, I of meditation. Oh, absolutely. I mean, I of meditation. Oh, absolutely. I mean, I unfortunately I unfortunately I unfortunately um this podcast for some people they um this podcast for some people they um this podcast for some people they think about supplements, optimization, think about supplements, optimization, think about supplements, optimization, working out, and morning sunlight. working out, and morning sunlight. working out, and morning sunlight. Morning sunlight thing is pretty Morning sunlight thing is pretty Morning sunlight thing is pretty important, especially on overcast days. important, especially on overcast days. important, especially on overcast days. But um for everyone, we are circadian But um for everyone, we are circadian But um for everyone, we are circadian creatures. I'll go for that. creatures. I'll go for that. creatures. I'll go for that. &gt;&gt; You want to get mentally ill, you can &gt;&gt; You want to get mentally ill, you can &gt;&gt; You want to get mentally ill, you can help yourself be mildly or um severely help yourself be mildly or um severely help yourself be mildly or um severely mentally depressed or ill. You can mentally depressed or ill. You can mentally depressed or ill. You can damage your relationships by being in damage your relationships by being in damage your relationships by being in dim or dark environments in the early dim or dark environments in the early dim or dark environments in the early hours of the day. This is just there's hours of the day. This is just there's hours of the day. This is just there's so much data, right? Bright days, dark so much data, right? Bright days, dark so much data, right? Bright days, dark nights. That's the idea. But that's the nights. That's the idea. But that's the nights. That's the idea. But that's the healthy uh approach. But um no this healthy uh approach. But um no this healthy uh approach. But um no this podcast was always about psychology and podcast was always about psychology and podcast was always about psychology and biology and understanding some mechanism biology and understanding some mechanism biology and understanding some mechanism and practical tools and um the and practical tools and um the and practical tools and um the optimization thing is I think I do optimization thing is I think I do optimization thing is I think I do think taking a healthy stock of oneself think taking a healthy stock of oneself think taking a healthy stock of oneself and saying you know some people need to and saying you know some people need to and saying you know some people need to move more some people need to move less move more some people need to move less move more some people need to move less and read more frankly you know um I and read more frankly you know um I and read more frankly you know um I know some really fit people that are know some really fit people that are know some really fit people that are getting dumb they'll tell you everything getting dumb they'll tell you everything getting dumb they'll tell you everything about sets and reps but I'm like listen about sets and reps but I'm like listen about sets and reps but I'm like listen you gota four PhDs. These aren't the you gota four PhDs. These aren't the you gota four PhDs. These aren't the exercise physiologists I'm referring to, exercise physiologists I'm referring to, exercise physiologists I'm referring to, but you got four PhDs in kettle bells but you got four PhDs in kettle bells but you got four PhDs in kettle bells and nutrition and that you've given and nutrition and that you've given and nutrition and that you've given yourself through YouTube. Like, read a yourself through YouTube. Like, read a yourself through YouTube. Like, read a hard book, read a fiction book, read a hard book, read a fiction book, read a hard book, read a fiction book, read a kids book for God's sake, you know, like kids book for God's sake, you know, like kids book for God's sake, you know, like you got to balance yourself out. So, I you got to balance yourself out. So, I you got to balance yourself out. So, I do I do believe in that. But I think do I do believe in that. But I think do I do believe in that. But I think when it comes to like the relational when it comes to like the relational when it comes to like the relational piece, the piece, the piece, the reason I keep coming back to 12step the reason I keep coming back to 12step the reason I keep coming back to 12step is I think it's just a beautiful is I think it's just a beautiful is I think it's just a beautiful template for how to listen. template for how to listen. template for how to listen. &gt;&gt; How to listen and be, you know, a friend &gt;&gt; How to listen and be, you know, a friend &gt;&gt; How to listen and be, you know, a friend of mine brought a book I didn't read of mine brought a book I didn't read of mine brought a book I didn't read the book, but the title's just the book, but the title's just the book, but the title's just hilarious. The the title of the book is hilarious. The the title of the book is hilarious. The the title of the book is death, the end of self-improvement. And death, the end of self-improvement. And death, the end of self-improvement. And it's like it's like it's like &gt;&gt; fair. &gt;&gt; fair. &gt;&gt; fair. &gt;&gt; You know what? &gt;&gt; You know what? &gt;&gt; You know what? &gt;&gt; Who knows what happens next? sit down, &gt;&gt; Who knows what happens next? sit down, &gt;&gt; Who knows what happens next? sit down, have a cup of tea, and look at the have a cup of tea, and look at the have a cup of tea, and look at the trees. Uh, as a family therapist, trees. Uh, as a family therapist, trees. Uh, as a family therapist, uh, I love hanging out. Families operate uh, I love hanging out. Families operate uh, I love hanging out. Families operate in the inter interstices. You know, I in the inter interstices. You know, I in the inter interstices. You know, I hate quality time. I hate it. It's a hate quality time. I hate it. It's a hate quality time. I hate it. It's a yepy invention. I can work 80 hours, but yepy invention. I can work 80 hours, but yepy invention. I can work 80 hours, but then I'll sit at a table with my kid and then I'll sit at a table with my kid and then I'll sit at a table with my kid and really stare at them and really give really stare at them and really give really stare at them and really give them attention. No, families operate. them attention. No, families operate. them attention. No, families operate. You want you want your kid to talk to You want you want your kid to talk to You want you want your kid to talk to you? They're in the back seat while you? They're in the back seat while you? They're in the back seat while you're driving in the hockey practice. you're driving in the hockey practice. you're driving in the hockey practice. Then they'll open up and talk to you. Then they'll open up and talk to you. Then they'll open up and talk to you. You're cooking together and all of a You're cooking together and all of a You're cooking together and all of a sudden they start burbling. You don't sudden they start burbling. You don't sudden they start burbling. You don't focus the laser beam of your attention focus the laser beam of your attention focus the laser beam of your attention on them. They'll clam up. One of the on them. They'll clam up. One of the on them. They'll clam up. One of the things that families can teach us about things that families can teach us about things that families can teach us about relationality, relational joy, is relationality, relational joy, is relationality, relational joy, is hanging out, being it. It doesn't have hanging out, being it. It doesn't have hanging out, being it. It doesn't have to be so focused. to be so focused. to be so focused. be a little less perfect and be a be a little less perfect and be a be a little less perfect and be a little more human and uh just let little more human and uh just let little more human and uh just let yourself be nurtured in different modes yourself be nurtured in different modes yourself be nurtured in different modes than the ones we're used to. than the ones we're used to. than the ones we're used to. &gt;&gt; I love that. I um uh my parents split &gt;&gt; I love that. I um uh my parents split &gt;&gt; I love that. I um uh my parents split when I was 14 and we went from a family when I was 14 and we went from a family when I was 14 and we went from a family that was pretty cohesive. I mean, my dad that was pretty cohesive. I mean, my dad that was pretty cohesive. I mean, my dad worked a lot and sure it had issues, but worked a lot and sure it had issues, but worked a lot and sure it had issues, but we were very cohesive to just very we were very cohesive to just very we were very cohesive to just very different picture. My sister was off at different picture. My sister was off at different picture. My sister was off at school, my dad was elsewhere, my it was school, my dad was elsewhere, my it was school, my dad was elsewhere, my it was just me and my mom. And those were just me and my mom. And those were just me and my mom. And those were really difficult years. Like very really difficult years. Like very really difficult years. Like very difficult for reasons that are very difficult for reasons that are very difficult for reasons that are important to get into in detail now. But important to get into in detail now. But important to get into in detail now. But um but I was thinking the other day I um but I was thinking the other day I um but I was thinking the other day I have very fond memories of kind of have very fond memories of kind of have very fond memories of kind of evenings where evenings where evenings where may or may not have been doing my may or may not have been doing my may or may not have been doing my homework. Probably should have been. But homework. Probably should have been. But homework. Probably should have been. But I would watch TV or do homework in the I would watch TV or do homework in the I would watch TV or do homework in the living room while my mom would living room while my mom would living room while my mom would cook. Sometimes she was on the phone cook. Sometimes she was on the phone cook. Sometimes she was on the phone with a friend um with a friend um with a friend um and there was music on. Occasionally and there was music on. Occasionally and there was music on. Occasionally we'd watch we'd watch the Wonder Years we'd watch we'd watch the Wonder Years we'd watch we'd watch the Wonder Years and then there was like a dating show and then there was like a dating show and then there was like a dating show that she liked to watch but then she'd that she liked to watch but then she'd that she liked to watch but then she'd get really upset if the couples didn't get really upset if the couples didn't get really upset if the couples didn't like each other and so and it and like each other and so and it and like each other and so and it and like those are some of the best memories those are some of the best memories those are some of the best memories that's right that's right that's right &gt;&gt; I have my mom and it wasn't the trips &gt;&gt; I have my mom and it wasn't the trips &gt;&gt; I have my mom and it wasn't the trips that we took or any of that stuff that we took or any of that stuff that we took or any of that stuff &gt;&gt; um and this graduate adviser that I had &gt;&gt; um and this graduate adviser that I had &gt;&gt; um and this graduate adviser that I had her name was Barbara Chapman. a her name was Barbara Chapman. a her name was Barbara Chapman. a phenomenal scientist like a hard like a phenomenal scientist like a hard like a phenomenal scientist like a hard like a real pure scientist taught me so much real pure scientist taught me so much real pure scientist taught me so much about how to really think about doing about how to really think about doing about how to really think about doing really solid science brilliant woman really solid science brilliant woman really solid science brilliant woman trained at all the top places didn't trained at all the top places didn't trained at all the top places didn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about the accutrants that go give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about the accutrants that go give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about the accutrants that go with she just loved doing experiments in with she just loved doing experiments in with she just loved doing experiments in any case she had two daughters while I any case she had two daughters while I any case she had two daughters while I was in the lab and her husband's a was in the lab and her husband's a was in the lab and her husband's a scientist too so I got to know their scientist too so I got to know their scientist too so I got to know their family very well and sadly she passed family very well and sadly she passed family very well and sadly she passed away in 2014 cancer and it was super away in 2014 cancer and it was super away in 2014 cancer and it was super devastating to all of us so a lot of devastating to all of us so a lot of devastating to all of us so a lot of memorial memorials for her. But I went memorial memorials for her. But I went memorial memorials for her. But I went to the memorial at the House of Flowers to the memorial at the House of Flowers to the memorial at the House of Flowers in San Francisco, which is also where in San Francisco, which is also where in San Francisco, which is also where she and her husband been married and her she and her husband been married and her she and her husband been married and her two daughters were there. And um it was two daughters were there. And um it was two daughters were there. And um it was heavy. Like all the colleagues, all the heavy. Like all the colleagues, all the heavy. Like all the colleagues, all the friends, she was she was an amazing friends, she was she was an amazing friends, she was she was an amazing person. I'm like crying buckets. I'm a person. I'm like crying buckets. I'm a person. I'm like crying buckets. I'm a mess. I always have to speak at her mess. I always have to speak at her mess. I always have to speak at her memorials. It's like the eighth memorials. It's like the eighth memorials. It's like the eighth memorial. I'm like, I'm not going to memorial. I'm like, I'm not going to memorial. I'm like, I'm not going to cry. I'm not. Of course, I get up there, cry. I'm not. Of course, I get up there, cry. I'm not. Of course, I get up there, I just I just I just &gt;&gt; in front of all my colleagues, you know, &gt;&gt; in front of all my colleagues, you know, &gt;&gt; in front of all my colleagues, you know, all of that. I mean, it actually taught all of that. I mean, it actually taught all of that. I mean, it actually taught me a few things about how to deal with me a few things about how to deal with me a few things about how to deal with people in profession, you know. Um people in profession, you know. Um people in profession, you know. Um because you can't walk away from that because you can't walk away from that because you can't walk away from that and be like you're just like snot and be like you're just like snot and be like you're just like snot out your no. Anyway, her daughters get out your no. Anyway, her daughters get out your no. Anyway, her daughters get up and um everyone's bracing themselves up and um everyone's bracing themselves up and um everyone's bracing themselves like this is going to be hard, like this is going to be hard, like this is going to be hard, &gt;&gt; devastating. Yeah. &gt;&gt; devastating. Yeah. &gt;&gt; devastating. Yeah. &gt;&gt; They get up there and basically what I &gt;&gt; They get up there and basically what I &gt;&gt; They get up there and basically what I recall and I think is accurate is they recall and I think is accurate is they recall and I think is accurate is they were like we love our mom, we miss our were like we love our mom, we miss our were like we love our mom, we miss our mom, all that stuff. Everyone's melting mom, all that stuff. Everyone's melting mom, all that stuff. Everyone's melting and they just go, "But the thing and they just go, "But the thing and they just go, "But the thing we remember best and that we loved about we remember best and that we loved about we remember best and that we loved about her the most was all the unstructured her the most was all the unstructured her the most was all the unstructured time. &gt;&gt; She would just hang out with us." &gt;&gt; She would just hang out with us." &gt;&gt; She would just hang out with us." &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I was like, &gt;&gt; And I was like, &gt;&gt; And I was like, &gt;&gt; I don't want to break down now, but it &gt;&gt; I don't want to break down now, but it &gt;&gt; I don't want to break down now, but it was because it would be out tears of was because it would be out tears of was because it would be out tears of joy, but it was just so incredible. joy, but it was just so incredible. joy, but it was just so incredible. &gt;&gt; I was like, that's so cool. Like of all &gt;&gt; I was like, that's so cool. Like of all &gt;&gt; I was like, that's so cool. Like of all the things they did, the World the things they did, the World the things they did, the World Series, the trips they took to France, Series, the trips they took to France, Series, the trips they took to France, they did that. the scientific they did that. the scientific they did that. the scientific meetings that the girls came to. It's meetings that the girls came to. It's meetings that the girls came to. It's like the unstructured time and I was like the unstructured time and I was like the unstructured time and I was just like that is so cool and I'm just like that is so cool and I'm just like that is so cool and I'm actually in touch with them now. One actually in touch with them now. One actually in touch with them now. One actually is in graduate school doing actually is in graduate school doing actually is in graduate school doing neuroscience, which is warming, but neuroscience, which is warming, but neuroscience, which is warming, but could have done anything. And it's so could have done anything. And it's so could have done anything. And it's so wild because of all that. Their mom's wild because of all that. Their mom's wild because of all that. Their mom's been gone probably long, almost as long been gone probably long, almost as long been gone probably long, almost as long as they had her, you know, and it's like as they had her, you know, and it's like as they had her, you know, and it's like the unstructured time. That was it. the unstructured time. That was it. the unstructured time. That was it. That's the thing they held on to more That's the thing they held on to more That's the thing they held on to more than anything. than anything. than anything. &gt;&gt; That's connection. I uh I'll tell you a &gt;&gt; That's connection. I uh I'll tell you a &gt;&gt; That's connection. I uh I'll tell you a story. So, um, I was dealing with a rock story. So, um, I was dealing with a rock story. So, um, I was dealing with a rock star, uh, not Bruce Springsteen who star, uh, not Bruce Springsteen who star, uh, not Bruce Springsteen who wrote the intro to my everybody's album. wrote the intro to my everybody's album. wrote the intro to my everybody's album. I'm always talking about him. It wasn't I'm always talking about him. It wasn't I'm always talking about him. It wasn't him. It was a different, but anyway, I him. It was a different, but anyway, I him. It was a different, but anyway, I dealing with a rockstar. And this is how dealing with a rockstar. And this is how dealing with a rockstar. And this is how he described himself. So, when I'm on he described himself. So, when I'm on he described himself. So, when I'm on stage in front of 60,000 people, I'm stage in front of 60,000 people, I'm stage in front of 60,000 people, I'm alive. When I come home and I'm with my alive. When I come home and I'm with my alive. When I come home and I'm with my wife and four kids, I'm like a computer wife and four kids, I'm like a computer wife and four kids, I'm like a computer on sleep mode. I'm just half shut down on sleep mode. I'm just half shut down on sleep mode. I'm just half shut down and depressed. and depressed. and depressed. He used to asleep 10 hours a day. He used to asleep 10 hours a day. He used to asleep 10 hours a day. Uh, okay. So, I talked to him about Uh, okay. So, I talked to him about Uh, okay. So, I talked to him about gratification and relational joy, about gratification and relational joy, about gratification and relational joy, about hanging out, about and I said, "Look, hanging out, about and I said, "Look, hanging out, about and I said, "Look, your kids keep daddy, daddy." You your kids keep daddy, daddy." You your kids keep daddy, daddy." You go, "No, no, no. I want you to go, "No, no, no. I want you to go, "No, no, no. I want you to start saying yes, yes." And, you start saying yes, yes." And, you start saying yes, yes." And, you know, dad, let's go for a walk. Oh, know, dad, let's go for a walk. Oh, know, dad, let's go for a walk. Oh, okay. Get yourself up out of the chair okay. Get yourself up out of the chair okay. Get yourself up out of the chair and go beat. And he did. And about six and go beat. And he did. And about six and go beat. And he did. And about six months into this absolutely true story, months into this absolutely true story, months into this absolutely true story, he comes to me, big smile on his face. he comes to me, big smile on his face. he comes to me, big smile on his face. He says, "I got it." I said, "Okay, tell He says, "I got it." I said, "Okay, tell He says, "I got it." I said, "Okay, tell me. There's a story." He goes, "I this me. There's a story." He goes, "I this me. There's a story." He goes, "I this Sunday I had the best day of my life." I Sunday I had the best day of my life." I Sunday I had the best day of my life." I said, "Go on." He said, "My wife, me, said, "Go on." He said, "My wife, me, said, "Go on." He said, "My wife, me, and my four kids, we didn't get out of and my four kids, we didn't get out of and my four kids, we didn't get out of our PJs all day. We sat around and our PJs all day. We sat around and our PJs all day. We sat around and played Monopoly from 7 in the morning played Monopoly from 7 in the morning played Monopoly from 7 in the morning till 7 at night. I had no idea where the till 7 at night. I had no idea where the till 7 at night. I had no idea where the time went. I had no idea what we were time went. I had no idea what we were time went. I had no idea what we were doing. And I It was the best day of my doing. And I It was the best day of my doing. And I It was the best day of my goddamn life. And I said, "Welcome to goddamn life. And I said, "Welcome to goddamn life. And I said, "Welcome to relational joy." relational joy." relational joy." That's what I want. And that's what That's what I want. And that's what That's what I want. And that's what we're born for. You know, I deal with we're born for. You know, I deal with we're born for. You know, I deal with really tough couples, really tough guys. really tough couples, really tough guys. really tough couples, really tough guys. The ace in my pocket is relational The ace in my pocket is relational The ace in my pocket is relational connection is what we're born for. connection is what we're born for. connection is what we're born for. And people move very quickly in the And people move very quickly in the And people move very quickly in the therapy I do. Not just me, but all the therapy I do. Not just me, but all the therapy I do. Not just me, but all the therapists we've trained. And the reason therapists we've trained. And the reason therapists we've trained. And the reason is that our whole art as RLT therapists is that our whole art as RLT therapists is that our whole art as RLT therapists is moving somebody out of disconnection is moving somebody out of disconnection is moving somebody out of disconnection into the jetream of connection and into the jetream of connection and into the jetream of connection and relational joy. And once somebody is in relational joy. And once somebody is in relational joy. And once somebody is in that jetream, that jetream, that jetream, oh man, it's just so much better than oh man, it's just so much better than oh man, it's just so much better than the disconnection that the jetream takes the disconnection that the jetream takes the disconnection that the jetream takes them and they move very quickly and them and they move very quickly and them and they move very quickly and transformationally because this is what transformationally because this is what transformationally because this is what makes us happy. This is what fulfills makes us happy. This is what fulfills makes us happy. This is what fulfills us. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's almost like the best stuff is &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's almost like the best stuff is &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's almost like the best stuff is the stuff that you would never post on the stuff that you would never post on the stuff that you would never post on social media because it's uh so boring social media because it's uh so boring social media because it's uh so boring for the internet and so awesome in real for the internet and so awesome in real for the internet and so awesome in real life. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well said. That's what I want. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well said. That's what I want. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well said. That's what I want. &gt;&gt; I think I'm starting to catch your vibe. &gt;&gt; I think I'm starting to catch your vibe. &gt;&gt; I think I'm starting to catch your vibe. [laughter] &gt;&gt; You're a pretty relational dude, &gt;&gt; You're a pretty relational dude, &gt;&gt; You're a pretty relational dude, I got to tell you. I got to tell you. I got to tell you. &gt;&gt; For better or worse. Um, you know, well, &gt;&gt; For better or worse. Um, you know, well, &gt;&gt; For better or worse. Um, you know, well, I've have work to do. I'm fortunate now I've have work to do. I'm fortunate now I've have work to do. I'm fortunate now to be in the um in the landscape of what to be in the um in the landscape of what to be in the um in the landscape of what I what I think is uh like a real I what I think is uh like a real I what I think is uh like a real education and in um peace and simplicity education and in um peace and simplicity education and in um peace and simplicity despite my professional life being less despite my professional life being less despite my professional life being less about peace and simplicity more about peace and simplicity more about peace and simplicity more about well it's all it's all good I love about well it's all it's all good I love about well it's all it's all good I love it I love my job love my job but um it I love my job love my job but um it I love my job love my job but um but in the rest of my life is it's but in the rest of my life is it's but in the rest of my life is it's really like peace and simplicity I had a really like peace and simplicity I had a really like peace and simplicity I had a hike with a friend recently um was hike with a friend recently um was hike with a friend recently um was awesome just awesome like it was just to awesome just awesome like it was just to awesome just awesome like it was just to we got together for a hike, talked about we got together for a hike, talked about we got together for a hike, talked about some things, hung out. That was great. some things, hung out. That was great. some things, hung out. That was great. I've taken a lot of hikes with a lot of I've taken a lot of hikes with a lot of I've taken a lot of hikes with a lot of friends and that one was definitely in friends and that one was definitely in friends and that one was definitely in the a winner for whatever reason. Just the a winner for whatever reason. Just the a winner for whatever reason. Just the relational piece. And then also now the relational piece. And then also now the relational piece. And then also now I think um she may be getting bored. I think um she may be getting bored. I think um she may be getting bored. I don't know. I should probably ask her, don't know. I should probably ask her, don't know. I should probably ask her, but like my girlfriend and I these days but like my girlfriend and I these days but like my girlfriend and I these days like we just hang out and listen to like we just hang out and listen to like we just hang out and listen to music. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That's like a lot of our time is hanging &gt;&gt; That's like a lot of our time is hanging &gt;&gt; That's like a lot of our time is hanging out and listening to music. She's got out and listening to music. She's got out and listening to music. She's got great musical taste. I like music and great musical taste. I like music and great musical taste. I like music and I'm trying to learn more about other I'm trying to learn more about other I'm trying to learn more about other music and I know pretty quickly if I music and I know pretty quickly if I music and I know pretty quickly if I like something or not and she's got like something or not and she's got like something or not and she's got like a treasure trove of music. But even when a treasure trove of music. But even when a treasure trove of music. But even when we don't like something like you so we don't like something like you so we don't like something like you so we just hang out and listen to music like just hang out and listen to music like just hang out and listen to music like most I'm realizing we spent a lot of most I'm realizing we spent a lot of most I'm realizing we spent a lot of time just hanging out listening to music time just hanging out listening to music time just hanging out listening to music but it's uh it's a totally different but it's uh it's a totally different but it's uh it's a totally different landscape because the intensity is landscape because the intensity is landscape because the intensity is there in certain aspects certainly but there in certain aspects certainly but there in certain aspects certainly but um but the peace piece is like this um but the peace piece is like this um but the peace piece is like this whole other landscape that I'm less whole other landscape that I'm less whole other landscape that I'm less familiar with and I should say I familiar with and I should say I familiar with and I should say I take the blame for that. I've been a bit take the blame for that. I've been a bit take the blame for that. I've been a bit of an intensity junkie in my life for of an intensity junkie in my life for of an intensity junkie in my life for sure. Adrenaline and I are like close sure. Adrenaline and I are like close sure. Adrenaline and I are like close buddies. We hang out. We like each buddies. We hang out. We like each buddies. We hang out. We like each other. We get high off each other. Um other. We get high off each other. Um other. We get high off each other. Um but nowadays but nowadays but nowadays that doesn't really appeal. that doesn't really appeal. that doesn't really appeal. &gt;&gt; No, intimacy is better. Gratification is &gt;&gt; No, intimacy is better. Gratification is &gt;&gt; No, intimacy is better. Gratification is fine, but intimacy is better. It's a fine, but intimacy is better. It's a fine, but intimacy is better. It's a deeper satisfaction. deeper satisfaction. deeper satisfaction. &gt;&gt; You know, one of the things I say is &gt;&gt; You know, one of the things I say is &gt;&gt; You know, one of the things I say is relational I talk about relational I talk about relational I talk about relational recovery. Not addictions can be part of recovery. Not addictions can be part of recovery. Not addictions can be part of it, but recovering the state of it, but recovering the state of it, but recovering the state of relationality we're born for. That's relationality we're born for. That's relationality we're born for. That's what I'm looking for. what I'm looking for. what I'm looking for. &gt;&gt; And one of the things I say is uh &gt;&gt; And one of the things I say is uh &gt;&gt; And one of the things I say is uh operating with maturity, skill, health, operating with maturity, skill, health, operating with maturity, skill, health, integrity, learning how to do this well, your life learning how to do this well, your life learning how to do this well, your life is simple. Being [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up, that's is simple. Being [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up, that's is simple. Being [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up, that's complicated. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; Fighting for an a day and a half, that's &gt;&gt; Fighting for an a day and a half, that's &gt;&gt; Fighting for an a day and a half, that's complicated. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; When your wife comes at you and says, &gt;&gt; When your wife comes at you and says, &gt;&gt; When your wife comes at you and says, "I'm really mad." You go, "I'm sorry, "I'm really mad." You go, "I'm sorry, "I'm really mad." You go, "I'm sorry, honey. what can I do to help you? And honey. what can I do to help you? And honey. what can I do to help you? And she's chilled out in 10 minutes. That's she's chilled out in 10 minutes. That's she's chilled out in 10 minutes. That's simple. So, relationality is actually simple. So, relationality is actually simple. So, relationality is actually simple. Not being relational is full of simple. Not being relational is full of simple. Not being relational is full of complications. This is easy. The scientist in me has to This is easy. The scientist in me has to This is easy. The scientist in me has to run the experiment here. So, a lot of run the experiment here. So, a lot of run the experiment here. So, a lot of the examples you've given, I acknowledge the examples you've given, I acknowledge the examples you've given, I acknowledge probably they certainly apply. you're probably they certainly apply. you're probably they certainly apply. you're the clinician, you would know and the clinician, you would know and the clinician, you would know and you're, you know, you have your own life you're, you know, you have your own life you're, you know, you have your own life experience. We've got this model out on experience. We've got this model out on experience. We've got this model out on the table of like the guy who doesn't the table of like the guy who doesn't the table of like the guy who doesn't really know how to listen as well as he really know how to listen as well as he really know how to listen as well as he could. Um, still needs to learn to ask could. Um, still needs to learn to ask could. Um, still needs to learn to ask for help and ask what do you need right for help and ask what do you need right for help and ask what do you need right now in this moment to take breaks when now in this moment to take breaks when now in this moment to take breaks when things get ratcheted up. She's got things get ratcheted up. She's got things get ratcheted up. She's got things that she needs and wants from things that she needs and wants from things that she needs and wants from him. He's like kind of this like, you him. He's like kind of this like, you him. He's like kind of this like, you know, emotionally, you know, emotionally, you know, emotionally, you know, semi-mbbreionic, semi adult thing. Let's semi-mbbreionic, semi adult thing. Let's semi-mbbreionic, semi adult thing. Let's turn the table. turn the table. turn the table. Not because we have to, but because like Not because we have to, but because like Not because we have to, but because like once again, it's rarely just one person. once again, it's rarely just one person. once again, it's rarely just one person. Is there ever a time when like a guy Is there ever a time when like a guy Is there ever a time when like a guy has a complaint that's valid? has a complaint that's valid? has a complaint that's valid? &gt;&gt; Oh my god. &gt;&gt; Oh my god. &gt;&gt; Oh my god. &gt;&gt; Because I just think it's important for &gt;&gt; Because I just think it's important for &gt;&gt; Because I just think it's important for us to do this. So we have a male and us to do this. So we have a male and us to do this. So we have a male and female audience, but I just think part female audience, but I just think part female audience, but I just think part of the male crisis of the male crisis of the male crisis is that it seems like the seesaw is that it seems like the seesaw is that it seems like the seesaw is always tilted the same way. And that always tilted the same way. And that always tilted the same way. And that message, while probably valid in a lot message, while probably valid in a lot message, while probably valid in a lot of circumstances, probably more than of circumstances, probably more than of circumstances, probably more than half if I'm honest, it's I think half if I'm honest, it's I think half if I'm honest, it's I think sometimes men have things that requests sometimes men have things that requests sometimes men have things that requests and things that they want and have valid and things that they want and have valid and things that they want and have valid complaints, maybe invalid complaints. complaints, maybe invalid complaints. complaints, maybe invalid complaints. Let's talk about how to voice um concern Let's talk about how to voice um concern Let's talk about how to voice um concern request. dare I say criticism in a way request. dare I say criticism in a way request. dare I say criticism in a way that's healthy and that serves both that's healthy and that serves both that's healthy and that serves both people. It serves relationally. people. It serves relationally. people. It serves relationally. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I'm not a big fan of criticism. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I'm not a big fan of criticism. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I'm not a big fan of criticism. Um if you go online and you do my Um if you go online and you do my Um if you go online and you do my course, we give you a format for course, we give you a format for course, we give you a format for criticism. It's called the feedback criticism. It's called the feedback criticism. It's called the feedback wheel. &gt;&gt; Constructive criticism. &gt;&gt; Constructive criticism. &gt;&gt; Constructive criticism. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But even so, I one of &gt;&gt; Yeah. But even so, I one of &gt;&gt; Yeah. But even so, I one of the skills I teach people is we're uh the skills I teach people is we're uh the skills I teach people is we're uh evolutionary wire, you know, the evolutionary wire, you know, the evolutionary wire, you know, the negative bias of the brain. We we notice negative bias of the brain. We we notice negative bias of the brain. We we notice what's wrong. That's survival. Hey, that what's wrong. That's survival. Hey, that what's wrong. That's survival. Hey, that leaf shouldn't be turning. Well, there's leaf shouldn't be turning. Well, there's leaf shouldn't be turning. Well, there's a saber-tooth tiger on the other side. a saber-tooth tiger on the other side. a saber-tooth tiger on the other side. We notice what's wrong and that's part We notice what's wrong and that's part We notice what's wrong and that's part of our evolution. of our evolution. of our evolution. That's what comes to us first. So, That's what comes to us first. So, That's what comes to us first. So, complaint comes to us first. But one of complaint comes to us first. But one of complaint comes to us first. But one of the disciplines I teach people, the disciplines I teach people, the disciplines I teach people, literally sit down, write down the literally sit down, write down the literally sit down, write down the complaint. Okay, now flip it over. Flip complaint. Okay, now flip it over. Flip complaint. Okay, now flip it over. Flip the page over. Inside of every complaint the page over. Inside of every complaint the page over. Inside of every complaint is a request. is a request. is a request. &gt;&gt; Think about that. Every complaint has an &gt;&gt; Think about that. Every complaint has an &gt;&gt; Think about that. Every complaint has an implicit request in it implicit request in it implicit request in it unless you're absolutely have to. Nine unless you're absolutely have to. Nine unless you're absolutely have to. Nine out of 10en times skip the complaint and out of 10en times skip the complaint and out of 10en times skip the complaint and just go for the request. just go for the request. just go for the request. And particularly women to men, men are And particularly women to men, men are And particularly women to men, men are criticism phobic because we base our criticism phobic because we base our criticism phobic because we base our self-esteem on our performance. So don't self-esteem on our performance. So don't self-esteem on our performance. So don't tell your guy what he's doing wrong. tell your guy what he's doing wrong. tell your guy what he's doing wrong. Tell him what he could be doing a little Tell him what he could be doing a little Tell him what he could be doing a little better. Hey, you're doing a great job. better. Hey, you're doing a great job. better. Hey, you're doing a great job. This would work better. Um, in our This would work better. Um, in our This would work better. Um, in our culture, we try and get more of what we culture, we try and get more of what we culture, we try and get more of what we want from each other by criticizing each want from each other by criticizing each want from each other by criticizing each other. There's a pl if you have to, I'll teach There's a pl if you have to, I'll teach There's a pl if you have to, I'll teach you how to do it. Um, but better skip you how to do it. Um, but better skip you how to do it. Um, but better skip the criticism and go right for what you the criticism and go right for what you the criticism and go right for what you want. Empower your partner to give you want. Empower your partner to give you want. Empower your partner to give you what you want. Don't beat them down by what you want. Don't beat them down by what you want. Don't beat them down by sharing your feelings about how that's sharing your feelings about how that's sharing your feelings about how that's therapy. Therapy has been the worst on therapy. Therapy has been the worst on therapy. Therapy has been the worst on this. Sharing your misery at what your this. Sharing your misery at what your this. Sharing your misery at what your partner's done wrong is not going to partner's done wrong is not going to partner's done wrong is not going to motivate them to do it better for you. motivate them to do it better for you. motivate them to do it better for you. Help them do it better. We're a team. Help them do it better. We're a team. Help them do it better. We're a team. This is what I want from you. Honey, This is what I want from you. Honey, This is what I want from you. Honey, what could I give you to help you give what could I give you to help you give what could I give you to help you give it to me? Who sounds like that? We have it to me? Who sounds like that? We have it to me? Who sounds like that? We have to learn how to sound like that. So, to learn how to sound like that. So, to learn how to sound like that. So, criticism. I learned criticism from criticism. I learned criticism from criticism. I learned criticism from Janet Hurley, PM Melody's uh 12step Janet Hurley, PM Melody's uh 12step Janet Hurley, PM Melody's uh 12step sponsor. It's called the feedback reel. sponsor. It's called the feedback reel. sponsor. It's called the feedback reel. I I'll do it real brief, but you can go I I'll do it real brief, but you can go I I'll do it real brief, but you can go online. Four parts. This is what online. Four parts. This is what online. Four parts. This is what happened as I recollect. It is still happened as I recollect. It is still happened as I recollect. It is still subjective. This is the story I told subjective. This is the story I told subjective. This is the story I told myself about it. This is what I felt. myself about it. This is what I felt. myself about it. This is what I felt. And your all important part, this is And your all important part, this is And your all important part, this is what would make me feel better. So, uh, what would make me feel better. So, uh, what would make me feel better. So, uh, Belinda to Terry, you said you're going Belinda to Terry, you said you're going Belinda to Terry, you said you're going to be home at 7. You didn't call or to be home at 7. You didn't call or to be home at 7. You didn't call or text. You showed up at 7:45. The kids text. You showed up at 7:45. The kids text. You showed up at 7:45. The kids and I were waiting for you. Done. The and I were waiting for you. Done. The and I were waiting for you. Done. The story I told myself was you can be story I told myself was you can be story I told myself was you can be selfish and see as long as you own it. This is and see as long as you own it. This is and see as long as you own it. This is the story. You can say the nasty things the story. You can say the nasty things the story. You can say the nasty things you're thinking. You got caught up. You you're thinking. You got caught up. You you're thinking. You got caught up. You forgot about us. Your work was more forgot about us. Your work was more forgot about us. Your work was more important and you blew it. What I feel important and you blew it. What I feel important and you blew it. What I feel about it. Um this is a big tip for your about it. Um this is a big tip for your about it. Um this is a big tip for your listeners. Uh take the feeling that comes easiest Uh take the feeling that comes easiest Uh take the feeling that comes easiest to you and put that last. Reach for the to you and put that last. Reach for the to you and put that last. Reach for the feelings that are less common. So if feelings that are less common. So if feelings that are less common. So if you're used to big, you know, I'm pissed you're used to big, you know, I'm pissed you're used to big, you know, I'm pissed off, go for the vulnerability. I was off, go for the vulnerability. I was off, go for the vulnerability. I was hurt. If you're used to being hurt, go hurt. If you're used to being hurt, go hurt. If you're used to being hurt, go for your strength. That was really not a for your strength. That was really not a for your strength. That was really not a good way. So whatever you're used to, good way. So whatever you're used to, good way. So whatever you're used to, flip it. flip it. flip it. &gt;&gt; And then what we never add, this would &gt;&gt; And then what we never add, this would &gt;&gt; And then what we never add, this would help me feel better. This would be help me feel better. This would be help me feel better. This would be repair. So you're leading your partner repair. So you're leading your partner repair. So you're leading your partner into repair. Now, here's a funny story. into repair. Now, here's a funny story. into repair. Now, here's a funny story. So Janet said you get four sentences, So Janet said you get four sentences, So Janet said you get four sentences, one sentence for each part. one sentence for each part. one sentence for each part. We have no attention span for being We have no attention span for being We have no attention span for being criticized. So four sentences is enough. criticized. So four sentences is enough. criticized. So four sentences is enough. I said to Janet, "Hey, look, I said to Janet, "Hey, look, I said to Janet, "Hey, look, you're a West Coast you're a West Coast you're a West Coast Christian. I'm an East Coast Jew. I've Christian. I'm an East Coast Jew. I've Christian. I'm an East Coast Jew. I've never said anything in four sentences. I never said anything in four sentences. I never said anything in four sentences. I need more. Okay, I'll give you cultural need more. Okay, I'll give you cultural need more. Okay, I'll give you cultural dispensation. You can have eight dispensation. You can have eight dispensation. You can have eight sentences." And ever that was 40 years sentences." And ever that was 40 years sentences." And ever that was 40 years ago. And now I tell all my clients to ago. And now I tell all my clients to ago. And now I tell all my clients to get eight sentences, two sentences each. get eight sentences, two sentences each. get eight sentences, two sentences each. This is what happened. This is what I This is what happened. This is what I This is what happened. This is what I told myself. This is what I felt. And told myself. This is what I felt. And told myself. This is what I felt. And this would help if you be willing. this would help if you be willing. this would help if you be willing. That's how you complain. But for every That's how you complain. But for every That's how you complain. But for every complaint, I want 99 requests instead. complaint, I want 99 requests instead. complaint, I want 99 requests instead. Love it. Um, I don't have any, for the Love it. Um, I don't have any, for the Love it. Um, I don't have any, for the record, I don't have any specific record, I don't have any specific record, I don't have any specific critiques that I want to wage right now. critiques that I want to wage right now. critiques that I want to wage right now. Is that a problem? Is that a problem? Is that a problem? &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Is that a problem? I don't have any &gt;&gt; Is that a problem? I don't have any &gt;&gt; Is that a problem? I don't have any critiques. I'm only in gratitude these critiques. I'm only in gratitude these critiques. I'm only in gratitude these days. It's really weird. It's really days. It's really weird. It's really days. It's really weird. It's really wild. Like something happened right wild. Like something happened right wild. Like something happened right around my 50th birthday. There were a around my 50th birthday. There were a around my 50th birthday. There were a bunch of things that led into it, but bunch of things that led into it, but bunch of things that led into it, but like I just am uh I mean I just feel like I just am uh I mean I just feel like I just am uh I mean I just feel constantly grateful. I don't know what constantly grateful. I don't know what constantly grateful. I don't know what happened, so I'm not going to worry happened, so I'm not going to worry happened, so I'm not going to worry about it. Um but yeah, some something about it. Um but yeah, some something about it. Um but yeah, some something hit and I like to think it has to do hit and I like to think it has to do hit and I like to think it has to do something with age. I do too. something with age. I do too. something with age. I do too. &gt;&gt; You know, it's like something's there. A &gt;&gt; You know, it's like something's there. A &gt;&gt; You know, it's like something's there. A buddy of mine who's also a professor at buddy of mine who's also a professor at buddy of mine who's also a professor at Stanford, he once told me, he goes, "50 Stanford, he once told me, he goes, "50 Stanford, he once told me, he goes, "50 is really different." How different can is really different." How different can is really different." How different can it be? He's like, "You'll see." I was it be? He's like, "You'll see." I was it be? He's like, "You'll see." I was like, "Is it like pain in the body?" like, "Is it like pain in the body?" like, "Is it like pain in the body?" He's like, "No, he takes really good He's like, "No, he takes really good He's like, "No, he takes really good care of himself. He's he's not into care of himself. He's he's not into care of himself. He's he's not into lifting and running. He's into some lifting and running. He's into some lifting and running. He's into some other stuff." Kind of rock climbing yoga other stuff." Kind of rock climbing yoga other stuff." Kind of rock climbing yoga dude. Um, amazing scientist, too. What? dude. Um, amazing scientist, too. What? dude. Um, amazing scientist, too. What? He goes, "It's it's um [clears throat] He goes, "It's it's um [clears throat] He goes, "It's it's um [clears throat] 50 is different. you'll just he goes, 50 is different. you'll just he goes, 50 is different. you'll just he goes, "Your brain is different at 50." And I "Your brain is different at 50." And I "Your brain is different at 50." And I kind of and I was like, maybe it was kind of and I was like, maybe it was kind of and I was like, maybe it was because I was anticipating it. Uh but because I was anticipating it. Uh but because I was anticipating it. Uh but yeah, 50 hit and I'm like, yeah, 50 hit and I'm like, yeah, 50 hit and I'm like, &gt;&gt; well, I'm still here. I I'm I live &gt;&gt; well, I'm still here. I I'm I live &gt;&gt; well, I'm still here. I I'm I live longer than a lot of my heroes longer than a lot of my heroes longer than a lot of my heroes &gt;&gt; and I wasn't impressed by the 27 club. I &gt;&gt; and I wasn't impressed by the 27 club. I &gt;&gt; and I wasn't impressed by the 27 club. I mean, impressive artist, but like the mean, impressive artist, but like the mean, impressive artist, but like the people a lot of people I knew and looked people a lot of people I knew and looked people a lot of people I knew and looked up to and who mentored me dead. Um I'm up to and who mentored me dead. Um I'm up to and who mentored me dead. Um I'm like, this is awesome. I'm on the second like, this is awesome. I'm on the second like, this is awesome. I'm on the second half and I just so I wake up that half and I just so I wake up that half and I just so I wake up that way. It's it's wild. Well, you don't way. It's it's wild. Well, you don't way. It's it's wild. Well, you don't split the small stuff. split the small stuff. split the small stuff. &gt;&gt; There's some wisdom in being an elder &gt;&gt; There's some wisdom in being an elder &gt;&gt; There's some wisdom in being an elder and like you had your fight with your and like you had your fight with your and like you had your fight with your girlfriends 353 time. You know, uh you girlfriends 353 time. You know, uh you girlfriends 353 time. You know, uh you asked about me and Belinda. I'll tell asked about me and Belinda. I'll tell asked about me and Belinda. I'll tell you, Belinda's a fighter and I'm a you, Belinda's a fighter and I'm a you, Belinda's a fighter and I'm a fighter. We both grew up in very violent fighter. We both grew up in very violent fighter. We both grew up in very violent families and our adopted children are families and our adopted children are families and our adopted children are fighters. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] me. fighters. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] me. fighters. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] me. I'm standing up for myself. I'm going to I'm standing up for myself. I'm going to I'm standing up for myself. I'm going to bop you right in the nose. And I'm a New bop you right in the nose. And I'm a New bop you right in the nose. And I'm a New Yorker, too. So, you know, don't mess Yorker, too. So, you know, don't mess Yorker, too. So, you know, don't mess with me. That's my adaptive trial. with me. That's my adaptive trial. with me. That's my adaptive trial. That's my instinct. And 30 years ago, we That's my instinct. And 30 years ago, we That's my instinct. And 30 years ago, we would fight for weeks, blind and I. I would fight for weeks, blind and I. I would fight for weeks, blind and I. I mean, ra yelling, screaming, rage, go to mean, ra yelling, screaming, rage, go to mean, ra yelling, screaming, rage, go to bed at 3:00 in the morning, wake up at bed at 3:00 in the morning, wake up at bed at 3:00 in the morning, wake up at 7, start all, tell other people how to 7, start all, tell other people how to 7, start all, tell other people how to live their lives all day, and then come live their lives all day, and then come live their lives all day, and then come back and fight again. This is true. 99% back and fight again. This is true. 99% back and fight again. This is true. 99% The 1% we look ugly just like everybody The 1% we look ugly just like everybody The 1% we look ugly just like everybody else. But 99, we start to fight. We take else. But 99, we start to fight. We take else. But 99, we start to fight. We take a break. We both know what that's about. a break. We both know what that's about. a break. We both know what that's about. 15 20 minutes and it's not one or 15 20 minutes and it's not one or 15 20 minutes and it's not one or the other. It's kind of even. One of us the other. It's kind of even. One of us the other. It's kind of even. One of us will go to the other. It sounds will go to the other. It sounds will go to the other. It sounds something like this. Andrew, something like this. Andrew, something like this. Andrew, uh, I don't want to fight. Do you really uh, I don't want to fight. Do you really uh, I don't want to fight. Do you really want to fight? I mean, we could, but I want to fight? I mean, we could, but I want to fight? I mean, we could, but I don't really want to, honey. What do you don't really want to, honey. What do you don't really want to, honey. What do you need? And Balloon will say to me, well, need? And Balloon will say to me, well, need? And Balloon will say to me, well, you really were an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about dot you really were an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about dot you really were an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about dot dot. And I'll go, yeah, I was. You're dot. And I'll go, yeah, I was. You're dot. And I'll go, yeah, I was. You're right. Uh, I'm sorry. I I'll work on right. Uh, I'm sorry. I I'll work on right. Uh, I'm sorry. I I'll work on that. I go, "What do you need?" I go, that. I go, "What do you need?" I go, that. I go, "What do you need?" I go, "Well, you could really apologize about "Well, you could really apologize about "Well, you could really apologize about one, two, three." And he'll go, "I'll one, two, three." And he'll go, "I'll one, two, three." And he'll go, "I'll apologize about one." 20 years ago. What apologize about one." 20 years ago. What apologize about one." 20 years ago. What about two and three now? Good. One. about two and three now? Good. One. about two and three now? Good. One. Fine. We'll take it. Good. Great. Fine. We'll take it. Good. Great. Fine. We'll take it. Good. Great. What's on TV? Let's cuddle up on the What's on TV? Let's cuddle up on the What's on TV? Let's cuddle up on the couch and have an evening. And what I'm couch and have an evening. And what I'm couch and have an evening. And what I'm really thinking in that moment is this. really thinking in that moment is this. really thinking in that moment is this. And this is what I teach people. How do And this is what I teach people. How do And this is what I teach people. How do I want to spend my evening? How do I want to spend my evening? How do I want to spend my evening? How do I want to spend my time? Is it really want to spend my time? Is it really want to spend my time? Is it really worth it to me to prove my point and worth it to me to prove my point and worth it to me to prove my point and nail her into the ground? Or can we make nail her into the ground? Or can we make nail her into the ground? Or can we make peace efficiently and skillfully and peace efficiently and skillfully and peace efficiently and skillfully and move the hell on? move the hell on? move the hell on? It we behave with skill because it's in It we behave with skill because it's in It we behave with skill because it's in our interest to do so. I'm not making our interest to do so. I'm not making our interest to do so. I'm not making peace with Belinda for her. I'm making peace with Belinda for her. I'm making peace with Belinda for her. I'm making peace with Belinda for me. peace with Belinda for me. peace with Belinda for me. I love this um word this I love this um word this I love this um word this language around being skilled in uh language around being skilled in uh language around being skilled in uh relating uh especially when things potentially uh especially when things potentially uh especially when things potentially get tense. It encapsulates get tense. It encapsulates get tense. It encapsulates all the things around um all the things around um all the things around um asking for help, asking for help, asking for help, asking what one needs. That's I that's asking what one needs. That's I that's asking what one needs. That's I that's so powerful. I've said it like four so powerful. I've said it like four so powerful. I've said it like four times so forgive me but I think it's times so forgive me but I think it's times so forgive me but I think it's people need to hear it again. you know, people need to hear it again. you know, people need to hear it again. you know, like just asking what do you need? I like just asking what do you need? I like just asking what do you need? I mean, if we could somehow program mean, if we could somehow program mean, if we could somehow program ourselves to turn the We all know that ourselves to turn the We all know that ourselves to turn the We all know that feeling when our lyic systems activated feeling when our lyic systems activated feeling when our lyic systems activated and like, you know, you start feeling and like, you know, you start feeling and like, you know, you start feeling your body, whatever activation state you your body, whatever activation state you your body, whatever activation state you get into, that's the lyic system. We all get into, that's the lyic system. We all get into, that's the lyic system. We all know it uh when it happens and just if know it uh when it happens and just if know it uh when it happens and just if that could just translate to the words that could just translate to the words that could just translate to the words like what do you need? And as you like what do you need? And as you like what do you need? And as you pointed out, that's best for both pointed out, that's best for both pointed out, that's best for both people. &gt;&gt; Let's prepare. &gt;&gt; Let's prepare. &gt;&gt; Let's prepare. All relationships are an endless dance All relationships are an endless dance All relationships are an endless dance of harmony, disharmony, and repair. I of harmony, disharmony, and repair. I of harmony, disharmony, and repair. I got this from Ed Trronic, infant got this from Ed Trronic, infant got this from Ed Trronic, infant observational researcher. Ed and Barry observational researcher. Ed and Barry observational researcher. Ed and Barry Brezelden were the first of a generation Brezelden were the first of a generation Brezelden were the first of a generation to stop thinking about mothers and to stop thinking about mothers and to stop thinking about mothers and infants reconstructed from adults and infants reconstructed from adults and infants reconstructed from adults and actually stuck cameras in front of actually stuck cameras in front of actually stuck cameras in front of mothers and infants and then fathers and mothers and infants and then fathers and mothers and infants and then fathers and looked at what happened. And I borrowed looked at what happened. And I borrowed looked at what happened. And I borrowed from Ed that all relationships are an from Ed that all relationships are an from Ed that all relationships are an endless rhythm of closeness, disruption, endless rhythm of closeness, disruption, endless rhythm of closeness, disruption, and a return. And in our culture, we and a return. And in our culture, we and a return. And in our culture, we don't learn the skills of moving from don't learn the skills of moving from don't learn the skills of moving from disillusionment, distance, disruption disillusionment, distance, disruption disillusionment, distance, disruption back into repair and return. And what back into repair and return. And what back into repair and return. And what makes life even more dicey is when we're makes life even more dicey is when we're makes life even more dicey is when we're in that disrupted state, we lose our in that disrupted state, we lose our in that disrupted state, we lose our prefrontal quarter wise adult and move prefrontal quarter wise adult and move prefrontal quarter wise adult and move into the adaptive child. So the first into the adaptive child. So the first into the adaptive child. So the first skill is getting back in your right skill is getting back in your right skill is getting back in your right mind. And then okay honey, what do you mind. And then okay honey, what do you mind. And then okay honey, what do you need? Let's fix this together. need? Let's fix this together. need? Let's fix this together. What's the What's the What's the work that [clears throat] work that [clears throat] work that [clears throat] men um boys men you know can do to um boys men you know can do to um boys men you know can do to understand um and work on their self-esteem um and work on their self-esteem um and work on their self-esteem dare I say in a vacuum. I know it's all dare I say in a vacuum. I know it's all dare I say in a vacuum. I know it's all relational. you have to do it. But there relational. you have to do it. But there relational. you have to do it. But there are people whose time is spent, you are people whose time is spent, you are people whose time is spent, you know, taking care of their job, their know, taking care of their job, their know, taking care of their job, their school, scrolling, spending some time, school, scrolling, spending some time, school, scrolling, spending some time, doing it like the there's I see an doing it like the there's I see an doing it like the there's I see an opportunity in the work that you do for opportunity in the work that you do for opportunity in the work that you do for and the fact that you're here uh for and the fact that you're here uh for and the fact that you're here uh for young guys to start earlier. young guys to start earlier. young guys to start earlier. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, I mean, I got I got lucky with &gt;&gt; You know, I mean, I got I got lucky with &gt;&gt; You know, I mean, I got I got lucky with someone taught me how to work out someone taught me how to work out someone taught me how to work out properly a long time ago. He was the guy properly a long time ago. He was the guy properly a long time ago. He was the guy everyone said was an idiot about how to everyone said was an idiot about how to everyone said was an idiot about how to work out. Turns out it worked and you work out. Turns out it worked and you work out. Turns out it worked and you didn't have to do it spend your whole didn't have to do it spend your whole didn't have to do it spend your whole life in a gym. I got lucky by having life in a gym. I got lucky by having life in a gym. I got lucky by having great mentors. I got lucky. I also fired great mentors. I got lucky. I also fired great mentors. I got lucky. I also fired some mentors and got new ones. So I some mentors and got new ones. So I some mentors and got new ones. So I played an active role. But played an active role. But played an active role. But you're incredibly skilled in this you're incredibly skilled in this you're incredibly skilled in this domain. It's your profession. Um and domain. It's your profession. Um and domain. It's your profession. Um and there are guys in their teens, 20s, 30s, there are guys in their teens, 20s, 30s, there are guys in their teens, 20s, 30s, all the way up to, you know, 80s, 90s all the way up to, you know, 80s, 90s all the way up to, you know, 80s, 90s surely that can learn. But like there's surely that can learn. But like there's surely that can learn. But like there's a special opportunity in starting to a special opportunity in starting to a special opportunity in starting to cultivate these skills in one's teens cultivate these skills in one's teens cultivate these skills in one's teens and 20s and 30s. Um and 20s and 30s. Um and 20s and 30s. Um and perhaps even having them when one and perhaps even having them when one and perhaps even having them when one shows up to relationship in much shows up to relationship in much shows up to relationship in much better form than certainly I had better form than certainly I had better form than certainly I had [laughter] um you know for sure. So what does that um you know for sure. So what does that um you know for sure. So what does that work look like? Like is it journaling? work look like? Like is it journaling? work look like? Like is it journaling? Is it is it like how does it work? Is it is it like how does it work? Is it is it like how does it work? &gt;&gt; I have two pieces of advice. And you &gt;&gt; I have two pieces of advice. And you &gt;&gt; I have two pieces of advice. And you have sons I should point out. like you have sons I should point out. like you have sons I should point out. like you have some experience teaching people you have some experience teaching people you have some experience teaching people how to do this. how to do this. how to do this. &gt;&gt; We've taught them this. My doc, the son, &gt;&gt; We've taught them this. My doc, the son, &gt;&gt; We've taught them this. My doc, the son, I was driving to school and he's giving I was driving to school and he's giving I was driving to school and he's giving me [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I Thomas stop. He gives me [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I Thomas stop. He gives me [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I Thomas stop. He gives me [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I look at him and I go, "Do you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I look at him and I go, "Do you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I look at him and I go, "Do you think this is appropriate for our think this is appropriate for our think this is appropriate for our relationship?" And he falls on the floor relationship?" And he falls on the floor relationship?" And he falls on the floor and he says, "Dad, there are dads and he says, "Dad, there are dads and he says, "Dad, there are dads driving their sons to school all over driving their sons to school all over driving their sons to school all over America. They're talking about the game. America. They're talking about the game. America. They're talking about the game. They're talking about friends. How many They're talking about friends. How many They're talking about friends. How many dads are saying to their son, "Do you dads are saying to their son, "Do you dads are saying to their son, "Do you think this is appropriate for our think this is appropriate for our think this is appropriate for our relationship?" Anyway, he does a whole relationship?" Anyway, he does a whole relationship?" Anyway, he does a whole routine about being the son of Tus. But routine about being the son of Tus. But routine about being the son of Tus. But but they [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about it, but they but they [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about it, but they but they [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about it, but they we taught them. and my Alexander my high we taught them. and my Alexander my high we taught them. and my Alexander my high achieving doctor you know researcher to achieving doctor you know researcher to achieving doctor you know researcher to this day uh he'll call and go I really this day uh he'll call and go I really this day uh he'll call and go I really blew that presentation and felt I know blew that presentation and felt I know blew that presentation and felt I know I'm enough and I matter even though I I'm enough and I matter even though I I'm enough and I matter even though I blew the presentation but I just want blew the presentation but I just want blew the presentation but I just want you to know we can teach our kids you to know we can teach our kids you to know we can teach our kids healthier moray it's part of our job as healthier moray it's part of our job as healthier moray it's part of our job as parents we can ra I have a little parents we can ra I have a little parents we can ra I have a little course online raising relational boys course online raising relational boys course online raising relational boys and girls and we can insist on more and girls and we can insist on more and girls and we can insist on more relationality We can um create like a pick in We can um create like a pick in We can um create like a pick in basketball. We can create a relationally basketball. We can create a relationally basketball. We can create a relationally cherishing subculture around our cherishing subculture around our cherishing subculture around our children, friends, family, teach them. children, friends, family, teach them. children, friends, family, teach them. Uh go into school and do an Uh go into school and do an Uh go into school and do an anti-bullying campaign. Um we can we can anti-bullying campaign. Um we can we can anti-bullying campaign. Um we can we can consciously download this to our kids consciously download this to our kids consciously download this to our kids and be explicit about it. In terms of and be explicit about it. In terms of and be explicit about it. In terms of the young person themselves, I have two the young person themselves, I have two the young person themselves, I have two pieces of advice. pieces of advice. pieces of advice. One, find older people who are good at this find older people who are good at this find older people who are good at this and let them be your mentor. Go to them and let them be your mentor. Go to them and let them be your mentor. Go to them and be explicit and let them teach you, and be explicit and let them teach you, and be explicit and let them teach you, but find people who are happy. Teach our but find people who are happy. Teach our but find people who are happy. Teach our kids how to be relational. Stand up for kids how to be relational. Stand up for kids how to be relational. Stand up for it and create a culture around them that it and create a culture around them that it and create a culture around them that supports that. because the playground supports that. because the playground supports that. because the playground won't, the school won't, your colleagues won't, the school won't, your colleagues won't, the school won't, your colleagues won't. So create a little counterculture won't. So create a little counterculture won't. So create a little counterculture of relationality and surround your of relationality and surround your of relationality and surround your family with them. For the young person, family with them. For the young person, family with them. For the young person, find mentors find mentors find mentors who are happy and let them teach you who are happy and let them teach you who are happy and let them teach you about how to be happy. And the other about how to be happy. And the other about how to be happy. And the other thing I want to teach which is true for thing I want to teach which is true for thing I want to teach which is true for all of us and uh I would not be able all of us and uh I would not be able all of us and uh I would not be able to forgive myself if I didn't say this to forgive myself if I didn't say this to forgive myself if I didn't say this one thing in our podcast. We have a lot one thing in our podcast. We have a lot one thing in our podcast. We have a lot of people listening. of people listening. of people listening. This is what I want to say. This is what I want to say. This is what I want to say. If you get one thing from our If you get one thing from our If you get one thing from our conversation today and you only get conversation today and you only get conversation today and you only get this, this one thing will be enough to this, this one thing will be enough to this, this one thing will be enough to change your life. I mean it. Here's what change your life. I mean it. Here's what change your life. I mean it. Here's what it is. it is. it is. There is no redeeming value in There is no redeeming value in There is no redeeming value in harshness. Let me say it again. There is harshness. Let me say it again. There is harshness. Let me say it again. There is nothing that harshness does that loving nothing that harshness does that loving nothing that harshness does that loving firmness doesn't do better. Be firm but firmness doesn't do better. Be firm but firmness doesn't do better. Be firm but with love, not harshness. And that's you with love, not harshness. And that's you with love, not harshness. And that's you treating others. That's the way you treating others. That's the way you treating others. That's the way you allow others to treat you. And very much allow others to treat you. And very much allow others to treat you. And very much that's the way you treat you. that's the way you treat you. that's the way you treat you. I am on an anti-harsness campaign and I am on an anti-harsness campaign and I am on an anti-harsness campaign and what I say to friends, family, students, what I say to friends, family, students, what I say to friends, family, students, uh, and it's true. At 75, uh, and it's true. At 75, uh, and it's true. At 75, I have a deal with the universe. If it I have a deal with the universe. If it I have a deal with the universe. If it isn't kind, I'm not interested. And that isn't kind, I'm not interested. And that isn't kind, I'm not interested. And that adapted child that lives inside me can adapted child that lives inside me can adapted child that lives inside me can be very harsh to my own imperfection. be very harsh to my own imperfection. be very harsh to my own imperfection. And I will say to that or to Belinda or And I will say to that or to Belinda or And I will say to that or to Belinda or to a colleague, you may have something to a colleague, you may have something to a colleague, you may have something to say to me [snorts] and it may be in to say to me [snorts] and it may be in to say to me [snorts] and it may be in my interest to learn and listen to you, my interest to learn and listen to you, my interest to learn and listen to you, but you have to say it like you're on my but you have to say it like you're on my but you have to say it like you're on my side. If you can't say it like you're on my If you can't say it like you're on my If you can't say it like you're on my side, I'm not going to listen. So, side, I'm not going to listen. So, side, I'm not going to listen. So, a hallmark of relationality a hallmark of relationality a hallmark of relationality is that it's loving and not harsh. Let is that it's loving and not harsh. Let is that it's loving and not harsh. Let that be your bellweather. that be your bellweather. that be your bellweather. I love that. I love that. I love that. Especially the part about the voice Especially the part about the voice Especially the part about the voice inside of us because I think we inside of us because I think we inside of us because I think we internalize the judge of the judgmental internalize the judge of the judgmental internalize the judge of the judgmental voice of the parent or the dismissive voice of the parent or the dismissive voice of the parent or the dismissive voice of the parent. All that stuff voice of the parent. All that stuff voice of the parent. All that stuff um gets in our heads and um it drives so um gets in our heads and um it drives so um gets in our heads and um it drives so much of our misery and what you just much of our misery and what you just much of our misery and what you just described offers a tremendous amount of described offers a tremendous amount of described offers a tremendous amount of agency. Yes. in terms of what will we agency. Yes. in terms of what will we agency. Yes. in terms of what will we will accept or won't accept from others will accept or won't accept from others will accept or won't accept from others what we request from others let's be what we request from others let's be what we request from others let's be positive here uh but at least equally positive here uh but at least equally positive here uh but at least equally importantly is what I heard uh is what importantly is what I heard uh is what importantly is what I heard uh is what how harsh we are with our inner dialogue how harsh we are with our inner dialogue how harsh we are with our inner dialogue and that we should cultivate a and that we should cultivate a and that we should cultivate a kindness internally because I do believe kindness internally because I do believe kindness internally because I do believe I'm certain that cultivates an external I'm certain that cultivates an external I'm certain that cultivates an external kindness &gt;&gt; yes start with you be kind to too. Uh, &gt;&gt; yes start with you be kind to too. Uh, &gt;&gt; yes start with you be kind to too. Uh, okay. So, I'll tell a story if you're okay. So, I'll tell a story if you're okay. So, I'll tell a story if you're not bored. not bored. not bored. &gt;&gt; No, please. &gt;&gt; No, please. &gt;&gt; No, please. &gt;&gt; Uh, absolutely true story. So, I was off &gt;&gt; Uh, absolutely true story. So, I was off &gt;&gt; Uh, absolutely true story. So, I was off at a conference, you know, and blah at a conference, you know, and blah at a conference, you know, and blah blah. And it was I was signing books. blah. And it was I was signing books. blah. And it was I was signing books. Uh, and it was late and one of my Uh, and it was late and one of my Uh, and it was late and one of my handlers, Terry, you going to miss your handlers, Terry, you going to miss your handlers, Terry, you going to miss your plane? Okay. I got I'm on the plane. I'm plane? Okay. I got I'm on the plane. I'm plane? Okay. I got I'm on the plane. I'm on the plane. on the plane. on the plane. I'm not drinking now, but I was drinking I'm not drinking now, but I was drinking I'm not drinking now, but I was drinking then. I had a little glass of short. I then. I had a little glass of short. I then. I had a little glass of short. I had my feet off. Uh, and uh, I'm feeling had my feet off. Uh, and uh, I'm feeling had my feet off. Uh, and uh, I'm feeling great. And I feel this coldness on my great. And I feel this coldness on my great. And I feel this coldness on my chest. And I look down and there's this chest. And I look down and there's this chest. And I look down and there's this big black splotch on my shirt. And I big black splotch on my shirt. And I big black splotch on my shirt. And I realized I was signing books with like a realized I was signing books with like a realized I was signing books with like a Sharpie. &gt;&gt; And in my haste, I didn't put the cap &gt;&gt; And in my haste, I didn't put the cap &gt;&gt; And in my haste, I didn't put the cap on. I put the sharp and it was like on. I put the sharp and it was like on. I put the sharp and it was like permanent ink. permanent ink. permanent ink. &gt;&gt; And I gotta tell you, Andrew, this was &gt;&gt; And I gotta tell you, Andrew, this was &gt;&gt; And I gotta tell you, Andrew, this was like this is one of my I hope I go on like this is one of my I hope I go on like this is one of my I hope I go on Oprah shirt. This is an expensive Oprah shirt. This is an expensive Oprah shirt. This is an expensive goddamn shirt. And I'm ADD. I'm always goddamn shirt. And I'm ADD. I'm always goddamn shirt. And I'm ADD. I'm always breaking things, bumping. So that breaking things, bumping. So that breaking things, bumping. So that adaptive child part of me was going to adaptive child part of me was going to adaptive child part of me was going to town. You're such a loser. You can't town. You're such a loser. You can't town. You're such a loser. You can't even look at you. You can't. And I'm even look at you. You can't. And I'm even look at you. You can't. And I'm depressive. Uh I wrote about it. That depressive. Uh I wrote about it. That depressive. Uh I wrote about it. That shirt and the harshness that I would shirt and the harshness that I would shirt and the harshness that I would level at myself could have turned into a level at myself could have turned into a level at myself could have turned into a five-day depression when I was younger. five-day depression when I was younger. five-day depression when I was younger. And having learned these techniques, I And having learned these techniques, I And having learned these techniques, I leaned, it's just a boy, just a young leaned, it's just a boy, just a young leaned, it's just a boy, just a young boy in me. And I leaned to that adapter. boy in me. And I leaned to that adapter. boy in me. And I leaned to that adapter. I said, "Listen, sweetheart, let me tell I said, "Listen, sweetheart, let me tell I said, "Listen, sweetheart, let me tell you something. The same ADD brain that you something. The same ADD brain that you something. The same ADD brain that ruined this shirt is the brain that ruined this shirt is the brain that ruined this shirt is the brain that wrote the books that were being wrote the books that were being wrote the books that were being autographed. So, how about you cut me some slack?" So, how about you cut me some slack?" So, how about you cut me some slack?" You know, I'm a therapist. I have very You know, I'm a therapist. I have very You know, I'm a therapist. I have very little cost of Kleenex, you know, an little cost of Kleenex, you know, an little cost of Kleenex, you know, an office. This shirt cost to do business. office. This shirt cost to do business. office. This shirt cost to do business. Sit down and let me enjoy my wine. And Sit down and let me enjoy my wine. And Sit down and let me enjoy my wine. And he did. he did. he did. Uh we don't have to be passive about Uh we don't have to be passive about Uh we don't have to be passive about these things. We can shape what goes on these things. We can shape what goes on these things. We can shape what goes on in our relationships, include our in our relationships, include our in our relationships, include our relationships to ourselves. relationships to ourselves. relationships to ourselves. uh stand up for health, but with um uh stand up for health, but with um uh stand up for health, but with um finesse and love, not with a blunt finesse and love, not with a blunt finesse and love, not with a blunt instrument. Uh and we get better at it. instrument. Uh and we get better at it. instrument. Uh and we get better at it. You you love the gym, the you go to the You you love the gym, the you go to the You you love the gym, the you go to the gym and you work out the first time, you gym and you work out the first time, you gym and you work out the first time, you feel like you're going to throw up. You feel like you're going to throw up. You feel like you're going to throw up. You go to the gym the 300th time, you got it go to the gym the 300th time, you got it go to the gym the 300th time, you got it nailed. Same thing with this. That harsh nailed. Same thing with this. That harsh nailed. Same thing with this. That harsh voice turns on you and you say, "Honey, voice turns on you and you say, "Honey, voice turns on you and you say, "Honey, stop." The first time you do it, they'll stop." The first time you do it, they'll stop." The first time you do it, they'll laugh at you. the 300th time you do it, laugh at you. the 300th time you do it, laugh at you. the 300th time you do it, they'll stop. That's called liberation. they'll stop. That's called liberation. they'll stop. That's called liberation. That's freedom. That's freedom. That's freedom. That's our birthright. That's our birthright. That's our birthright. Fantastic. Well, Terry, real um this was Fantastic. Well, Terry, real um this was Fantastic. Well, Terry, real um this was a true education in a true education in a true education in relational understanding. That's what the word I'm understanding. That's what the word I'm understanding. That's what the word I'm looking for. and relational looking for. and relational looking for. and relational understanding because I think men understanding because I think men understanding because I think men especially, I will say men especially, I will say men especially, I will say men especially, we think about ourselves and the we think about ourselves and the we think about ourselves and the landscape and how we're going to deal landscape and how we're going to deal landscape and how we're going to deal with the landscape. It's like I maybe with the landscape. It's like I maybe with the landscape. It's like I maybe now I just with your permission I'll now I just with your permission I'll now I just with your permission I'll just say I have this wild somewhat just say I have this wild somewhat just say I have this wild somewhat facicious story about the Y chromosome. facicious story about the Y chromosome. facicious story about the Y chromosome. May I? May I? May I? &gt;&gt; Oh yeah, go ahead. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah, go ahead. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah, go ahead. &gt;&gt; May I? So, I have a theory that long ago &gt;&gt; May I? So, I have a theory that long ago &gt;&gt; May I? So, I have a theory that long ago um some primordial version of us, a homo um some primordial version of us, a homo um some primordial version of us, a homo sapiens, um with a Y chromosome, picked sapiens, um with a Y chromosome, picked sapiens, um with a Y chromosome, picked up a rock and was like, "Oh, up a rock and was like, "Oh, up a rock and was like, "Oh, interesting." And then just like hit his interesting." And then just like hit his interesting." And then just like hit his head with it and was like, "Ow, that head with it and was like, "Ow, that head with it and was like, "Ow, that hurts." And then hit the guy next to him hurts." And then hit the guy next to him hurts." And then hit the guy next to him and they were like, "Oh, that hurts." and they were like, "Oh, that hurts." and they were like, "Oh, that hurts." And then they got together and like, And then they got together and like, And then they got together and like, "What would happen if we threw this over "What would happen if we threw this over "What would happen if we threw this over that tree? Let's see what and I sort that tree? Let's see what and I sort that tree? Let's see what and I sort of half joking because I think there's of half joking because I think there's of half joking because I think there's something about the Y chromosome that something about the Y chromosome that something about the Y chromosome that you observe in like if you uh go to a you observe in like if you uh go to a you observe in like if you uh go to a wedding and there's boys there and wedding and there's boys there and wedding and there's boys there and everyone gets their jackets and their everyone gets their jackets and their everyone gets their jackets and their ties and like within no time the boys ties and like within no time the boys ties and like within no time the boys are combining all the drinks and they're are combining all the drinks and they're are combining all the drinks and they're like what would happen if [laughter] and like what would happen if [laughter] and like what would happen if [laughter] and who's going to drink it and then at some who's going to drink it and then at some who's going to drink it and then at some point it turns into this idea of having point it turns into this idea of having point it turns into this idea of having action at a distance like there's action at a distance like there's action at a distance like there's something about the Y chromosome we want something about the Y chromosome we want something about the Y chromosome we want to see that sometimes it's a remote to see that sometimes it's a remote to see that sometimes it's a remote control car. Like the first time you control car. Like the first time you control car. Like the first time you play with a remote control car, you're play with a remote control car, you're play with a remote control car, you're like, "Oh, wow. I can control something like, "Oh, wow. I can control something like, "Oh, wow. I can control something at a distance." Sounds very diabolical, at a distance." Sounds very diabolical, at a distance." Sounds very diabolical, but it's just cool. You're over here, but it's just cool. You're over here, but it's just cool. You're over here, it's over there, right? And um likewise it's over there, right? And um likewise it's over there, right? And um likewise with a video game or there's something with a video game or there's something with a video game or there's something about this like action at distance and about this like action at distance and about this like action at distance and let's see what would happen if and I let's see what would happen if and I let's see what would happen if and I look at a lot of my adult male friends, look at a lot of my adult male friends, look at a lot of my adult male friends, some who are very successful some who are very successful some who are very successful phenoms, and they're still playing this phenoms, and they're still playing this phenoms, and they're still playing this game of what would happen if and action game of what would happen if and action game of what would happen if and action at a distance to get this feedback about at a distance to get this feedback about at a distance to get this feedback about whether or not they're doing well in whether or not they're doing well in whether or not they're doing well in life. all awesome features to being male. I all awesome features to being male. I all awesome features to being male. I love being male. I think the Y love being male. I think the Y love being male. I think the Y chromosome should be celebrated um just chromosome should be celebrated um just chromosome should be celebrated um just as the X chromosome should be as the X chromosome should be as the X chromosome should be celebrated. And at the same time, none celebrated. And at the same time, none celebrated. And at the same time, none of that of that of that addresses what you were talking about addresses what you were talking about addresses what you were talking about today. And so there are a few people today. And so there are a few people today. And so there are a few people only a few and I know you're among them only a few and I know you're among them only a few and I know you're among them now having spoken to you and heard from now having spoken to you and heard from now having spoken to you and heard from you more importantly who can understand you more importantly who can understand you more importantly who can understand the first piece the first piece the first piece about what would happen if and the about what would happen if and the about what would happen if and the action at a distance and the second action at a distance and the second action at a distance and the second piece the relational piece and all too piece the relational piece and all too piece the relational piece and all too often these are separated. It's like, often these are separated. It's like, often these are separated. It's like, "Oh, let's talk about evolutionary "Oh, let's talk about evolutionary "Oh, let's talk about evolutionary theory about what men need a provider, theory about what men need a provider, theory about what men need a provider, protector, and then and then it's," no, protector, and then and then it's," no, protector, and then and then it's," no, let's actually feel our feelings let's actually feel our feelings let's actually feel our feelings and dissolve into a puddle of our own and dissolve into a puddle of our own and dissolve into a puddle of our own tears, and then we're going to resurrect tears, and then we're going to resurrect tears, and then we're going to resurrect in a in a new form. That's so that's in a in a new form. That's so that's in a in a new form. That's so that's like, you know, enlighten like no, these like, you know, enlighten like no, these like, you know, enlighten like no, these things have to be things have to be things have to be &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; Um in whole. &gt;&gt; Um in whole. &gt;&gt; Um in whole. &gt;&gt; I want wholeness. &gt;&gt; I want wholeness. &gt;&gt; I want wholeness. &gt;&gt; That's the word I'm looking for. You are &gt;&gt; That's the word I'm looking for. You are &gt;&gt; That's the word I'm looking for. You are speaking to how men and boys help can be speaking to how men and boys help can be speaking to how men and boys help can be whole people. And I love it. and you whole people. And I love it. and you whole people. And I love it. and you give very practical, very actionable give very practical, very actionable give very practical, very actionable advice and advice and advice and it's going to help a lot of people. So, it's going to help a lot of people. So, it's going to help a lot of people. So, I'm very grateful that you've written I'm very grateful that you've written I'm very grateful that you've written your books. We'll put links to your books. We'll put links to your books. We'll put links to your books, to your courses. It sounds like books, to your courses. It sounds like books, to your courses. It sounds like people can sign up for these courses and people can sign up for these courses and people can sign up for these courses and take these courses take these courses take these courses &gt;&gt; and for coming here today and for being &gt;&gt; and for coming here today and for being &gt;&gt; and for coming here today and for being a public educator and teaching people, a public educator and teaching people, a public educator and teaching people, men and women, but today mostly men how men and women, but today mostly men how men and women, but today mostly men how to love themselves more, love other to love themselves more, love other to love themselves more, love other people more, love life more, and learn people more, love life more, and learn people more, love life more, and learn to relate. So, thank you so much for to relate. So, thank you so much for to relate. So, thank you so much for coming here. coming here. coming here. &gt;&gt; You're doing beautiful work. &gt;&gt; You're doing beautiful work. &gt;&gt; You're doing beautiful work. There's so much [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and darkness in There's so much [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and darkness in There's so much [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and darkness in this world right now. And I want to tell this world right now. And I want to tell this world right now. And I want to tell you, it's a blessing to be taken you, it's a blessing to be taken you, it's a blessing to be taken seriously by you and to be offered this seriously by you and to be offered this seriously by you and to be offered this opportunity. And it's fun hanging out opportunity. And it's fun hanging out opportunity. And it's fun hanging out with you. with you. with you. &gt;&gt; I'm right back at you. I feel very &gt;&gt; I'm right back at you. I feel very &gt;&gt; I'm right back at you. I feel very honored and blessed to have you here. honored and blessed to have you here. honored and blessed to have you here. And this was a lot of fun. To be And this was a lot of fun. To be And this was a lot of fun. To be continued. &gt;&gt; To be continued. &gt;&gt; To be continued. &gt;&gt; To be continued. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Terry Real. To learn discussion with Terry Real. To learn discussion with Terry Real. To learn more about his work, please see the more about his work, please see the more about his work, please see the links in the show note captions. If links in the show note captions. If links in the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Terry Real. And today's discussion with Terry Real. And today's discussion with Terry Real. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for [music] your interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]