Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based [music] tools for mental science-based [music] tools for mental science-based [music] tools for mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, for my discussion with Dr. David for my discussion with Dr. David for my discussion with Dr. David Anderson. David, great to be here and Anderson. David, great to be here and Anderson. David, great to be here and great to finally sit down and chat with great to finally sit down and chat with great to finally sit down and chat with you. Great to be here, too. Thank you so you. Great to be here, too. Thank you so you. Great to be here, too. Thank you so much. &gt;&gt; I want to start with something fairly &gt;&gt; I want to start with something fairly &gt;&gt; I want to start with something fairly basic, and that's the difference between basic, and that's the difference between basic, and that's the difference between emotions and states. How should we think emotions and states. How should we think emotions and states. How should we think about them, and why might states be about them, and why might states be about them, and why might states be at least, as useful a thing to think at least, as useful a thing to think at least, as useful a thing to think about, if not more useful? The short about, if not more useful? The short about, if not more useful? The short answer to your question is that I see answer to your question is that I see answer to your question is that I see emotions as a type of internal state, in emotions as a type of internal state, in emotions as a type of internal state, in the sense that arousal is also a type of the sense that arousal is also a type of the sense that arousal is also a type of internal state, motivation is a type of internal state, motivation is a type of internal state, motivation is a type of internal state, sleep is a type of internal state, sleep is a type of internal state, sleep is a type of internal state. They change the input to internal state. They change the input to internal state. They change the input to output transformation of the brain. When output transformation of the brain. When output transformation of the brain. When you're asleep, you don't hear something you're asleep, you don't hear something you're asleep, you don't hear something that you would hear if you were awake. that you would hear if you were awake. that you would hear if you were awake. So, from that broad perspective, I see So, from that broad perspective, I see So, from that broad perspective, I see emotion as a class of state that emotion as a class of state that emotion as a class of state that controls behavior. The reason I think controls behavior. The reason I think controls behavior. The reason I think it's useful to think about it as a state it's useful to think about it as a state it's useful to think about it as a state is it puts the focus on it as a is it puts the focus on it as a is it puts the focus on it as a neurobiological process, rather than as neurobiological process, rather than as neurobiological process, rather than as a psychological process. Many people a psychological process. Many people a psychological process. Many people equate emotion with feeling, which is a equate emotion with feeling, which is a equate emotion with feeling, which is a subjective sense that we can only study subjective sense that we can only study subjective sense that we can only study in humans, because to find out what in humans, because to find out what in humans, because to find out what someone's feeling, you have to ask them, someone's feeling, you have to ask them, someone's feeling, you have to ask them, and people are the only and people are the only and people are the only animals that can talk that we can animals that can talk that we can animals that can talk that we can understand. That's how I think about understand. That's how I think about understand. That's how I think about emotion. It's the If you think of an emotion. It's the If you think of an emotion. It's the If you think of an iceberg, it's the part of the iceberg iceberg, it's the part of the iceberg iceberg, it's the part of the iceberg that's below the surface of the water. that's below the surface of the water. that's below the surface of the water. The feeling part is the tip. What are The feeling part is the tip. What are The feeling part is the tip. What are some of the other features of states some of the other features of states some of the other features of states that represent below the tip of the that represent below the tip of the that represent below the tip of the iceberg? &gt;&gt; Right. There have been people who have &gt;&gt; Right. There have been people who have &gt;&gt; Right. There have been people who have thought of emotions as having just thought of emotions as having just thought of emotions as having just really two dimensions, a an arousal really two dimensions, a an arousal really two dimensions, a an arousal dimension and a valence dimension. Ralph dimension and a valence dimension. Ralph dimension and a valence dimension. Ralph Adolphs and I have tried to expand that Adolphs and I have tried to expand that Adolphs and I have tried to expand that a little bit to think about components a little bit to think about components a little bit to think about components of emotion, particularly those that of emotion, particularly those that of emotion, particularly those that distinguish emotion states from distinguish emotion states from distinguish emotion states from motivational states, because they are motivational states, because they are motivational states, because they are very closely related. One of those very closely related. One of those very closely related. One of those important properties is persistence. important properties is persistence. important properties is persistence. This is something that distinguishes This is something that distinguishes This is something that distinguishes state-driven behaviors from simple state-driven behaviors from simple state-driven behaviors from simple reflexes. Reflexes tend to terminate reflexes. Reflexes tend to terminate reflexes. Reflexes tend to terminate when the stimulus turns off, like the when the stimulus turns off, like the when the stimulus turns off, like the doctor hitting your knee with a hammer. doctor hitting your knee with a hammer. doctor hitting your knee with a hammer. It initiates with the stimulus onset, It initiates with the stimulus onset, It initiates with the stimulus onset, and it terminates with the stimulus and it terminates with the stimulus and it terminates with the stimulus offset. Emotions tend to outlast, often, offset. Emotions tend to outlast, often, offset. Emotions tend to outlast, often, the stimulus that evoked them. If you're the stimulus that evoked them. If you're the stimulus that evoked them. If you're walking along a trail here in Southern walking along a trail here in Southern walking along a trail here in Southern California, you hear a rattlesnake California, you hear a rattlesnake California, you hear a rattlesnake rattling, you're going to jump in the rattling, you're going to jump in the rattling, you're going to jump in the air, your heart is going to continue to air, your heart is going to continue to air, your heart is going to continue to beat, and your palms sweat for a while beat, and your palms sweat for a while beat, and your palms sweat for a while after it's slithered off in the bush, after it's slithered off in the bush, after it's slithered off in the bush, and you're going to be hypervigilant. If and you're going to be hypervigilant. If and you're going to be hypervigilant. If you see something that even remotely you see something that even remotely you see something that even remotely looks snake-like, a stick, you're going looks snake-like, a stick, you're going looks snake-like, a stick, you're going to stop. Not all states have to stop. Not all states have to stop. Not all states have persistence. So, for example, you think persistence. So, for example, you think persistence. So, for example, you think about hunger. Once you've eaten, the about hunger. Once you've eaten, the about hunger. Once you've eaten, the state is gone. You're not hungry state is gone. You're not hungry state is gone. You're not hungry anymore. But, if you're really angry and anymore. But, if you're really angry and anymore. But, if you're really angry and you get into a fight with somebody, even you get into a fight with somebody, even you get into a fight with somebody, even after the fight is over, you may remain after the fight is over, you may remain after the fight is over, you may remain riled up for a long time, and it takes riled up for a long time, and it takes riled up for a long time, and it takes you a while to calm down. And then, you a while to calm down. And then, you a while to calm down. And then, generalization is an important component of emotion is an important component of emotion is an important component of emotion states um that uh make them, if they states um that uh make them, if they states um that uh make them, if they have been uh triggered in one situation, have been uh triggered in one situation, have been uh triggered in one situation, they can apply to another situation. My they can apply to another situation. My they can apply to another situation. My favorite example of that is you come favorite example of that is you come favorite example of that is you come home from work, and your kid is home from work, and your kid is home from work, and your kid is screaming. If you had a good day at screaming. If you had a good day at screaming. If you had a good day at work, you might pick it up and work, you might pick it up and work, you might pick it up and soothe it. If you had a bad day at work, soothe it. If you had a bad day at work, soothe it. If you had a bad day at work, you might react very differently to it. you might react very differently to it. you might react very differently to it. &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk a bit about aggression, &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk a bit about aggression, &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk a bit about aggression, the beautiful work of Dayu Lin and the beautiful work of Dayu Lin and the beautiful work of Dayu Lin and others in your lab. What are your others in your lab. What are your others in your lab. What are your thoughts on aggression, how it's thoughts on aggression, how it's thoughts on aggression, how it's generated, the neural circuit generated, the neural circuit generated, the neural circuit mechanisms, and some of the variation in mechanisms, and some of the variation in mechanisms, and some of the variation in what we call aggression? First of all, what we call aggression? First of all, what we call aggression? First of all, um the word aggression um the word aggression um the word aggression in my mind refers more to a description in my mind refers more to a description in my mind refers more to a description of behavior than it does to an internal of behavior than it does to an internal of behavior than it does to an internal state. Aggression could reflect an state. Aggression could reflect an state. Aggression could reflect an internal state that we would call anger internal state that we would call anger internal state that we would call anger in humans, or could reflect fear, or it in humans, or could reflect fear, or it in humans, or could reflect fear, or it could reflect hunger, if it's predatory could reflect hunger, if it's predatory could reflect hunger, if it's predatory aggression. The work that Dayu did when aggression. The work that Dayu did when aggression. The work that Dayu did when she was in my lab, she found a way to she was in my lab, she found a way to she was in my lab, she found a way to evoke aggression in mice using evoke aggression in mice using evoke aggression in mice using optogenetics to activate specific neurons in a region to activate specific neurons in a region to activate specific neurons in a region of the hypothalamus, the ventromedial of the hypothalamus, the ventromedial of the hypothalamus, the ventromedial hypothalamus, VMH. Following, first, the hypothalamus, VMH. Following, first, the hypothalamus, VMH. Following, first, the famous Nobel Prize-winning work of famous Nobel Prize-winning work of famous Nobel Prize-winning work of Walter Hess. In Hess's original Walter Hess. In Hess's original Walter Hess. In Hess's original experiments, he describes two types of experiments, he describes two types of experiments, he describes two types of aggression that he evokes from cats, aggression that he evokes from cats, aggression that he evokes from cats, depending on where in the hypothalamus depending on where in the hypothalamus depending on where in the hypothalamus he puts his electrode. One of which he puts his electrode. One of which he puts his electrode. One of which he calls defensive rage. That's the ears calls defensive rage. That's the ears calls defensive rage. That's the ears laid back, teeth bared, and hissing. And laid back, teeth bared, and hissing. And laid back, teeth bared, and hissing. And the other one is predatory aggression, the other one is predatory aggression, the other one is predatory aggression, where the cat has its ears forward, where the cat has its ears forward, where the cat has its ears forward, and it's like batting with its paw at a and it's like batting with its paw at a and it's like batting with its paw at a mouse-like object, like it wants to mouse-like object, like it wants to mouse-like object, like it wants to catch it and eat it. If you think of catch it and eat it. If you think of catch it and eat it. If you think of ventromedial hypothalamus like a pear ventromedial hypothalamus like a pear ventromedial hypothalamus like a pear sitting on the ground, the fat part of sitting on the ground, the fat part of sitting on the ground, the fat part of the pear and near the ground is where the pear and near the ground is where the pear and near the ground is where the aggression neurons are, but the aggression neurons are, but the aggression neurons are, but the upper part of the pear has fear neurons. upper part of the pear has fear neurons. upper part of the pear has fear neurons. Fast-forward from that from a lot of Fast-forward from that from a lot of Fast-forward from that from a lot of work from Dayu now on her own at NYU, work from Dayu now on her own at NYU, work from Dayu now on her own at NYU, and with her postdoc Annegret Falkner, and with her postdoc Annegret Falkner, and with her postdoc Annegret Falkner, there's evidence that the type of there's evidence that the type of there's evidence that the type of fighting that we were that we elicit when we that we were that we elicit when we that we were that we elicit when we stimulate VMH is offensive aggression stimulate VMH is offensive aggression stimulate VMH is offensive aggression that is actually rewarding to male mice. that is actually rewarding to male mice. that is actually rewarding to male mice. &gt;&gt; They like it. &gt;&gt; They like it. &gt;&gt; They like it. &gt;&gt; They like it. Male mice will learn to &gt;&gt; They like it. Male mice will learn to &gt;&gt; They like it. Male mice will learn to poke their nose or press a bar to get poke their nose or press a bar to get poke their nose or press a bar to get the opportunity to beat up a subordinate the opportunity to beat up a subordinate the opportunity to beat up a subordinate male mouse. It has a positive valence. male mouse. It has a positive valence. male mouse. It has a positive valence. So, it's become clear that, if you want So, it's become clear that, if you want So, it's become clear that, if you want to call it the state of aggressiveness, to call it the state of aggressiveness, to call it the state of aggressiveness, is multifaceted. It depends on the type is multifaceted. It depends on the type is multifaceted. It depends on the type of aggression, and it involves different of aggression, and it involves different of aggression, and it involves different sorts of circuits. Why do you think sorts of circuits. Why do you think sorts of circuits. Why do you think there would be such a close positioning there would be such a close positioning there would be such a close positioning of neurons that can elicit such of neurons that can elicit such of neurons that can elicit such divergent states and behaviors? I mean, divergent states and behaviors? I mean, divergent states and behaviors? I mean, you're talking about this pear-shaped you're talking about this pear-shaped you're talking about this pear-shaped structure where the neurons that structure where the neurons that structure where the neurons that generate fear are cheek to jowl with the generate fear are cheek to jowl with the generate fear are cheek to jowl with the neurons that generate offensive neurons that generate offensive neurons that generate offensive aggression. If you think from an aggression. If you think from an aggression. If you think from an evolutionary perspective, it might have evolutionary perspective, it might have evolutionary perspective, it might have been the case that defensive behaviors been the case that defensive behaviors been the case that defensive behaviors and fear arose before offensive and fear arose before offensive and fear arose before offensive aggression, because animals, first and aggression, because animals, first and aggression, because animals, first and foremost, have to defend themselves from foremost, have to defend themselves from foremost, have to defend themselves from predation by other animals. And maybe predation by other animals. And maybe predation by other animals. And maybe it's only when they're comfortable with it's only when they're comfortable with it's only when they're comfortable with having warded off predation and made having warded off predation and made having warded off predation and made themselves safe that they can start themselves safe that they can start themselves safe that they can start about start to think about who's going about start to think about who's going about start to think about who's going to be the alpha male in my group to be the alpha male in my group to be the alpha male in my group here. And so, it could be that, if you here. And so, it could be that, if you here. And so, it could be that, if you think that brain regions and cell think that brain regions and cell think that brain regions and cell populations evolve by duplication and populations evolve by duplication and populations evolve by duplication and modification of preexisting modification of preexisting modification of preexisting cell populations, that might be the way cell populations, that might be the way cell populations, that might be the way that those regions wound up next to each that those regions wound up next to each that those regions wound up next to each other. But, I think there must be a other. But, I think there must be a other. But, I think there must be a functional part, as well. So, one thing functional part, as well. So, one thing functional part, as well. So, one thing we know about offensive aggression is we know about offensive aggression is we know about offensive aggression is that strong fear shuts it down. Whereas, that strong fear shuts it down. Whereas, that strong fear shuts it down. Whereas, defensive aggression, at least in rats, defensive aggression, at least in rats, defensive aggression, at least in rats, is actually enhanced by fear. It's one is actually enhanced by fear. It's one is actually enhanced by fear. It's one of the big differences between defensive of the big differences between defensive of the big differences between defensive aggression and offensive aggression. And aggression and offensive aggression. And aggression and offensive aggression. And maybe these two regions are close to maybe these two regions are close to maybe these two regions are close to each other to facilitate inhibition of each other to facilitate inhibition of each other to facilitate inhibition of aggression by the fear neurons. We know aggression by the fear neurons. We know aggression by the fear neurons. We know for a fact that if we deliberately for a fact that if we deliberately for a fact that if we deliberately stimulate those fear neurons at the top stimulate those fear neurons at the top stimulate those fear neurons at the top of the pear, when two animals are of the pear, when two animals are of the pear, when two animals are involved in a fight, it just stops the involved in a fight, it just stops the involved in a fight, it just stops the fight dead in its tracks, and they go fight dead in its tracks, and they go fight dead in its tracks, and they go off into the corner and freeze. So, at off into the corner and freeze. So, at off into the corner and freeze. So, at least hierarchically, it seems like fear least hierarchically, it seems like fear least hierarchically, it seems like fear is the dominant behavior over offensive is the dominant behavior over offensive is the dominant behavior over offensive aggression. I think that's the way I aggression. I think that's the way I aggression. I think that's the way I tend to think about why these neurons tend to think about why these neurons tend to think about why these neurons are all mixed up together. And it's are all mixed up together. And it's are all mixed up together. And it's not just fight and flight. There are not just fight and flight. There are not just fight and flight. There are also metabolic neurons that are mixed also metabolic neurons that are mixed also metabolic neurons that are mixed together in VMH, as well. together in VMH, as well. together in VMH, as well. &gt;&gt; One of the concepts that you've raised &gt;&gt; One of the concepts that you've raised &gt;&gt; One of the concepts that you've raised in your lectures before is this idea of in your lectures before is this idea of in your lectures before is this idea of a sort of hydraulic pressure. Maybe it a sort of hydraulic pressure. Maybe it a sort of hydraulic pressure. Maybe it was Conrad I can't speak now. Excuse me. Conrad I can't speak now. Excuse me. Conrad I can't speak now. Excuse me. Konrad Lorenz, Martin, who talked about Konrad Lorenz, Martin, who talked about Konrad Lorenz, Martin, who talked about a kind of hydraulic pressure towards a kind of hydraulic pressure towards a kind of hydraulic pressure towards behavior. What's really driving behavior. What's really driving behavior. What's really driving hydraulic pressure toward a given state? hydraulic pressure toward a given state? hydraulic pressure toward a given state? One way that is helpful, at least for One way that is helpful, at least for One way that is helpful, at least for me, to break this question apart and me, to break this question apart and me, to break this question apart and think about it, is to distinguish think about it, is to distinguish think about it, is to distinguish homeostatic behaviors, that is, need-based behaviors, that is, need-based behaviors, that is, need-based behaviors, where the pressure is built behaviors, where the pressure is built behaviors, where the pressure is built up because of a need, like I'm hungry, I up because of a need, like I'm hungry, I up because of a need, like I'm hungry, I need to eat, I'm thirsty, I need to need to eat, I'm thirsty, I need to need to eat, I'm thirsty, I need to drink, I'm hot, I need to get to a cold drink, I'm hot, I need to get to a cold drink, I'm hot, I need to get to a cold place. It's basically the thermostat place. It's basically the thermostat place. It's basically the thermostat model of your brain. You have a set model of your brain. You have a set model of your brain. You have a set point, and then if the temperature gets point, and then if the temperature gets point, and then if the temperature gets too hot, you turn on the AC, and if the too hot, you turn on the AC, and if the too hot, you turn on the AC, and if the temperature gets too cold, you turn on temperature gets too cold, you turn on temperature gets too cold, you turn on the heater, and you put yourself back to the heater, and you put yourself back to the heater, and you put yourself back to the set point. You can think of this the set point. You can think of this the set point. You can think of this accumulated hydraulic pressure either accumulated hydraulic pressure either accumulated hydraulic pressure either being based on something that you were being based on something that you were being based on something that you were deprived of creating an accumulating deprived of creating an accumulating deprived of creating an accumulating need or something that you want to do need or something that you want to do need or something that you want to do building up a drive or a pressure to do building up a drive or a pressure to do building up a drive or a pressure to do that and the natural way to think about that and the natural way to think about that and the natural way to think about that at least for me is as gradual that at least for me is as gradual that at least for me is as gradual increases in neural activity in a increases in neural activity in a increases in neural activity in a particular region of the brain. So for particular region of the brain. So for particular region of the brain. So for example in the area of the brain of the example in the area of the brain of the example in the area of the brain of the hypothalamus that controls feeding Scott hypothalamus that controls feeding Scott hypothalamus that controls feeding Scott Sternson and others have shown that the Sternson and others have shown that the Sternson and others have shown that the hungrier you get hungrier you get hungrier you get the higher the level of activity in that the higher the level of activity in that the higher the level of activity in that region in the brain and then when you region in the brain and then when you region in the brain and then when you eat boom the activity goes right back eat boom the activity goes right back eat boom the activity goes right back down again. And I think in the case of down again. And I think in the case of down again. And I think in the case of aggression our data and others show that aggression our data and others show that aggression our data and others show that the more strongly you drive this region the more strongly you drive this region the more strongly you drive this region of the brain optogenetically of the brain optogenetically of the brain optogenetically the more of just a hair trigger you need the more of just a hair trigger you need the more of just a hair trigger you need to set the animal off to get it to set the animal off to get it to set the animal off to get it to fight. VMH projects to about 30 fight. VMH projects to about 30 fight. VMH projects to about 30 different regions in the brain and it different regions in the brain and it different regions in the brain and it gets input from about 30 different gets input from about 30 different gets input from about 30 different regions. So I kind of see it as both an regions. So I kind of see it as both an regions. So I kind of see it as both an antenna and a broadcasting center. It's antenna and a broadcasting center. It's antenna and a broadcasting center. It's like a satellite dish that takes in like a satellite dish that takes in like a satellite dish that takes in information from different sensory information from different sensory information from different sensory modalities smell maybe vision mechanical modalities smell maybe vision mechanical modalities smell maybe vision mechanical sensation and then it sort of mechanical sensation and then it sort of mechanical sensation and then it sort of synthesizes and integrates that into a synthesizes and integrates that into a synthesizes and integrates that into a fairly low dimensional as the fairly low dimensional as the fairly low dimensional as the computational people call it computational people call it computational people call it representation of this pressure to representation of this pressure to representation of this pressure to attack and it broadcasts that all over attack and it broadcasts that all over attack and it broadcasts that all over the brain to trigger all these systems the brain to trigger all these systems the brain to trigger all these systems that have to be brought into play if the that have to be brought into play if the that have to be brought into play if the animal is going to engage in aggression animal is going to engage in aggression animal is going to engage in aggression because aggression is a very risky thing because aggression is a very risky thing because aggression is a very risky thing for an animal to engage in. It could for an animal to engage in. It could for an animal to engage in. It could wind up losing and it could wind up wind up losing and it could wind up wind up losing and it could wind up getting killed and so it's brain getting killed and so it's brain getting killed and so it's brain constantly has to make a cost-benefit constantly has to make a cost-benefit constantly has to make a cost-benefit analysis of whether to continue on that analysis of whether to continue on that analysis of whether to continue on that path or to back off. As we're talking path or to back off. As we're talking path or to back off. As we're talking about aggression and mating behavior about aggression and mating behavior about aggression and mating behavior I think hormones. I think hormones. I think hormones. One of the common myths that's out there One of the common myths that's out there One of the common myths that's out there and I think that persists is that and I think that persists is that and I think that persists is that testosterone makes animals and humans testosterone makes animals and humans testosterone makes animals and humans aggressive and estrogen makes animals aggressive and estrogen makes animals aggressive and estrogen makes animals placid and kind or emotional. placid and kind or emotional. placid and kind or emotional. And as we both know nothing could be And as we both know nothing could be And as we both know nothing could be further from the truth. The specific further from the truth. The specific further from the truth. The specific hormones that are involved in generating hormones that are involved in generating hormones that are involved in generating aggression via VMH aggression via VMH aggression via VMH are things are things are things other than testosterone. Can you tell us other than testosterone. Can you tell us other than testosterone. Can you tell us a little bit more about that because a little bit more about that because a little bit more about that because there's some interesting surprises in there's some interesting surprises in there's some interesting surprises in there. When we finally identified the there. When we finally identified the there. When we finally identified the neurons in VMH that control aggression neurons in VMH that control aggression neurons in VMH that control aggression with a molecular marker we found out with a molecular marker we found out with a molecular marker we found out that marker was the estrogen that marker was the estrogen that marker was the estrogen receptor. Other labs have shown that the receptor. Other labs have shown that the receptor. Other labs have shown that the estrogen receptor in adult male mice is estrogen receptor in adult male mice is estrogen receptor in adult male mice is necessary for aggression. If you knock necessary for aggression. If you knock necessary for aggression. If you knock out the gene in VMH they don't fight and out the gene in VMH they don't fight and out the gene in VMH they don't fight and it's been shown and a lot of this is it's been shown and a lot of this is it's been shown and a lot of this is work from your colleague Nirao Shah at work from your colleague Nirao Shah at work from your colleague Nirao Shah at Stanford who is one of my former PhD Stanford who is one of my former PhD Stanford who is one of my former PhD students that if you castrate a mouse students that if you castrate a mouse students that if you castrate a mouse and it loses the ability to and it loses the ability to and it loses the ability to fight not only can you rescue fighting fight not only can you rescue fighting fight not only can you rescue fighting with a testosterone implant but you can with a testosterone implant but you can with a testosterone implant but you can rescue it with an estrogen implant. So rescue it with an estrogen implant. So rescue it with an estrogen implant. So you can bypass completely the you can bypass completely the you can bypass completely the requirement for testosterone to restore requirement for testosterone to restore requirement for testosterone to restore aggressiveness to the mice and as you aggressiveness to the mice and as you aggressiveness to the mice and as you say it's because many of the effects of say it's because many of the effects of say it's because many of the effects of testosterone although not many of them are mediated although not many of them are mediated although not many of them are mediated by its conversion to estrogen by a by its conversion to estrogen by a by its conversion to estrogen by a process called aromatization. process called aromatization. process called aromatization. It's carried out by an enzyme called It's carried out by an enzyme called It's carried out by an enzyme called aromatase. In fact people may have most aromatase. In fact people may have most aromatase. In fact people may have most of your listeners may have heard of your listeners may have heard of your listeners may have heard of aromatase cuz aromatase inhibitors are aromatase cuz aromatase inhibitors are aromatase cuz aromatase inhibitors are widely used in female humans as adjuvant widely used in female humans as adjuvant widely used in female humans as adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. What's chemotherapy for breast cancer. What's chemotherapy for breast cancer. What's involved in female aggression that's involved in female aggression that's involved in female aggression that's unique from the pathways that generate unique from the pathways that generate unique from the pathways that generate male aggression? So we and other labs male aggression? So we and other labs male aggression? So we and other labs have studied this in both mice and also have studied this in both mice and also have studied this in both mice and also in fruit flies. One thing in mice that in fruit flies. One thing in mice that in fruit flies. One thing in mice that is distinguishes aggression in females is distinguishes aggression in females is distinguishes aggression in females from males is that male mice are pretty from males is that male mice are pretty from males is that male mice are pretty much ready to fight at the drop of a much ready to fight at the drop of a much ready to fight at the drop of a hat. Female mice only fight when they hat. Female mice only fight when they hat. Female mice only fight when they are nurturing and nursing their pups after nurturing and nursing their pups after nurturing and nursing their pups after they've delivered a litter and there is they've delivered a litter and there is they've delivered a litter and there is a window there where they become hyper a window there where they become hyper a window there where they become hyper aggressive. After the pups are weaned aggressive. After the pups are weaned aggressive. After the pups are weaned that aggressiveness goes away. So this that aggressiveness goes away. So this that aggressiveness goes away. So this is pretty remarkable that you take a is pretty remarkable that you take a is pretty remarkable that you take a virgin female mouse and expose it to a virgin female mouse and expose it to a virgin female mouse and expose it to a male and her response is to become male and her response is to become male and her response is to become sexually receptive and to mate with him sexually receptive and to mate with him sexually receptive and to mate with him and now you let her have her pups and now you let her have her pups and now you let her have her pups and you put the same male or another male you put the same male or another male you put the same male or another male mouse in the cage with her and instead mouse in the cage with her and instead mouse in the cage with her and instead of trying to mate with him she attacks of trying to mate with him she attacks of trying to mate with him she attacks him. We recently showed in a paper this him. We recently showed in a paper this him. We recently showed in a paper this is work from one of my students Mong Yu is work from one of my students Mong Yu is work from one of my students Mong Yu Liu that within VMH in females there are Liu that within VMH in females there are Liu that within VMH in females there are two clearly divisible subsets of two clearly divisible subsets of two clearly divisible subsets of estrogen receptor neurons and she showed estrogen receptor neurons and she showed estrogen receptor neurons and she showed that one of those subsets controls that one of those subsets controls that one of those subsets controls fighting and the other one controls fighting and the other one controls fighting and the other one controls mating. This gets into the whole issue mating. This gets into the whole issue mating. This gets into the whole issue of neurons that are present in females of neurons that are present in females of neurons that are present in females but not in males. So this is already but not in males. So this is already but not in males. So this is already showing you some complexity. The male showing you some complexity. The male showing you some complexity. The male mouse VMH has both male specific mouse VMH has both male specific mouse VMH has both male specific aggression neurons and generic aggression neurons and generic aggression neurons and generic aggression neurons and then the female aggression neurons and then the female aggression neurons and then the female VMH the mating cells are only found in VMH the mating cells are only found in VMH the mating cells are only found in females. They are female specific and females. They are female specific and females. They are female specific and not found in the male brain and so we're not found in the male brain and so we're not found in the male brain and so we're trying to find out what these sex trying to find out what these sex trying to find out what these sex specific populations of neurons are specific populations of neurons are specific populations of neurons are doing but that indicates that is doing but that indicates that is doing but that indicates that is some of the mechanism by which different some of the mechanism by which different some of the mechanism by which different sexes show different behaviors. If one sexes show different behaviors. If one sexes show different behaviors. If one observes the mating behaviors of observes the mating behaviors of observes the mating behaviors of different animals we know that there's a different animals we know that there's a different animals we know that there's a tremendous range of mating behaviors in tremendous range of mating behaviors in tremendous range of mating behaviors in humans. There can be no aggressive component There can be no aggressive component There can be no aggressive component there can be aggressive component. there can be aggressive component. there can be aggressive component. Humans have all sorts of kinks and Humans have all sorts of kinks and Humans have all sorts of kinks and fetishes and behaviors and most of which fetishes and behaviors and most of which fetishes and behaviors and most of which probably has never been documented cuz probably has never been documented cuz probably has never been documented cuz most of this happens in private. With most of this happens in private. With most of this happens in private. With that said when you look at mating that said when you look at mating that said when you look at mating behavior of various animals you see an behavior of various animals you see an behavior of various animals you see an aggressive component sometimes but not aggressive component sometimes but not aggressive component sometimes but not always. Is it species specific? Is it always. Is it species specific? Is it always. Is it species specific? Is it context specific? And more generally do context specific? And more generally do context specific? And more generally do you think that there you think that there you think that there is cross talk between these different is cross talk between these different is cross talk between these different neuronal populations and the animal neuronal populations and the animal neuronal populations and the animal itself might be kind of confused about itself might be kind of confused about itself might be kind of confused about what's going on? I can't really speak to what's going on? I can't really speak to what's going on? I can't really speak to the issue of whether this is species the issue of whether this is species the issue of whether this is species specific cuz I'm not a naturalist or a specific cuz I'm not a naturalist or a specific cuz I'm not a naturalist or a zoologist. I've seen like you have in zoologist. I've seen like you have in zoologist. I've seen like you have in the wild for example lions when they the wild for example lions when they the wild for example lions when they mate. I've seen them in Africa there's mate. I've seen them in Africa there's mate. I've seen them in Africa there's often a biting component of that as often a biting component of that as often a biting component of that as well. One of the things that surprised well. One of the things that surprised well. One of the things that surprised us when we identified neurons in VMHVL us when we identified neurons in VMHVL us when we identified neurons in VMHVL that control aggression in males is that control aggression in males is that control aggression in males is that within that population there is a subset within that population there is a subset within that population there is a subset of neurons that is activated by females of neurons that is activated by females of neurons that is activated by females during male female mating encounters. during male female mating encounters. during male female mating encounters. There's some evidence that those female There's some evidence that those female There's some evidence that those female selective neurons in VMH are part of the selective neurons in VMH are part of the selective neurons in VMH are part of the mating behavior. If you shut them down mating behavior. If you shut them down mating behavior. If you shut them down the animals don't mate as effectively as the animals don't mate as effectively as the animals don't mate as effectively as they otherwise would. they otherwise would. they otherwise would. What happens when you stimulate them we What happens when you stimulate them we What happens when you stimulate them we don't yet know because we don't have a don't yet know because we don't have a don't yet know because we don't have a way to specifically do that without way to specifically do that without way to specifically do that without activating the male aggression neurons. activating the male aggression neurons. activating the male aggression neurons. But I think they must be there for a But I think they must be there for a But I think they must be there for a reason because VMH is not traditionally reason because VMH is not traditionally reason because VMH is not traditionally the brain region to which male sexual the brain region to which male sexual the brain region to which male sexual behavior has been assigned. That's behavior has been assigned. That's behavior has been assigned. That's another area called the medial preoptic another area called the medial preoptic another area called the medial preoptic area and there we have shown that there area and there we have shown that there area and there we have shown that there are neurons that definitely stimulate are neurons that definitely stimulate are neurons that definitely stimulate mating behavior. In fact if we activate mating behavior. In fact if we activate mating behavior. In fact if we activate those mating neurons in a male while those mating neurons in a male while those mating neurons in a male while it's in the middle of attacking another it's in the middle of attacking another it's in the middle of attacking another male it will stop fighting start singing male it will stop fighting start singing male it will stop fighting start singing to that male and start to try to mount to that male and start to try to mount to that male and start to try to mount that male until we shut those neurons that male until we shut those neurons that male until we shut those neurons off. So those are the make love not war off. So those are the make love not war off. So those are the make love not war neurons and VMH are the make war not neurons and VMH are the make war not neurons and VMH are the make war not love neurons and there are dense love neurons and there are dense love neurons and there are dense interconnections between these two nuclei which are very between these two nuclei which are very between these two nuclei which are very close to each other into the in the close to each other into the in the close to each other into the in the brain. But it's also possible that there brain. But it's also possible that there brain. But it's also possible that there are some cooperative interactions are some cooperative interactions are some cooperative interactions between those structures as well as between those structures as well as between those structures as well as antagonistic interactions and the antagonistic interactions and the antagonistic interactions and the balance of whether it's the cooperative balance of whether it's the cooperative balance of whether it's the cooperative or antagonistic interactions that are or antagonistic interactions that are or antagonistic interactions that are firing at any given moment in a mating firing at any given moment in a mating firing at any given moment in a mating encounter as you suggest may determine encounter as you suggest may determine encounter as you suggest may determine whether a moment of coital bliss whether a moment of coital bliss whether a moment of coital bliss among two lions may suddenly turn into a among two lions may suddenly turn into a among two lions may suddenly turn into a snap or a growl and a bearing of fangs. snap or a growl and a bearing of fangs. snap or a growl and a bearing of fangs. We don't know that but certainly the We don't know that but certainly the We don't know that but certainly the substrate the wiring is there for that substrate the wiring is there for that substrate the wiring is there for that to happen. When we made that discovery to happen. When we made that discovery to happen. When we made that discovery initially it raised the question in initially it raised the question in initially it raised the question in my mind whether my mind whether my mind whether some people that are serial rapists for some people that are serial rapists for some people that are serial rapists for example and engage in sexual violence example and engage in sexual violence example and engage in sexual violence might in some level have their wires might in some level have their wires might in some level have their wires crossed in some way that these crossed in some way that these crossed in some way that these states that are supposed to be pretty states that are supposed to be pretty states that are supposed to be pretty much separated and mutually antagonistic much separated and mutually antagonistic much separated and mutually antagonistic are not and are actually more rewarding are not and are actually more rewarding are not and are actually more rewarding and reinforcing. and reinforcing. and reinforcing. I'd love to talk about this structure I'd love to talk about this structure I'd love to talk about this structure cuz seems to be involved in everything cuz seems to be involved in everything cuz seems to be involved in everything which is the PAG the periaqueductal which is the PAG the periaqueductal which is the PAG the periaqueductal gray. It's been studied in the context gray. It's been studied in the context gray. It's been studied in the context of pain. It's been studied in the of pain. It's been studied in the of pain. It's been studied in the context of the so called lordosis context of the so called lordosis context of the so called lordosis response the receptivity or arching response the receptivity or arching response the receptivity or arching of the back of the female to receive of the back of the female to receive of the back of the female to receive intromission and mating from the male. intromission and mating from the male. intromission and mating from the male. In particular I want to know is there In particular I want to know is there In particular I want to know is there some mechanism of pain modulation and some mechanism of pain modulation and some mechanism of pain modulation and control during fighting control during fighting control during fighting and or mating. And the reason I ask is and or mating. And the reason I ask is and or mating. And the reason I ask is that while I'm not combat sports person that while I'm not combat sports person that while I'm not combat sports person years ago I did a little bit of years ago I did a little bit of years ago I did a little bit of martial arts and it always was martial arts and it always was martial arts and it always was impressive to me how little it hurt to impressive to me how little it hurt to impressive to me how little it hurt to get punched during a fight and how much get punched during a fight and how much get punched during a fight and how much it hurt afterwards. it hurt afterwards. it hurt afterwards. Right? So there's clearly a some Right? So there's clearly a some Right? So there's clearly a some endogenous pain control endogenous pain control endogenous pain control that then wears off and then you feel that then wears off and then you feel that then wears off and then you feel beat up. Yep. What's PAG doing vis-a-vis beat up. Yep. What's PAG doing vis-a-vis beat up. Yep. What's PAG doing vis-a-vis pain and what's pain doing vis-a-vis pain and what's pain doing vis-a-vis pain and what's pain doing vis-a-vis these other behaviors? So I think of PAG these other behaviors? So I think of PAG these other behaviors? So I think of PAG like a old-fashioned telephone like a old-fashioned telephone like a old-fashioned telephone switchboard. There are calls coming in switchboard. There are calls coming in switchboard. There are calls coming in and then the cables have to be punched and then the cables have to be punched and then the cables have to be punched into the right hole to get the into the right hole to get the into the right hole to get the information to be routed to the right information to be routed to the right information to be routed to the right recipient on the other end of it because recipient on the other end of it because recipient on the other end of it because pretty much every type of innate pretty much every type of innate pretty much every type of innate behavior you can think of has had the behavior you can think of has had the behavior you can think of has had the PAG implicated. In cross-section the PAG implicated. In cross-section the PAG implicated. In cross-section the PAG kind of looks like the water in a toilet kind of looks like the water in a toilet kind of looks like the water in a toilet when you're standing over an open toilet when you're standing over an open toilet when you're standing over an open toilet bowl. And if you imagine a clock face bowl. And if you imagine a clock face bowl. And if you imagine a clock face projected on to that, it's like the PAG projected on to that, it's like the PAG projected on to that, it's like the PAG has sectors from 1 to 12 maybe even more has sectors from 1 to 12 maybe even more has sectors from 1 to 12 maybe even more of them and in each of those sectors you of them and in each of those sectors you of them and in each of those sectors you find different neurons from the find different neurons from the find different neurons from the hypothalamus are projecting. So could hypothalamus are projecting. So could hypothalamus are projecting. So could turn out that there is a topographic turn out that there is a topographic turn out that there is a topographic arrangement along the dorsal ventral arrangement along the dorsal ventral arrangement along the dorsal ventral axis of the PAG and the medial lateral axis of the PAG and the medial lateral axis of the PAG and the medial lateral axis of the PAG that determines the type axis of the PAG that determines the type axis of the PAG that determines the type of behavior that will be emitted when of behavior that will be emitted when of behavior that will be emitted when neurons in that region are stimulated. neurons in that region are stimulated. neurons in that region are stimulated. And I think sort of all of the evidence And I think sort of all of the evidence And I think sort of all of the evidence is pointing in that direction but by no is pointing in that direction but by no is pointing in that direction but by no means has it been mapped out. Now the means has it been mapped out. Now the means has it been mapped out. Now the thing that you mentioned about it not thing that you mentioned about it not thing that you mentioned about it not hurting when you got beat up during hurting when you got beat up during hurting when you got beat up during martial arts, there is a well-known martial arts, there is a well-known martial arts, there is a well-known phenomenon called fear-induced phenomenon called fear-induced phenomenon called fear-induced analgesia where when an animal is in a high state where when an animal is in a high state where when an animal is in a high state of fear like if it's trying to defend of fear like if it's trying to defend of fear like if it's trying to defend itself there is a suppression of pain itself there is a suppression of pain itself there is a suppression of pain responses. And I'm not sure completely about the And I'm not sure completely about the And I'm not sure completely about the mechanisms and how well that's mechanisms and how well that's mechanisms and how well that's understood but for example the adrenal understood but for example the adrenal understood but for example the adrenal gland has a peptide in it that is gland has a peptide in it that is gland has a peptide in it that is released from the adrenal medulla which released from the adrenal medulla which released from the adrenal medulla which controls the fight or flight responses controls the fight or flight responses controls the fight or flight responses and that peptide has analgesic and that peptide has analgesic and that peptide has analgesic activities. Now whether activities. Now whether activities. Now whether &gt;&gt; peptide is? &gt;&gt; peptide is? &gt;&gt; peptide is? &gt;&gt; bovine adrenal medullary peptide of 22 &gt;&gt; bovine adrenal medullary peptide of 22 &gt;&gt; bovine adrenal medullary peptide of 22 amino acid residues and I only know amino acid residues and I only know amino acid residues and I only know about it because it activates a receptor about it because it activates a receptor about it because it activates a receptor that we discovered many years ago that's that we discovered many years ago that's that we discovered many years ago that's involved in pain and we thought it involved in pain and we thought it involved in pain and we thought it promoted pain but it turns out that it promoted pain but it turns out that it promoted pain but it turns out that it this actually inhibits pain. It's like this actually inhibits pain. It's like this actually inhibits pain. It's like an endogenous analgesic. Whether this is an endogenous analgesic. Whether this is an endogenous analgesic. Whether this is happening this type of analgesia is happening this type of analgesia is happening this type of analgesia is happening when an animal is engaged in happening when an animal is engaged in happening when an animal is engaged in offensive aggression offensive aggression offensive aggression or in mating behavior, I don't know but or in mating behavior, I don't know but or in mating behavior, I don't know but it certainly is possible and I don't it certainly is possible and I don't it certainly is possible and I don't know whether these analgesic mechanisms know whether these analgesic mechanisms know whether these analgesic mechanisms are happening in the PAG. They could are happening in the PAG. They could are happening in the PAG. They could also be happening a little further down also be happening a little further down also be happening a little further down in the spinal cord. The PAG is really in the spinal cord. The PAG is really in the spinal cord. The PAG is really continuous with the spinal cord. If you continuous with the spinal cord. If you continuous with the spinal cord. If you just follow it down towards the tail of just follow it down towards the tail of just follow it down towards the tail of an animal, you will wind up in the an animal, you will wind up in the an animal, you will wind up in the spinal cord and so it could be that spinal cord and so it could be that spinal cord and so it could be that there are influences acting at many there are influences acting at many there are influences acting at many levels on pain in the PAG and in the levels on pain in the PAG and in the levels on pain in the PAG and in the spinal cord as well. spinal cord as well. spinal cord as well. And it may well be known. I just don't And it may well be known. I just don't And it may well be known. I just don't know it. I want to distinguish clearly know it. I want to distinguish clearly know it. I want to distinguish clearly between things that are not known that I between things that are not known that I between things that are not known that I know are unknown which is in a fairly know are unknown which is in a fairly know are unknown which is in a fairly small area where I have expertise from small area where I have expertise from small area where I have expertise from things that may be known but I'm things that may be known but I'm things that may be known but I'm ignorant of them because I just don't ignorant of them because I just don't ignorant of them because I just don't have a broad enough knowledge base to have a broad enough knowledge base to have a broad enough knowledge base to know that. Tell us about tachykinin. know that. Tell us about tachykinin. know that. Tell us about tachykinin. I've talked about this a couple times on I've talked about this a couple times on I've talked about this a couple times on different podcast episodes because of different podcast episodes because of different podcast episodes because of its relationship to social isolation. My its relationship to social isolation. My its relationship to social isolation. My understanding is that tachykinin is understanding is that tachykinin is understanding is that tachykinin is present in flies and mice and in humans present in flies and mice and in humans present in flies and mice and in humans and may do similar things in those and may do similar things in those and may do similar things in those species. So tachykinin is refers to a species. So tachykinin is refers to a species. So tachykinin is refers to a family of related neuropeptides. So family of related neuropeptides. So family of related neuropeptides. So these are brain chemicals. They're these are brain chemicals. They're these are brain chemicals. They're different from dopamine and serotonin in different from dopamine and serotonin in different from dopamine and serotonin in that they're not small organic that they're not small organic that they're not small organic molecules. They're actually short pieces molecules. They're actually short pieces molecules. They're actually short pieces of protein that are directly encoded by of protein that are directly encoded by of protein that are directly encoded by genes that are active in specific genes that are active in specific genes that are active in specific neurons and not in others and when those neurons and not in others and when those neurons and not in others and when those neurons are active those neuropeptides neurons are active those neuropeptides neurons are active those neuropeptides are released together with classical are released together with classical are released together with classical transmitters like glutamate, whatever. transmitters like glutamate, whatever. transmitters like glutamate, whatever. Tachykinins have been famously Tachykinins have been famously Tachykinins have been famously implicated in pain, particularly implicated in pain, particularly implicated in pain, particularly tachykinin 1 which is called substance tachykinin 1 which is called substance tachykinin 1 which is called substance P, one of the original pain modulating. P, one of the original pain modulating. P, one of the original pain modulating. This is something that promotes This is something that promotes This is something that promotes inflammatory pain. And so we did a inflammatory pain. And so we did a inflammatory pain. And so we did a screen, unbiased screen of peptides and screen, unbiased screen of peptides and screen, unbiased screen of peptides and found indeed that one of the found indeed that one of the found indeed that one of the tachykinins, Drosophila tachykinin, tachykinins, Drosophila tachykinin, tachykinins, Drosophila tachykinin, those neurons when you activate them those neurons when you activate them those neurons when you activate them strongly promote aggression and it strongly promote aggression and it strongly promote aggression and it depends on the release of tachykinin. depends on the release of tachykinin. depends on the release of tachykinin. Now the interesting thing is that in Now the interesting thing is that in Now the interesting thing is that in flies just like in people and flies just like in people and flies just like in people and practically any other social animal that practically any other social animal that practically any other social animal that shows aggression social isolation shows aggression social isolation shows aggression social isolation increases aggressiveness. So putting a increases aggressiveness. So putting a increases aggressiveness. So putting a violent prisoner in solitary confinement violent prisoner in solitary confinement violent prisoner in solitary confinement is absolutely the worst most is absolutely the worst most is absolutely the worst most counterproductive thing you could do to counterproductive thing you could do to counterproductive thing you could do to them. And indeed we found in flies that them. And indeed we found in flies that them. And indeed we found in flies that social isolation increases the level of social isolation increases the level of social isolation increases the level of tachykinin in the brain and if we shut tachykinin in the brain and if we shut tachykinin in the brain and if we shut that gene down it prevents the isolation that gene down it prevents the isolation that gene down it prevents the isolation from increasing aggression. So since my from increasing aggression. So since my from increasing aggression. So since my lab also works on mice, it was natural lab also works on mice, it was natural lab also works on mice, it was natural to see whether tachykinins might be to see whether tachykinins might be to see whether tachykinins might be upregulated in social isolation and upregulated in social isolation and upregulated in social isolation and whether they play a role in aggression. whether they play a role in aggression. whether they play a role in aggression. And this is work done by a former And this is work done by a former And this is work done by a former post-doc Muriel Zelakowski now at post-doc Muriel Zelakowski now at post-doc Muriel Zelakowski now at University of Salt Lake City in Utah and University of Salt Lake City in Utah and University of Salt Lake City in Utah and she found remarkably that when mice are she found remarkably that when mice are she found remarkably that when mice are socially isolated for 2 weeks there is socially isolated for 2 weeks there is socially isolated for 2 weeks there is this massive upregulation of tachykinin this massive upregulation of tachykinin this massive upregulation of tachykinin 2 in their brain. In fact, if you tag 2 in their brain. In fact, if you tag 2 in their brain. In fact, if you tag the peptide with a green fluorescent the peptide with a green fluorescent the peptide with a green fluorescent protein from a jellyfish genetically, protein from a jellyfish genetically, protein from a jellyfish genetically, the brain looks green when the mice are the brain looks green when the mice are the brain looks green when the mice are socially isolated cuz there's so much of socially isolated cuz there's so much of socially isolated cuz there's so much of this stuff released. And she went on to this stuff released. And she went on to this stuff released. And she went on to show that increase in tachykinin is show that increase in tachykinin is show that increase in tachykinin is responsible for the effect of social responsible for the effect of social responsible for the effect of social isolation to increase aggressiveness and isolation to increase aggressiveness and isolation to increase aggressiveness and to increase fear and to increase to increase fear and to increase to increase fear and to increase anxiety. And in fact there are drugs anxiety. And in fact there are drugs anxiety. And in fact there are drugs that block the receptor for tachykinin that block the receptor for tachykinin that block the receptor for tachykinin which were tested in humans and which were tested in humans and which were tested in humans and abandoned because they had no efficacy abandoned because they had no efficacy abandoned because they had no efficacy in the test that they were analyzed for. in the test that they were analyzed for. in the test that they were analyzed for. If you give those drugs to a socially If you give those drugs to a socially If you give those drugs to a socially isolated mouse, it blocks all of the isolated mouse, it blocks all of the isolated mouse, it blocks all of the effects of social isolation. It blocks effects of social isolation. It blocks effects of social isolation. It blocks the aggression, it blocks the increased the aggression, it blocks the increased the aggression, it blocks the increased fear and the increased anxiety. And that fear and the increased anxiety. And that fear and the increased anxiety. And that Muriel described it, the mice just Muriel described it, the mice just Muriel described it, the mice just looked chill. It's not a sedative which looked chill. It's not a sedative which looked chill. It's not a sedative which is really important. It's not that the is really important. It's not that the is really important. It's not that the mice are going to sleep. Most remarkably mice are going to sleep. Most remarkably mice are going to sleep. Most remarkably is once you socially isolate a mouse and is once you socially isolate a mouse and is once you socially isolate a mouse and it becomes aggressive you can never put it becomes aggressive you can never put it becomes aggressive you can never put it back in its cage with its brothers it back in its cage with its brothers it back in its cage with its brothers from its litter because it will kill from its litter because it will kill from its litter because it will kill them all overnight. But if you give it them all overnight. But if you give it them all overnight. But if you give it this drug which is called osanetant that this drug which is called osanetant that this drug which is called osanetant that black blocks tachykinin 2 black blocks tachykinin 2 black blocks tachykinin 2 that mouse can be returned to the cage that mouse can be returned to the cage that mouse can be returned to the cage with its brothers and will not attack with its brothers and will not attack with its brothers and will not attack them and seems to be happy about that them and seems to be happy about that them and seems to be happy about that for the rest of the time. So this is an for the rest of the time. So this is an for the rest of the time. So this is an incredibly powerful effect of this drug incredibly powerful effect of this drug incredibly powerful effect of this drug and I've been really interested in and I've been really interested in and I've been really interested in trying to get pharmaceutical companies trying to get pharmaceutical companies trying to get pharmaceutical companies to test this drug which has a really to test this drug which has a really to test this drug which has a really good safety profile in humans in testing good safety profile in humans in testing good safety profile in humans in testing it in people who are subjected to social it in people who are subjected to social it in people who are subjected to social isolation stress or bereavement stress isolation stress or bereavement stress isolation stress or bereavement stress but it's just very difficult for but it's just very difficult for but it's just very difficult for economic reasons to find a way to get economic reasons to find a way to get economic reasons to find a way to get somebody to test that. As long as we're somebody to test that. As long as we're somebody to test that. As long as we're talking about humans I'd love to get talking about humans I'd love to get talking about humans I'd love to get your thoughts about human studies of your thoughts about human studies of your thoughts about human studies of emotion. I know you wrote this book with emotion. I know you wrote this book with emotion. I know you wrote this book with Ralph Adolph so you have this new book. Ralph Adolph so you have this new book. Ralph Adolph so you have this new book. There are books that are worth reading There are books that are worth reading There are books that are worth reading and then there are books that are and then there are books that are and then there are books that are important and I think this book is truly important and I think this book is truly important and I think this book is truly important for the general population to important for the general population to important for the general population to read and understand. There's a heat map read and understand. There's a heat map read and understand. There's a heat map diagram in that book of subjective diagram in that book of subjective diagram in that book of subjective reports that people gave of where they reports that people gave of where they reports that people gave of where they experience an emotion or a feeling, experience an emotion or a feeling, experience an emotion or a feeling, somatic feeling, in their body or in somatic feeling, in their body or in somatic feeling, in their body or in their head or both when they are angry, their head or both when they are angry, their head or both when they are angry, sad, calm, lonely sad, calm, lonely sad, calm, lonely etc. And I wouldn't want people to etc. And I wouldn't want people to etc. And I wouldn't want people to think that those heat maps were think that those heat maps were think that those heat maps were generated by any physiological generated by any physiological generated by any physiological measurement because they were not. How measurement because they were not. How measurement because they were not. How should we think about the body in terms should we think about the body in terms should we think about the body in terms of states? And of states? And of states? And at some point I'd love for you to at some point I'd love for you to at some point I'd love for you to comment on that heat map experiment. comment on that heat map experiment. comment on that heat map experiment. This goes back to something called the This goes back to something called the This goes back to something called the somatic marker hypothesis that was somatic marker hypothesis that was somatic marker hypothesis that was proposed by Antonio Damasio who was a proposed by Antonio Damasio who was a proposed by Antonio Damasio who was a neurologist at USC. The idea that our neurologist at USC. The idea that our neurologist at USC. The idea that our subjective feeling of a particular subjective feeling of a particular subjective feeling of a particular emotion is in part associated with a emotion is in part associated with a emotion is in part associated with a sensation of something happening in a sensation of something happening in a sensation of something happening in a particular part of our body, the gut, particular part of our body, the gut, particular part of our body, the gut, the heart. If there is a physiology the heart. If there is a physiology the heart. If there is a physiology underlying these heat maps it could underlying these heat maps it could underlying these heat maps it could reflect increased blood flow to these reflect increased blood flow to these reflect increased blood flow to these different structures and that in turn different structures and that in turn different structures and that in turn reflects communication between the brain reflects communication between the brain reflects communication between the brain and the body and it's bidirectional and the body and it's bidirectional and the body and it's bidirectional communication. And it's mediated by the communication. And it's mediated by the communication. And it's mediated by the peripheral nervous system, the peripheral nervous system, the peripheral nervous system, the sympathetic and the parasympathetic sympathetic and the parasympathetic sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system which control heart rate, nervous system which control heart rate, nervous system which control heart rate, for example, blood vessel, blood for example, blood vessel, blood for example, blood vessel, blood pressure. And those neurons receive pressure. And those neurons receive pressure. And those neurons receive input from the hypothalamus and other input from the hypothalamus and other input from the hypothalamus and other blood brain region, central brain blood brain region, central brain blood brain region, central brain regions that control their activity. And regions that control their activity. And regions that control their activity. And when the brain is put in a particular when the brain is put in a particular when the brain is put in a particular state, it activates sympathetic and state, it activates sympathetic and state, it activates sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons, which have parasympathetic neurons, which have parasympathetic neurons, which have effects on the heart and on blood effects on the heart and on blood effects on the heart and on blood pressure. These in turn feed back onto pressure. These in turn feed back onto pressure. These in turn feed back onto the brain through the sensory system. the brain through the sensory system. the brain through the sensory system. And a large part of this bidirectional And a large part of this bidirectional And a large part of this bidirectional communication is also mediated through communication is also mediated through communication is also mediated through the vagus nerve, which many of your the vagus nerve, which many of your the vagus nerve, which many of your listeners and viewers may have heard listeners and viewers may have heard listeners and viewers may have heard about because it's become a topic of about because it's become a topic of about because it's become a topic of intense activity now. The vagus nerve is intense activity now. The vagus nerve is intense activity now. The vagus nerve is a bundle of nerve fibers that comes out a bundle of nerve fibers that comes out a bundle of nerve fibers that comes out basically of your skull, out of the basically of your skull, out of the basically of your skull, out of the central nervous system, and then sends central nervous system, and then sends central nervous system, and then sends fibers in to your heart, your gut, all fibers in to your heart, your gut, all fibers in to your heart, your gut, all sorts of visceral organs. That sorts of visceral organs. That sorts of visceral organs. That information is both afferent and information is both afferent and information is both afferent and efferent. The vagal fibers sense things efferent. The vagal fibers sense things efferent. The vagal fibers sense things that are happening in the body. So, when that are happening in the body. So, when that are happening in the body. So, when you're The reason you feel your stomach you're The reason you feel your stomach you're The reason you feel your stomach tied up in knots if you're tense is that tied up in knots if you're tense is that tied up in knots if you're tense is that those vagal fibers are sensing the those vagal fibers are sensing the those vagal fibers are sensing the contraction of the gut muscles. They're contraction of the gut muscles. They're contraction of the gut muscles. They're also afferents, which means that also afferents, which means that also afferents, which means that information coming out of the brain can information coming out of the brain can information coming out of the brain can influence those peripheral organs as influence those peripheral organs as influence those peripheral organs as well. And there's work from a number of well. And there's work from a number of well. And there's work from a number of labs just in the last labs just in the last labs just in the last 6 months or so, where people are 6 months or so, where people are 6 months or so, where people are starting to decode starting to decode starting to decode the components of the different fibers the components of the different fibers the components of the different fibers in the vagus nerve. And it's amazing how in the vagus nerve. And it's amazing how in the vagus nerve. And it's amazing how much specificity is. There are specific much specificity is. There are specific much specificity is. There are specific vagal nerves that go to the lung, that vagal nerves that go to the lung, that vagal nerves that go to the lung, that control breathing responses, that go to control breathing responses, that go to control breathing responses, that go to the gut, that go to other organs. It's the gut, that go to other organs. It's the gut, that go to other organs. It's almost like a set of color-coded lines, almost like a set of color-coded lines, almost like a set of color-coded lines, labeled lines for those things. And now labeled lines for those things. And now labeled lines for those things. And now how those vagal afferents play a role in how those vagal afferents play a role in how those vagal afferents play a role in the playing out of emotion states is a the playing out of emotion states is a the playing out of emotion states is a fascinating question that people are fascinating question that people are fascinating question that people are just beginning to scrape the surface of. just beginning to scrape the surface of. just beginning to scrape the surface of. But I think what's exciting now is that But I think what's exciting now is that But I think what's exciting now is that people are going to be developing tools people are going to be developing tools people are going to be developing tools that will allow us to turn on or turn that will allow us to turn on or turn that will allow us to turn on or turn off specific subsets of fibers within off specific subsets of fibers within off specific subsets of fibers within the vagus nerve and ask how that affects the vagus nerve and ask how that affects the vagus nerve and ask how that affects particular emotional behaviors. So, particular emotional behaviors. So, particular emotional behaviors. So, you're absolutely right. This brain-body you're absolutely right. This brain-body you're absolutely right. This brain-body connection is critical, not just for the connection is critical, not just for the connection is critical, not just for the gut, but for the heart, for the lungs, gut, but for the heart, for the lungs, gut, but for the heart, for the lungs, for all kinds of other parts of your for all kinds of other parts of your for all kinds of other parts of your body. And Darwin recognized that as body. And Darwin recognized that as body. And Darwin recognized that as well. And I think it's well. And I think it's well. And I think it's a central feature of emotion state. it's a central feature of emotion state. it's a central feature of emotion state. And I think what underlies our And I think what underlies our And I think what underlies our subjective feelings of an emotion. subjective feelings of an emotion. subjective feelings of an emotion. David, I have to say as a true fan of David, I have to say as a true fan of David, I have to say as a true fan of the work that your lab has been doing the work that your lab has been doing the work that your lab has been doing over so many decades, I know I speak on over so many decades, I know I speak on over so many decades, I know I speak on behalf of a tremendous number of people behalf of a tremendous number of people behalf of a tremendous number of people when I say thank you for taking time out when I say thank you for taking time out when I say thank you for taking time out of your important schedule to share with of your important schedule to share with of your important schedule to share with us what you've learned. I really have us what you've learned. I really have us what you've learned. I really have appreciated your questions. They're all appreciated your questions. They're all appreciated your questions. They're all They've all been right on the money. They've all been right on the money. They've all been right on the money. You've hit all of the critical important You've hit all of the critical important You've hit all of the critical important issues in this field, and you've issues in this field, and you've issues in this field, and you've uncovered what is known, the little bit uncovered what is known, the little bit uncovered what is known, the little bit is known, and how much is not known. And is known, and how much is not known. And is known, and how much is not known. And I think it's important to emphasize the I think it's important to emphasize the I think it's important to emphasize the unknown things because that's what the unknown things because that's what the unknown things because that's what the next generation of neuroscientists has next generation of neuroscientists has next generation of neuroscientists has to solve. And so, I hope this will help to solve. And so, I hope this will help to solve. And so, I hope this will help to attract young people into this field to attract young people into this field to attract young people into this field because it's so important, particularly because it's so important, particularly because it's so important, particularly for our understanding of mental illness for our understanding of mental illness for our understanding of mental illness and mental health and mental health and mental health and psychiatry. We've got to figure out and psychiatry. We've got to figure out and psychiatry. We've got to figure out how emotion systems are controlled in a how emotion systems are controlled in a how emotion systems are controlled in a causal way if we ever want to improve on causal way if we ever want to improve on causal way if we ever want to improve on the psychiatric treatments that we have the psychiatric treatments that we have the psychiatric treatments that we have now. And that's going to require the now. And that's going to require the now. And that's going to require the next generation of people coming into next generation of people coming into next generation of people coming into the field. Absolutely. I second that. the field. Absolutely. I second that. the field. Absolutely. I second that. Well, thank you. It's been a delight. Well, thank you. It's been a delight. Well, thank you. It's been a delight. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; Great. Really appreciate it. &gt;&gt; [music]