For the first time we could take an old For the first time we could take an old For the first time we could take an old brain, and we could give factors from a brain, and we could give factors from a brain, and we could give factors from a young organism and ask, is that going to young organism and ask, is that going to young organism and ask, is that going to change the age of the brain? And that's change the age of the brain? And that's change the age of the brain? And that's indeed what it did. So, we saw that uh indeed what it did. So, we saw that uh indeed what it did. So, we saw that uh there are stem cells in the brain of there are stem cells in the brain of there are stem cells in the brain of these mice that they got reactivated. these mice that they got reactivated. these mice that they got reactivated. There was less inflammation, more There was less inflammation, more There was less inflammation, more activity um that we can measure in the activity um that we can measure in the activity um that we can measure in the brain. And then most importantly, we brain. And then most importantly, we brain. And then most importantly, we actually saw that their memory function actually saw that their memory function actually saw that their memory function improved. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss the science where we discuss the science where we discuss the science &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; and science-based tools for everyday &gt;&gt; and science-based tools for everyday &gt;&gt; and science-based tools for everyday life. &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray. Dr. Tony today is Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray. Dr. Tony today is Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray. Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray is a professor of neurology Wyss-Coray is a professor of neurology Wyss-Coray is a professor of neurology at Stanford School of Medicine, and an at Stanford School of Medicine, and an at Stanford School of Medicine, and an expert in identifying factors that can expert in identifying factors that can expert in identifying factors that can help prevent and reverse organ help prevent and reverse organ help prevent and reverse organ degeneration and aging. Today, we degeneration and aging. Today, we degeneration and aging. Today, we discuss the factors that are present in discuss the factors that are present in discuss the factors that are present in young blood. Yes, you heard that right. young blood. Yes, you heard that right. young blood. Yes, you heard that right. And the factors that are present in And the factors that are present in And the factors that are present in blood after exercise that have been blood after exercise that have been blood after exercise that have been shown to rejuvenate the brain and other shown to rejuvenate the brain and other shown to rejuvenate the brain and other tissues in older individuals. Dr. Tony tissues in older individuals. Dr. Tony tissues in older individuals. Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray's lab has discovered several Wyss-Coray's lab has discovered several Wyss-Coray's lab has discovered several proteins that are present in high proteins that are present in high proteins that are present in high amounts when we are young and that amounts when we are young and that amounts when we are young and that circulate in the blood and that diminish circulate in the blood and that diminish circulate in the blood and that diminish with age. And if these are supplied to with age. And if these are supplied to with age. And if these are supplied to the aged body and brain, can reverse key the aged body and brain, can reverse key the aged body and brain, can reverse key features of aging, including improved features of aging, including improved features of aging, including improved cognition, tissue recovery from stress, cognition, tissue recovery from stress, cognition, tissue recovery from stress, damage, and more. We also discuss how damage, and more. We also discuss how damage, and more. We also discuss how aging is non-linear. It does not aging is non-linear. It does not aging is non-linear. It does not progress uniformly across the lifespan. progress uniformly across the lifespan. progress uniformly across the lifespan. And we discuss the fact that there are And we discuss the fact that there are And we discuss the fact that there are certain phases, such as puberty, your certain phases, such as puberty, your certain phases, such as puberty, your early 40s, and your early 60s, when early 40s, and your early 60s, when early 40s, and your early 60s, when aging is accelerated and then slows aging is accelerated and then slows aging is accelerated and then slows again. We also discuss how different again. We also discuss how different again. We also discuss how different organs in your body age at different organs in your body age at different organs in your body age at different rates and how you can measure that. rates and how you can measure that. rates and how you can measure that. Today's discussion is a very important Today's discussion is a very important Today's discussion is a very important one because so often these days we hear one because so often these days we hear one because so often these days we hear about anti-aging and longevity, but about anti-aging and longevity, but about anti-aging and longevity, but today you're going to hear about the today you're going to hear about the today you're going to hear about the real science of organ rejuvenation. We real science of organ rejuvenation. We real science of organ rejuvenation. We also are going to talk about the role of also are going to talk about the role of also are going to talk about the role of sunlight, fasting, hormones, and the use sunlight, fasting, hormones, and the use sunlight, fasting, hormones, and the use of specific molecular approaches to of specific molecular approaches to of specific molecular approaches to improve your vitality and health. We improve your vitality and health. We improve your vitality and health. We also, of course, discuss exercise and also, of course, discuss exercise and also, of course, discuss exercise and social interactions, but in the context social interactions, but in the context social interactions, but in the context of the specific molecules they release of the specific molecules they release of the specific molecules they release into your blood to promote and enhance into your blood to promote and enhance into your blood to promote and enhance health and how you can leverage that health and how you can leverage that health and how you can leverage that information. Tony Wyss-Coray is a celebrated pioneer Tony Wyss-Coray is a celebrated pioneer Tony Wyss-Coray is a celebrated pioneer in the science of these topics because in the science of these topics because in the science of these topics because of the rigor he applies to the work. of the rigor he applies to the work. of the rigor he applies to the work. He's not just talking about some He's not just talking about some He's not just talking about some molecule that someday they'll be a drug molecule that someday they'll be a drug molecule that someday they'll be a drug or some activity that we already know or some activity that we already know or some activity that we already know promotes health. He's an avid tool promotes health. He's an avid tool promotes health. He's an avid tool developer for measuring and reversing developer for measuring and reversing developer for measuring and reversing aging. So, today we discuss all of that aging. So, today we discuss all of that aging. So, today we discuss all of that and you're sure to come away from the and you're sure to come away from the and you're sure to come away from the discussion with both tools to improve discussion with both tools to improve discussion with both tools to improve your immediate and long-term health, as your immediate and long-term health, as your immediate and long-term health, as well as a deeper understanding of the well as a deeper understanding of the well as a deeper understanding of the biology. Before we begin, I'd like to biology. Before we begin, I'd like to biology. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Tony And now for my discussion with Dr. Tony And now for my discussion with Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray. Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray, Wyss-Coray. Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray, Wyss-Coray. Dr. Tony Wyss-Coray, welcome. Thank you. welcome. Thank you. welcome. Thank you. Great to see you, another Stanford Great to see you, another Stanford Great to see you, another Stanford colleague here. colleague here. colleague here. You're a true pioneer. Your work is the You're a true pioneer. Your work is the You're a true pioneer. Your work is the first work that I heard of where first work that I heard of where first work that I heard of where somebody did a serious experiment taking somebody did a serious experiment taking somebody did a serious experiment taking blood from a younger organism, putting blood from a younger organism, putting blood from a younger organism, putting it into an older organism, and observing it into an older organism, and observing it into an older organism, and observing very interesting things. very interesting things. very interesting things. If you would, could you tell us about If you would, could you tell us about If you would, could you tell us about that experiment and what, if anything, that experiment and what, if anything, that experiment and what, if anything, has been done in humans to examine has been done in humans to examine has been done in humans to examine whether young blood, such a loaded term, whether young blood, such a loaded term, whether young blood, such a loaded term, but young blood can be a rejuvenation but young blood can be a rejuvenation but young blood can be a rejuvenation factor for the more mature body or brain. for the more mature body or brain. for the more mature body or brain. Yeah, so we were actually not the first Yeah, so we were actually not the first Yeah, so we were actually not the first ones. Um ones. Um ones. Um but we collaborated with um but we collaborated with um but we collaborated with um the person who in sort of in more modern the person who in sort of in more modern the person who in sort of in more modern times uh used this model again. It's times uh used this model again. It's times uh used this model again. It's called parabiosis, where um you have a called parabiosis, where um you have a called parabiosis, where um you have a surgical model where an old and a young surgical model where an old and a young surgical model where an old and a young mouse are paired, and their circulation mouse are paired, and their circulation mouse are paired, and their circulation allows for exchange of blood from the allows for exchange of blood from the allows for exchange of blood from the young to the old animal. young to the old animal. young to the old animal. And my colleague who uh recruited me And my colleague who uh recruited me And my colleague who uh recruited me actually to Stanford, Tom Rando, used actually to Stanford, Tom Rando, used actually to Stanford, Tom Rando, used this model to study aging of stem cells this model to study aging of stem cells this model to study aging of stem cells in the muscle. So, he discovered that in the muscle. So, he discovered that in the muscle. So, he discovered that with old age, the muscle sort of with old age, the muscle sort of with old age, the muscle sort of deteriorates and doesn't regenerate. deteriorates and doesn't regenerate. deteriorates and doesn't regenerate. And when he used a mouse, an old mouse, And when he used a mouse, an old mouse, And when he used a mouse, an old mouse, and paired it with a young mouse, and paired it with a young mouse, and paired it with a young mouse, and that now this young circulation that now this young circulation that now this young circulation um infusing, if you will, the old um infusing, if you will, the old um infusing, if you will, the old muscle, he regenerated that muscle, and muscle, he regenerated that muscle, and muscle, he regenerated that muscle, and uh it looked almost like a young muscle. uh it looked almost like a young muscle. uh it looked almost like a young muscle. Uh and at the same time, he also Uh and at the same time, he also Uh and at the same time, he also observed effects in other tissues, observed effects in other tissues, observed effects in other tissues, including in the brain. including in the brain. including in the brain. And that's when we started to And that's when we started to And that's when we started to collaborate, um and explored uh what could the um and explored uh what could the um and explored uh what could the effects of the brain uh of young effects of the brain uh of young effects of the brain uh of young factors on the brain uh be. And in part, factors on the brain uh be. And in part, factors on the brain uh be. And in part, we were also intrigued by that because we were also intrigued by that because we were also intrigued by that because we had separate studies in humans where we had separate studies in humans where we had separate studies in humans where we tried to find blood signatures of we tried to find blood signatures of we tried to find blood signatures of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease. And what we noticed is that we could see And what we noticed is that we could see And what we noticed is that we could see proteins that were correlated or even proteins that were correlated or even proteins that were correlated or even predictive of Alzheimer's disease, predictive of Alzheimer's disease, predictive of Alzheimer's disease, but the most striking difference was but the most striking difference was but the most striking difference was between younger and older people. So, we between younger and older people. So, we between younger and older people. So, we saw that the concentration of their saw that the concentration of their saw that the concentration of their proteins was very different in young proteins was very different in young proteins was very different in young people and old people. people and old people. people and old people. And when you see something like that in And when you see something like that in And when you see something like that in biology, always ask, is this cause or biology, always ask, is this cause or biology, always ask, is this cause or effect? So, effect? So, effect? So, do the proteins in our body change do the proteins in our body change do the proteins in our body change because they respond to the aging of the because they respond to the aging of the because they respond to the aging of the brain, for example, or do they actually brain, for example, or do they actually brain, for example, or do they actually drive the aging of the brain? drive the aging of the brain? drive the aging of the brain? And here, Tom had this model that And here, Tom had this model that And here, Tom had this model that allowed him to ask that question, or allowed him to ask that question, or allowed him to ask that question, or that allowed us to gather to ask that allowed us to gather to ask that allowed us to gather to ask that question because for the first time we question because for the first time we question because for the first time we could take an old brain and we could take an old brain and we could take an old brain and we could give factors from a young organism and give factors from a young organism and give factors from a young organism and ask is that going to change the age of ask is that going to change the age of ask is that going to change the age of the brain and that's indeed what it did. the brain and that's indeed what it did. the brain and that's indeed what it did. So we saw that there's stem cells in the So we saw that there's stem cells in the So we saw that there's stem cells in the brain of these mice that they got brain of these mice that they got brain of these mice that they got reactivated. There was less inflammation, more There was less inflammation, more There was less inflammation, more activity that we can measure in the activity that we can measure in the activity that we can measure in the brain with brain with brain with electrical activity of neurons. electrical activity of neurons. electrical activity of neurons. And then most importantly we actually And then most importantly we actually And then most importantly we actually saw that their memory function improved. saw that their memory function improved. saw that their memory function improved. And so to your question is that relevant And so to your question is that relevant And so to your question is that relevant for humans? We actually tried to for humans? We actually tried to for humans? We actually tried to translate that we can talk more about translate that we can talk more about translate that we can talk more about this where that the stage of that field this where that the stage of that field this where that the stage of that field is right now to see whether it can be is right now to see whether it can be is right now to see whether it can be translated. Yeah, I would love to hear translated. Yeah, I would love to hear translated. Yeah, I would love to hear more about that. I more about that. I more about that. I realize in your description that most of realize in your description that most of realize in your description that most of us think about blood of course us think about blood of course us think about blood of course delivering oxygen and red blood cells delivering oxygen and red blood cells delivering oxygen and red blood cells etc. But of blood that's drawn as a etc. But of blood that's drawn as a etc. But of blood that's drawn as a good not the only but a good window into the not the only but a good window into the not the only but a good window into the health status, the age status of a of an health status, the age status of a of an health status, the age status of a of an organism including us. But what I'm organism including us. But what I'm organism including us. But what I'm hearing is that it's also hearing is that it's also hearing is that it's also delivering nutrients or proteins of some kind that nutrients or proteins of some kind that nutrients or proteins of some kind that can reverse some sort of clock and we'll get reverse some sort of clock and we'll get reverse some sort of clock and we'll get into later whether or not it's an organ into later whether or not it's an organ into later whether or not it's an organ specific clock or a body wide clock but specific clock or a body wide clock but specific clock or a body wide clock but I think blood borne factors generally I think blood borne factors generally I think blood borne factors generally I think of as a readout not think of as a readout not think of as a readout not as a medicine. But you're talking about as a medicine. But you're talking about as a medicine. But you're talking about blood borne factors as medicine. Yeah. I blood borne factors as medicine. Yeah. I blood borne factors as medicine. Yeah. I think that's really the fascinating think that's really the fascinating think that's really the fascinating aspect of aspect of aspect of this work that over the past few of this work that over the past few of this work that over the past few years people started to look at that years people started to look at that years people started to look at that many of these proteins and probably many of these proteins and probably many of these proteins and probably other molecules in the blood they're not other molecules in the blood they're not other molecules in the blood they're not just reflecting the status of the of the just reflecting the status of the of the just reflecting the status of the of the body if you will but they're actively body if you will but they're actively body if you will but they're actively influencing how it works. And the influencing how it works. And the influencing how it works. And the composition changes dramatically from composition changes dramatically from composition changes dramatically from young to old. We have this picture that young to old. We have this picture that young to old. We have this picture that I always like to show when I give a I always like to show when I give a I always like to show when I give a talk about our work, where we have um talk about our work, where we have um talk about our work, where we have um several thousand individuals and we several thousand individuals and we several thousand individuals and we measure 3,000 proteins in them. measure 3,000 proteins in them. measure 3,000 proteins in them. And then we use colors to show low And then we use colors to show low And then we use colors to show low levels or high levels of proteins and levels or high levels of proteins and levels or high levels of proteins and you see this dramatic change from young you see this dramatic change from young you see this dramatic change from young people to old people. In a way that you people to old people. In a way that you people to old people. In a way that you can pick one sample and you can say this can pick one sample and you can say this can pick one sample and you can say this person must be about that old and we can person must be about that old and we can person must be about that old and we can talk more about what people call clocks. talk more about what people call clocks. talk more about what people call clocks. But to your question, yes, there are But to your question, yes, there are But to your question, yes, there are factors in the blood that clearly can factors in the blood that clearly can factors in the blood that clearly can change the function of cells and organs. change the function of cells and organs. change the function of cells and organs. And what the field is trying to figure And what the field is trying to figure And what the field is trying to figure out is what are the key ones, which ones out is what are the key ones, which ones out is what are the key ones, which ones could we use to slow down aging or to could we use to slow down aging or to could we use to slow down aging or to keep the body healthy as long as you keep the body healthy as long as you keep the body healthy as long as you live. So, what has been done in humans in So, what has been done in humans in So, what has been done in humans in terms of a an equivalent or pseudo terms of a an equivalent or pseudo terms of a an equivalent or pseudo equivalent experiment to the parabiosis equivalent experiment to the parabiosis equivalent experiment to the parabiosis experiment you described? To try to experiment you described? To try to experiment you described? To try to translate that um we started a company translate that um we started a company translate that um we started a company Alkahest um Alkahest um Alkahest um to see whether factors from the blood to see whether factors from the blood to see whether factors from the blood of individuals could influence, first of individuals could influence, first of individuals could influence, first of all, aging of a mouse brain. So, we took all, aging of a mouse brain. So, we took all, aging of a mouse brain. So, we took blood from young people or old people blood from young people or old people blood from young people or old people and injected into mouse brains and we and injected into mouse brains and we and injected into mouse brains and we could show that could show that could show that young blood um young blood um young blood um could in fact mimic the effects of young could in fact mimic the effects of young could in fact mimic the effects of young mouse blood. So, there were the similar mouse blood. So, there were the similar mouse blood. So, there were the similar factors in humans as in mice. And then factors in humans as in mice. And then factors in humans as in mice. And then we went a step further and worked uh we went a step further and worked uh we went a step further and worked uh collaborated very closely with a company collaborated very closely with a company collaborated very closely with a company um called Grifols who is producing um called Grifols who is producing um called Grifols who is producing clinical medicines clinical medicines clinical medicines um for hospitals based on plasma um for hospitals based on plasma um for hospitals based on plasma donation. So, they have centers where donation. So, they have centers where donation. So, they have centers where volunteers donate plasma volunteers donate plasma volunteers donate plasma and then they pool this and they isolate and then they pool this and they isolate and then they pool this and they isolate uh for example, antibodies. So, if uh for example, antibodies. So, if uh for example, antibodies. So, if you're immunodeficient or you have you're immunodeficient or you have you're immunodeficient or you have cancer therapy and you are uh cancer therapy and you are uh cancer therapy and you are uh immunosuppressed, you will get regular infusions of you will get regular infusions of you will get regular infusions of antibodies that are sourced from healthy antibodies that are sourced from healthy antibodies that are sourced from healthy people, from these volunteers. people, from these volunteers. people, from these volunteers. Also, if you lose a lot of blood, you Also, if you lose a lot of blood, you Also, if you lose a lot of blood, you may get albumin, which is the main may get albumin, which is the main may get albumin, which is the main protein in our blood. protein in our blood. protein in our blood. So, this company had this manufacturing So, this company had this manufacturing So, this company had this manufacturing process where they collect thousands of process where they collect thousands of process where they collect thousands of donations and they process it into donations and they process it into donations and they process it into different medicines different medicines different medicines and this allowed us to test these and this allowed us to test these and this allowed us to test these different fractions and see which ones different fractions and see which ones different fractions and see which ones have an effect in the mice. have an effect in the mice. have an effect in the mice. And again, we could find some of them And again, we could find some of them And again, we could find some of them that really were more powerful than that really were more powerful than that really were more powerful than others. And so, we started some clinical others. And so, we started some clinical others. And so, we started some clinical trials in patients with Alzheimer's trials in patients with Alzheimer's trials in patients with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease and Parkinson's disease and Parkinson's disease and infused them with these fractions and infused them with these fractions and infused them with these fractions that we've shown that we've shown that we've shown uh have uh effects in mice. uh have uh effects in mice. uh have uh effects in mice. And these were small trials, but they looked these were small trials, but they looked these were small trials, but they looked promising. And they're related to what promising. And they're related to what promising. And they're related to what people have been observing people have been observing people have been observing previously that if you get a blood previously that if you get a blood previously that if you get a blood transfusions, often people transfusions, often people transfusions, often people have sort of have sort of have sort of feel invigorated or their mind they say feel invigorated or their mind they say feel invigorated or their mind they say their mind got cleared or they their mind got cleared or they their mind got cleared or they improved. And this company actually, Grifols, had And this company actually, Grifols, had And this company actually, Grifols, had also run a clinical study that was also run a clinical study that was also run a clinical study that was blinded placebo-controlled blinded placebo-controlled blinded placebo-controlled in patients with Alzheimer's disease in patients with Alzheimer's disease in patients with Alzheimer's disease where they first removed their plasma. where they first removed their plasma. where they first removed their plasma. This is called therapeutic plasma This is called therapeutic plasma This is called therapeutic plasma exchange and then infused them back with exchange and then infused them back with exchange and then infused them back with um a major blood component, this um a major blood component, this um a major blood component, this albumin, which also contains other albumin, which also contains other albumin, which also contains other factors. And they saw clear significant factors. And they saw clear significant factors. And they saw clear significant benefits. And this was in 500 patients. benefits. And this was in 500 patients. benefits. And this was in 500 patients. So, the field is trying to figure out So, the field is trying to figure out So, the field is trying to figure out next steps and hopefully do next steps and hopefully do next steps and hopefully do really one of these large clinical really one of these large clinical really one of these large clinical studies where you can then say, "This studies where you can then say, "This studies where you can then say, "This actually works and could get FDA actually works and could get FDA actually works and could get FDA approval." Have you done one of these? I haven't. I Have you done one of these? I haven't. I Have you done one of these? I haven't. I haven't. Are you close with anyone who haven't. Are you close with anyone who haven't. Are you close with anyone who has? I know people who have done it, who has? I know people who have done it, who has? I know people who have done it, yes. And I know people who as a response yes. And I know people who as a response yes. And I know people who as a response actually then supported the research actually then supported the research actually then supported the research that we have to have been doing in this that we have to have been doing in this that we have to have been doing in this field. Um there are companies now that offer Um there are companies now that offer Um there are companies now that offer this what is called therapeutic plasma this what is called therapeutic plasma this what is called therapeutic plasma exchange. And there was a small trial exchange. And there was a small trial exchange. And there was a small trial that was again placebo-controlled in 40 that was again placebo-controlled in 40 that was again placebo-controlled in 40 individuals uh from a company called Circulate uh from a company called Circulate uh from a company called Circulate Therapeutics. And they then looked in these And they then looked in these And they then looked in these individuals. These are healthy older individuals. These are healthy older individuals. These are healthy older people. And they use some of these people. And they use some of these people. And they use some of these measures that allow us to assess how old measures that allow us to assess how old measures that allow us to assess how old an organ is how old the body is or how an organ is how old the body is or how an organ is how old the body is or how old an organ is old an organ is old an organ is called epigenetic clocks. called epigenetic clocks. called epigenetic clocks. Um and they could indeed see that some Um and they could indeed see that some Um and they could indeed see that some of the uh organs looked younger or the of the uh organs looked younger or the of the uh organs looked younger or the body overall looked younger. There's body overall looked younger. There's body overall looked younger. There's some improvements in function. Not some improvements in function. Not some improvements in function. Not dramatic, but suggesting there dramatic, but suggesting there dramatic, but suggesting there might be something there. might be something there. might be something there. I'd like to take a quick break to I'd like to take a quick break to I'd like to take a quick break to acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any other. Their newest bar, the bronze bar, other. Their newest bar, the bronze bar, other. Their newest bar, the bronze bar, has 20 g of protein, only 150 calories, has 20 g of protein, only 150 calories, has 20 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. I have to say, these and 0 g of sugar. I have to say, these and 0 g of sugar. I have to say, these are the best-tasting protein bars I've are the best-tasting protein bars I've are the best-tasting protein bars I've ever had. And I've tried a lot of ever had. And I've tried a lot of ever had. And I've tried a lot of protein bars over the years. These new protein bars over the years. These new protein bars over the years. These new David bars have a marshmallow base, and David bars have a marshmallow base, and David bars have a marshmallow base, and they're covered in chocolate coating, they're covered in chocolate coating, they're covered in chocolate coating, and they're absolutely incredible. I of and they're absolutely incredible. I of and they're absolutely incredible. I of course eat regular whole foods. I eat course eat regular whole foods. I eat course eat regular whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, vegetables, et cetera. But I also make vegetables, et cetera. But I also make vegetables, et cetera. But I also make it a point to eat one or two David bars it a point to eat one or two David bars it a point to eat one or two David bars per day as a snack, which makes it easy per day as a snack, which makes it easy per day as a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goal of 1 g of protein to hit my protein goal of 1 g of protein to hit my protein goal of 1 g of protein per pound of body weight. And that per pound of body weight. And that per pound of body weight. And that allows me to take in the protein I need allows me to take in the protein I need allows me to take in the protein I need without consuming excess calories. I without consuming excess calories. I without consuming excess calories. I love all the David Bronze Bar flavors, love all the David Bronze Bar flavors, love all the David Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie dough, caramel including cookie dough, caramel including cookie dough, caramel chocolate, double chocolate, peanut chocolate, double chocolate, peanut chocolate, double chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They all actually butter chocolate. They all actually butter chocolate. They all actually taste like candy bars. Again, they're taste like candy bars. Again, they're taste like candy bars. Again, they're amazing. But again, they have no sugar amazing. But again, they have no sugar amazing. But again, they have no sugar and they have 20 g of protein with just and they have 20 g of protein with just and they have 20 g of protein with just 150 calories. If you'd like to try 150 calories. If you'd like to try 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great-tasting Element has a bunch of great-tasting Element has a bunch of great-tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try flavor. So, if you'd like to try flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to Element, you can go to Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. I can imagine a situation where I can imagine a situation where I can imagine a situation where there are factors in blood there are factors in blood there are factors in blood that can damage tissues can damage tissues can damage tissues that arise when there's some sort of that arise when there's some sort of that arise when there's some sort of injury. Let's say a heart attack or even injury. Let's say a heart attack or even injury. Let's say a heart attack or even a hip fracture. Um a hip fracture. Um a hip fracture. Um you know, pick an injury. you know, pick an injury. you know, pick an injury. I can also imagine a situation where I can also imagine a situation where I can also imagine a situation where the blood of very healthy vigorous the blood of very healthy vigorous the blood of very healthy vigorous younger organisms younger organisms younger organisms is devoid of all of that. is devoid of all of that. is devoid of all of that. So, when I'm thinking about what could So, when I'm thinking about what could So, when I'm thinking about what could be in young blood that could be in young blood that could be in young blood that could be rejuvenating, I can imagine that there's sort of a I can imagine that there's sort of a I can imagine that there's sort of a possible double dissociation there that possible double dissociation there that possible double dissociation there that as we get older, we're having little as we get older, we're having little as we get older, we're having little let's just call them micro injuries that let's just call them micro injuries that let's just call them micro injuries that we're not aware of all the time. And we're not aware of all the time. And we're not aware of all the time. And that infusing young blood into that infusing young blood into that infusing young blood into that person um would make them feel better. So, um would make them feel better. So, um would make them feel better. So, you're counteracting the bad stuff, but you're counteracting the bad stuff, but you're counteracting the bad stuff, but there's another picture where you're there's another picture where you're there's another picture where you're supplying something that's pro-youthful. supplying something that's pro-youthful. supplying something that's pro-youthful. Do you know whether or not the proteins Do you know whether or not the proteins Do you know whether or not the proteins that are contained in young blood are that are contained in young blood are that are contained in young blood are inhibiting the damage inhibiting the damage inhibiting the damage induced bad stuff induced bad stuff induced bad stuff or it's supplying something that is or it's supplying something that is or it's supplying something that is really a kind of a youthful factor. really a kind of a youthful factor. really a kind of a youthful factor. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Two different things. &gt;&gt; Two different things. &gt;&gt; Two different things. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. Right? And then you could &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. Right? And then you could &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. Right? And then you could see where they'd interact, but the see where they'd interact, but the see where they'd interact, but the reason I'm getting granular here is reason I'm getting granular here is reason I'm getting granular here is because I think ultimately for a because I think ultimately for a because I think ultimately for a therapeutic you'd want to be able to you'd want to be able to you'd want to be able to um dissociate between these two. Yeah, dissociate between these two. Yeah, dissociate between these two. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, no, totally makes sense. And yeah. Yeah, no, totally makes sense. And yeah. Yeah, no, totally makes sense. And in a short I answer it, it's all of the in a short I answer it, it's all of the in a short I answer it, it's all of the above. Um so, what we see is with age above. Um so, what we see is with age above. Um so, what we see is with age there's an increase in there's an increase in there's an increase in many what we call inflammatory proteins, many what we call inflammatory proteins, many what we call inflammatory proteins, and we actually identified some, and in and we actually identified some, and in and we actually identified some, and in mice if we knock them out or if we mice if we knock them out or if we mice if we knock them out or if we neutralize them, then cognition improves neutralize them, then cognition improves neutralize them, then cognition improves in the mice, in old mice. in the mice, in old mice. in the mice, in old mice. So, there you have examples of uh So, there you have examples of uh So, there you have examples of uh factors and actually natural factors and actually natural factors and actually natural factors that can inhibit some of these that can inhibit some of these that can inhibit some of these detrimental factors. detrimental factors. detrimental factors. But then you have also But then you have also But then you have also active pro-growth factors, growth active pro-growth factors, growth active pro-growth factors, growth factors that factors that factors that stimulate the activity of cells and stimulate the activity of cells and stimulate the activity of cells and might, you know, maintain stem cells might, you know, maintain stem cells might, you know, maintain stem cells better. So, they're truly better. So, they're truly better. So, they're truly beneficial factors, right? The challenge beneficial factors, right? The challenge beneficial factors, right? The challenge in this field has been in this field has been in this field has been to figure out which ones are the most to figure out which ones are the most to figure out which ones are the most important ones. important ones. important ones. And is there a smallest possible number And is there a smallest possible number And is there a smallest possible number of factors that you would need to have of factors that you would need to have of factors that you would need to have an effect, right? Sort of a cocktail. an effect, right? Sort of a cocktail. an effect, right? Sort of a cocktail. Mhm. Now, you could say Mhm. Now, you could say Mhm. Now, you could say our blood is nature's cocktail, right? our blood is nature's cocktail, right? our blood is nature's cocktail, right? It's the elixir of youth. It just It's the elixir of youth. It just It's the elixir of youth. It just sort of or it's a fountain of youth that sort of or it's a fountain of youth that sort of or it's a fountain of youth that lives in us, but it dries out as we get lives in us, but it dries out as we get lives in us, but it dries out as we get older. But it also accumulates is also an But it also accumulates is also an But it also accumulates is also an accumulation of bad stuff. So, it's not accumulation of bad stuff. So, it's not accumulation of bad stuff. So, it's not just a loss of that fountain. just a loss of that fountain. just a loss of that fountain. We have now tools where we can in mice We have now tools where we can in mice We have now tools where we can in mice again, we can look at every cell in the again, we can look at every cell in the again, we can look at every cell in the body of a mouse and we can ask how does body of a mouse and we can ask how does body of a mouse and we can ask how does the to the cells in an old mouse respond the to the cells in an old mouse respond the to the cells in an old mouse respond to young blood? to young blood? to young blood? And what you see is that almost every And what you see is that almost every And what you see is that almost every cell changes their behavior when you cell changes their behavior when you cell changes their behavior when you measure their transcripts or their gene measure their transcripts or their gene measure their transcripts or their gene expression in these cells. expression in these cells. expression in these cells. But they respond in different ways. And But they respond in different ways. And But they respond in different ways. And it's expected because they have it's expected because they have it's expected because they have different what we call receptors. So, different what we call receptors. So, different what we call receptors. So, one cell may respond to one factor and one cell may respond to one factor and one cell may respond to one factor and another cell to another one. another cell to another one. another cell to another one. And what's also interesting, we see a And what's also interesting, we see a And what's also interesting, we see a lot of stem cells lot of stem cells lot of stem cells seem to be seem to be seem to be targets of these young factors. targets of these young factors. targets of these young factors. Which sort of proves what we Which sort of proves what we Which sort of proves what we originally described, but now in an originally described, but now in an originally described, but now in an unbiased way. We look at everything and unbiased way. We look at everything and unbiased way. We look at everything and we ask, what are the major effects? we ask, what are the major effects? we ask, what are the major effects? And then what you also see that some And then what you also see that some And then what you also see that some organelles such as mitochondria, these organelles such as mitochondria, these organelles such as mitochondria, these are the energy producer units in are the energy producer units in are the energy producer units in inside cells, they are key targets of inside cells, they are key targets of inside cells, they are key targets of these rejuvenating effects. So, it all these rejuvenating effects. So, it all these rejuvenating effects. So, it all makes sense based on what we know from makes sense based on what we know from makes sense based on what we know from the aging field, what we know from stem the aging field, what we know from stem the aging field, what we know from stem cells and maintenance of stem cells. cells and maintenance of stem cells. cells and maintenance of stem cells. But, pinpointing But, pinpointing But, pinpointing which factor you would need to have this which factor you would need to have this which factor you would need to have this rejuvenating effect, or which one you rejuvenating effect, or which one you rejuvenating effect, or which one you have to block, has been extremely have to block, has been extremely have to block, has been extremely challenging. Because you almost have to challenging. Because you almost have to challenging. Because you almost have to go into the organism, and then we call go into the organism, and then we call go into the organism, and then we call this CRISPR tools, where you can knock this CRISPR tools, where you can knock this CRISPR tools, where you can knock out one gene after another, and ask out one gene after another, and ask out one gene after another, and ask which one is the important one. We can't which one is the important one. We can't which one is the important one. We can't really do this easily in vivo yet, but really do this easily in vivo yet, but really do this easily in vivo yet, but that's almost what we need to do. that's almost what we need to do. that's almost what we need to do. So, unfortunately, in the past 10 years, So, unfortunately, in the past 10 years, So, unfortunately, in the past 10 years, you know, there's individual factors you know, there's individual factors you know, there's individual factors that people keep describing, that people keep describing, that people keep describing, but I think we have not really come up with I think we have not really come up with I think we have not really come up with a good method a good method a good method to integrate multiple different factors to integrate multiple different factors to integrate multiple different factors that could provide or serve an amplified that could provide or serve an amplified that could provide or serve an amplified benefit, and mimic what nature is benefit, and mimic what nature is benefit, and mimic what nature is doing. Should I be banking my blood? You don't Should I be banking my blood? You don't Should I be banking my blood? You don't have to, um, have to, um, have to, um, because what we find, even though because what we find, even though because what we find, even though there's differences, clear differences there's differences, clear differences there's differences, clear differences from one person to another, from one person to another, from one person to another, overall, if you have the blood of a young person, if you have the blood of a young person, if you have the blood of a young person, that blood has overall the similar that blood has overall the similar that blood has overall the similar concentration from another young person, concentration from another young person, concentration from another young person, and it would still be beneficial to you. and it would still be beneficial to you. and it would still be beneficial to you. So, all the blood that we ever used in So, all the blood that we ever used in So, all the blood that we ever used in our studies was always a pool from our studies was always a pool from our studies was always a pool from multiple individuals, and that still has multiple individuals, and that still has multiple individuals, and that still has the beneficial effect. So, for these the beneficial effect. So, for these the beneficial effect. So, for these type of studies, you would not have to type of studies, you would not have to type of studies, you would not have to bank your own blood. bank your own blood. bank your own blood. Is the lore around Dracula based on this Is the lore around Dracula based on this Is the lore around Dracula based on this general logic, and if so, how do you general logic, and if so, how do you general logic, and if so, how do you think that lore arose? think that lore arose? think that lore arose? Meaning, I don't think somebody sat back Meaning, I don't think somebody sat back Meaning, I don't think somebody sat back and thought, "Oh, I can make up this and thought, "Oh, I can make up this and thought, "Oh, I can make up this story about this Count Dracula, who, you story about this Count Dracula, who, you story about this Count Dracula, who, you know, drank youthful blood." And, um, I know, drank youthful blood." And, um, I know, drank youthful blood." And, um, I mean, does that mean that experiments mean, does that mean that experiments mean, does that mean that experiments were being done long ago? I'm not trying were being done long ago? I'm not trying were being done long ago? I'm not trying to get gruesome here, but we know for to get gruesome here, but we know for to get gruesome here, but we know for instance blood letting and a bunch of instance blood letting and a bunch of instance blood letting and a bunch of other you know, scientifically dubious you know, scientifically dubious you know, scientifically dubious things have been used throughout things have been used throughout things have been used throughout history, but then again to reduce iron history, but then again to reduce iron history, but then again to reduce iron load in the blood some people will give load in the blood some people will give load in the blood some people will give blood. It's also a nice thing to do for your It's also a nice thing to do for your It's also a nice thing to do for your blood bank. They need blood in hospitals blood bank. They need blood in hospitals blood bank. They need blood in hospitals and too much iron load isn't good. We and too much iron load isn't good. We and too much iron load isn't good. We know that. So what's known about the know that. So what's known about the know that. So what's known about the origins of the Dracula story vis-a-vis origins of the Dracula story vis-a-vis origins of the Dracula story vis-a-vis the science that we are now aware of? the science that we are now aware of? the science that we are now aware of? Yeah, sort of in retrospect. I think Yeah, sort of in retrospect. I think Yeah, sort of in retrospect. I think where they came from is where they came from is where they came from is maybe more that people realize that you maybe more that people realize that you maybe more that people realize that you know, blood is this essential fluid. If know, blood is this essential fluid. If know, blood is this essential fluid. If you get a cut and you bleed too much, you get a cut and you bleed too much, you get a cut and you bleed too much, you're dead, right? you're dead, right? you're dead, right? Um, but then maybe also associated it Um, but then maybe also associated it Um, but then maybe also associated it with um with age or youthfulness. I don't know with age or youthfulness. I don't know with age or youthfulness. I don't know exactly how. exactly how. exactly how. We have not done and you know, this We have not done and you know, this We have not done and you know, this question came up many times before. We question came up many times before. We question came up many times before. We have actually never have actually never have actually never fed mice young blood. You could try fed mice young blood. You could try fed mice young blood. You could try that, right? Because it would have to be that, right? Because it would have to be that, right? Because it would have to be absorbed. The factors would have to be absorbed. The factors would have to be absorbed. The factors would have to be absorbed into the body. absorbed into the body. absorbed into the body. I wouldn't be surprised if some of them I wouldn't be surprised if some of them I wouldn't be surprised if some of them wouldn't have beneficial effects and wouldn't have beneficial effects and wouldn't have beneficial effects and survive sort of the survive sort of the survive sort of the you know, the stomach um the you know, the stomach um the you know, the stomach um acid environment of the stomach, but acid environment of the stomach, but acid environment of the stomach, but nobody's ever done it. I don't know nobody's ever done it. I don't know nobody's ever done it. I don't know where it comes from, but it's where it comes from, but it's where it comes from, but it's &gt;&gt; [gasps and laughter] &gt;&gt; [gasps and laughter] &gt;&gt; [gasps and laughter] &gt;&gt; yeah, I mean there's a lot of these &gt;&gt; yeah, I mean there's a lot of these &gt;&gt; yeah, I mean there's a lot of these questions and blood letting too, you questions and blood letting too, you questions and blood letting too, you know, it's blood saying also, right? know, it's blood saying also, right? know, it's blood saying also, right? Um, these leeches release factors into Um, these leeches release factors into Um, these leeches release factors into the blood. the blood. the blood. And they must have done something, And they must have done something, And they must have done something, otherwise people would probably not have otherwise people would probably not have otherwise people would probably not have done it. It's pretty wild. I again not done it. It's pretty wild. I again not done it. It's pretty wild. I again not I'm not trying to be gruesome or I'm not trying to be gruesome or I'm not trying to be gruesome or medieval here. It's just you know, now medieval here. It's just you know, now medieval here. It's just you know, now and again something from the historical and again something from the historical and again something from the historical text shows up in modern science and we text shows up in modern science and we text shows up in modern science and we kind of go, well there's sort of a kind of go, well there's sort of a kind of go, well there's sort of a mapping of some of the past to mapping of some of the past to mapping of some of the past to something that look is you know clearly something that look is you know clearly something that look is you know clearly of a of a of a scientific validation. I'm not a scientific validation. I'm not a scientific validation. I'm not promoting drinking blood. I'm interested promoting drinking blood. I'm interested promoting drinking blood. I'm interested in organ specific rates of aging. in organ specific rates of aging. in organ specific rates of aging. Um and then I also want to circle back Um and then I also want to circle back Um and then I also want to circle back to organ specific delivery of nutrients. to organ specific delivery of nutrients. to organ specific delivery of nutrients. Because what you're talking about is Because what you're talking about is Because what you're talking about is blood infusion. It goes everywhere. It blood infusion. It goes everywhere. It blood infusion. It goes everywhere. It goes into the general circulation. And goes into the general circulation. And goes into the general circulation. And you've mainly focused on the brain, but you've mainly focused on the brain, but you've mainly focused on the brain, but um it's possible that certain organs are um it's possible that certain organs are um it's possible that certain organs are more receptive to these youthful factors more receptive to these youthful factors more receptive to these youthful factors than others. I mean even the brain has a than others. I mean even the brain has a than others. I mean even the brain has a blood-brain barrier. The gonads have a blood-brain barrier. The gonads have a blood-brain barrier. The gonads have a blood-gonad barrier for interesting blood-gonad barrier for interesting blood-gonad barrier for interesting reasons. What is known about the rates reasons. What is known about the rates reasons. What is known about the rates of aging in different organs? of aging in different organs? of aging in different organs? Do they happen in parallel or no? And Do they happen in parallel or no? And Do they happen in parallel or no? And how different organs respond to these how different organs respond to these how different organs respond to these youthful factors? Yeah, so it's really youthful factors? Yeah, so it's really youthful factors? Yeah, so it's really interesting that you know, intuitively interesting that you know, intuitively interesting that you know, intuitively you think an organism just ages sort of you think an organism just ages sort of you think an organism just ages sort of as a whole in synchrony, we would say, as a whole in synchrony, we would say, as a whole in synchrony, we would say, right? But what researchers have right? But what researchers have right? But what researchers have discovered and this was first discovered and this was first discovered and this was first I think Monica Driscoll was the first I think Monica Driscoll was the first I think Monica Driscoll was the first who show in worms who show in worms who show in worms that when she looked with at the that when she looked with at the that when she looked with at the ultra-structural level that some of ultra-structural level that some of ultra-structural level that some of these organs in the worm seem to look these organs in the worm seem to look these organs in the worm seem to look more aged than others. more aged than others. more aged than others. And over the years now we have molecular And over the years now we have molecular And over the years now we have molecular tools where we can look at a single cell tools where we can look at a single cell tools where we can look at a single cell level or within an organ. level or within an organ. level or within an organ. And what we clearly see is that organs And what we clearly see is that organs And what we clearly see is that organs and cells within an organism can have and cells within an organism can have and cells within an organism can have slightly different rates of aging. And slightly different rates of aging. And slightly different rates of aging. And the way we conclude that is if we look the way we conclude that is if we look the way we conclude that is if we look at all these tissues in many different at all these tissues in many different at all these tissues in many different organism and we organism and we organism and we every you know, period of weeks or months in you know, period of weeks or months in you know, period of weeks or months in mice, for example, we harvest tissues mice, for example, we harvest tissues mice, for example, we harvest tissues from different animals, we can see these from different animals, we can see these from different animals, we can see these trajectories that some of them are trajectories that some of them are trajectories that some of them are relatively stable for a long time and relatively stable for a long time and relatively stable for a long time and then they start to decline, where others then they start to decline, where others then they start to decline, where others continue decline from early adulthood. continue decline from early adulthood. continue decline from early adulthood. And and yet others, you know, may And and yet others, you know, may And and yet others, you know, may maintain almost until the animal maintain almost until the animal maintain almost until the animal expires. So, that allows you then on an individual that allows you then on an individual that allows you then on an individual level to ask, level to ask, level to ask, if you compare now one individual to if you compare now one individual to if you compare now one individual to another, do their organs age exactly in the same do their organs age exactly in the same do their organs age exactly in the same way? Or is maybe there a person way? Or is maybe there a person way? Or is maybe there a person um whose heart ages a little bit faster um whose heart ages a little bit faster um whose heart ages a little bit faster than their actual the rest of their than their actual the rest of their than their actual the rest of their body. And in another person it would be body. And in another person it would be body. And in another person it would be the lung or the brain. the lung or the brain. the lung or the brain. And that's indeed what we seem to be And that's indeed what we seem to be And that's indeed what we seem to be seeing. Mhm. seeing. Mhm. seeing. Mhm. And [clears throat] And [clears throat] And [clears throat] the way we did this in humans, and maybe the way we did this in humans, and maybe the way we did this in humans, and maybe we can talk about this now, is we can talk about this now, is we can talk about this now, is again, we look at these proteins and again, we look at these proteins and again, we look at these proteins and there's company companies now that can there's company companies now that can there's company companies now that can look at thousands of proteins in a drop look at thousands of proteins in a drop look at thousands of proteins in a drop of blood. And this is not Theranos. This of blood. And this is not Theranos. This of blood. And this is not Theranos. This is this actually real is this actually real is this actually real um platforms, real science, where uh in platforms, real science, where uh in platforms, real science, where uh in just a drop of blood, there's companies just a drop of blood, there's companies just a drop of blood, there's companies that measure 11,000 proteins now, the that measure 11,000 proteins now, the that measure 11,000 proteins now, the concentration of these 11,000 proteins. concentration of these 11,000 proteins. concentration of these 11,000 proteins. And there's large population-based And there's large population-based And there's large population-based cohorts uh where people follow healthy people uh where people follow healthy people uh where people follow healthy people over uh two decades or even longer now, and uh two decades or even longer now, and uh two decades or even longer now, and they collected blood. And so we can they collected blood. And so we can they collected blood. And so we can profile this blood now, and we can ask, profile this blood now, and we can ask, profile this blood now, and we can ask, are proteins in that blood related to are proteins in that blood related to are proteins in that blood related to what diseases people develop or how they what diseases people develop or how they what diseases people develop or how they age? And the way how we make this, what And the way how we make this, what And the way how we make this, what people call a clock for a specific people call a clock for a specific people call a clock for a specific organ, is organ, is organ, is we look in your blood for proteins, for we look in your blood for proteins, for we look in your blood for proteins, for example, from the brain. example, from the brain. example, from the brain. So, out of these thousands of proteins So, out of these thousands of proteins So, out of these thousands of proteins that we can measure in the blood, some that we can measure in the blood, some that we can measure in the blood, some of them originate from your brain. Some of them originate from your brain. Some of them originate from your brain. Some originate from the lung, from the liver, originate from the lung, from the liver, originate from the lung, from the liver, from the heart. And we've always used from the heart. And we've always used from the heart. And we've always used that in clinical medicine, but we that in clinical medicine, but we that in clinical medicine, but we measure only a handful of proteins, measure only a handful of proteins, measure only a handful of proteins, usually a few liver proteins, a few usually a few liver proteins, a few usually a few liver proteins, a few heart proteins, and we use them to heart proteins, and we use them to heart proteins, and we use them to assess injury or assess injury or assess injury or um loss of function. So, if your liver is loss of function. So, if your liver is loss of function. So, if your liver is damaged, that's what we detect. But here damaged, that's what we detect. But here damaged, that's what we detect. But here we have now an opportunity to look in we have now an opportunity to look in we have now an opportunity to look in thousands of people at proteins that thousands of people at proteins that thousands of people at proteins that come, for example, from the liver and come, for example, from the liver and come, for example, from the liver and ask how do they change with age? ask how do they change with age? ask how do they change with age? And that allows us to then estimate the And that allows us to then estimate the And that allows us to then estimate the age of the liver in an individual. age of the liver in an individual. age of the liver in an individual. And what we find is that for most And what we find is that for most And what we find is that for most people, the age of your organs is pretty people, the age of your organs is pretty people, the age of your organs is pretty much in sync with your body. But for much in sync with your body. But for much in sync with your body. But for some individuals, you have more or less some individuals, you have more or less some individuals, you have more or less of a deviation. of a deviation. of a deviation. So, your liver may age faster So, your liver may age faster So, your liver may age faster um than that of the rest of the um than that of the rest of the um than that of the rest of the population and the rest of your body. population and the rest of your body. population and the rest of your body. And what is really super exciting, we And what is really super exciting, we And what is really super exciting, we call this an age gap. So, the difference call this an age gap. So, the difference call this an age gap. So, the difference between your actual age and the between your actual age and the between your actual age and the estimated age of your organ, and that's estimated age of your organ, and that's estimated age of your organ, and that's a very strong predictor of your future a very strong predictor of your future a very strong predictor of your future risk to develop disease in that organ. risk to develop disease in that organ. risk to develop disease in that organ. So, in other words, if your heart shows So, in other words, if your heart shows So, in other words, if your heart shows to age faster, you're more likely to get to age faster, you're more likely to get to age faster, you're more likely to get heart disease or a heart attack. If your heart disease or a heart attack. If your heart disease or a heart attack. If your kidney ages fast, you're going to get kidney ages fast, you're going to get kidney ages fast, you're going to get kidney disease. If your brain ages kidney disease. If your brain ages kidney disease. If your brain ages faster, you're more likely going to get you're more likely going to get you're more likely going to get Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease. Is this a test that anyone can now take? Is this a test that anyone can now take? Is this a test that anyone can now take? Is it commercially available? Yeah, so Is it commercially available? Yeah, so Is it commercially available? Yeah, so that's a great question. We started a that's a great question. We started a that's a great question. We started a company with Paul Kaleda um company with Paul Kaleda um company with Paul Kaleda um called Vera Biosciences. Vera? Vera called Vera Biosciences. Vera? Vera called Vera Biosciences. Vera? Vera Biosciences, and the mission is really Biosciences, and the mission is really Biosciences, and the mission is really to profile the age of organs to profile the age of organs to profile the age of organs to ideally eradicate chronic diseases and ideally eradicate chronic diseases and ideally eradicate chronic diseases and to maintain or to predict which organ is maintain or to predict which organ is maintain or to predict which organ is going to age because what we find is going to age because what we find is going to age because what we find is that if you have an organ that ages that if you have an organ that ages that if you have an organ that ages faster if you can detect that and you can do an if you can detect that and you can do an if you can detect that and you can do an intervention you can potentially delay intervention you can potentially delay intervention you can potentially delay aging right and extend health span and aging right and extend health span and aging right and extend health span and this is really the mission of Vero. this is really the mission of Vero. this is really the mission of Vero. The Vero Compass uses combination of The Vero Compass uses combination of The Vero Compass uses combination of this biological signature together with this biological signature together with this biological signature together with clinical and wearable data clinical and wearable data clinical and wearable data to create a platform that can to create a platform that can to create a platform that can predict how you respond which organ predict how you respond which organ predict how you respond which organ first of all which organ is the most first of all which organ is the most first of all which organ is the most sensitive which intervention you can use which intervention you can use which intervention you can use and then whether your organ responds or and then whether your organ responds or and then whether your organ responds or not by repeated testing and sort of not by repeated testing and sort of not by repeated testing and sort of creating a continuous loop where creating a continuous loop where creating a continuous loop where I tell you which organ is of concern I tell you which organ is of concern I tell you which organ is of concern you get medical advice based on other data get medical advice based on other data get medical advice based on other data that we can obtain from you that we can obtain from you that we can obtain from you and then you may get an intervention and then you may get an intervention and then you may get an intervention could be a classic medical treatment but could be a classic medical treatment but could be a classic medical treatment but it could also be a change in your it could also be a change in your it could also be a change in your lifestyle exercise change of diet type lifestyle exercise change of diet type lifestyle exercise change of diet type of exercise but have it tailored of exercise but have it tailored of exercise but have it tailored to your specific needs and then we can to your specific needs and then we can to your specific needs and then we can test does that intervention actually test does that intervention actually test does that intervention actually change the age of the your organ. change the age of the your organ. change the age of the your organ. It seems spectacular. I realize in It seems spectacular. I realize in It seems spectacular. I realize in addition let's say I were going to start a new let's say I were going to start a new let's say I were going to start a new medication um maybe um maybe um maybe taking a new drug for ADHD not for me I taking a new drug for ADHD not for me I taking a new drug for ADHD not for me I don't have ADHD fortunately but you know don't have ADHD fortunately but you know don't have ADHD fortunately but you know people are doing this all the time now people are doing this all the time now people are doing this all the time now trying different drugs for different trying different drugs for different trying different drugs for different things or things or things or taking something to lower their apoB as taking something to lower their apoB as taking something to lower their apoB as it were and then you could monitor how it were and then you could monitor how it were and then you could monitor how that impacts for better or worse the that impacts for better or worse the that impacts for better or worse the age of a particular organ or set of age of a particular organ or set of age of a particular organ or set of organs. &gt;&gt; Exactly absolutely. So, in many &gt;&gt; Exactly absolutely. So, in many &gt;&gt; Exactly absolutely. So, in many diseases, complex diseases, Alzheimer's diseases, complex diseases, Alzheimer's diseases, complex diseases, Alzheimer's disease in particular, we know that disease in particular, we know that disease in particular, we know that people have probably different forms of people have probably different forms of people have probably different forms of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease. And we know there are risk factors that And we know there are risk factors that And we know there are risk factors that predispose you to have Alzheimer's predispose you to have Alzheimer's predispose you to have Alzheimer's disease. But most of the trials now are disease. But most of the trials now are disease. But most of the trials now are done in all comers with the disease who in all comers with the disease who in all comers with the disease who already have the diagnosis. already have the diagnosis. already have the diagnosis. And so, you could imagine that if you And so, you could imagine that if you And so, you could imagine that if you have these predictors of change, have these predictors of change, have these predictors of change, the predictors of risk, and you get the predictors of risk, and you get the predictors of risk, and you get actually more resolution, and we can actually more resolution, and we can actually more resolution, and we can talk about that in a minute what the talk about that in a minute what the talk about that in a minute what the next stages of this type of research. next stages of this type of research. next stages of this type of research. You may get different profiles in people You may get different profiles in people You may get different profiles in people and say, "Okay, let's test this new drug and say, "Okay, let's test this new drug and say, "Okay, let's test this new drug in this type of Alzheimer's disease who in this type of Alzheimer's disease who in this type of Alzheimer's disease who has a very particular risk profile has a very particular risk profile has a very particular risk profile uh rather than in everyone, and then the uh rather than in everyone, and then the uh rather than in everyone, and then the drug fails." I think we may have tested drug fails." I think we may have tested drug fails." I think we may have tested a lot of drugs a lot of drugs a lot of drugs out there that might actually be out there that might actually be out there that might actually be beneficial, but because we applied them beneficial, but because we applied them beneficial, but because we applied them to everyone, and we applied them too to everyone, and we applied them too to everyone, and we applied them too late, they fail, and we throw them away. late, they fail, and we throw them away. late, they fail, and we throw them away. &gt;&gt; Yeah. We had um David Fagenbaum, Dr. &gt;&gt; Yeah. We had um David Fagenbaum, Dr. &gt;&gt; Yeah. We had um David Fagenbaum, Dr. David Fagenbaum, he's an MD uh David Fagenbaum, he's an MD uh David Fagenbaum, he's an MD uh University of Pennsylvania Professor of University of Pennsylvania Professor of University of Pennsylvania Professor of Medicine, um who himself was diagnosed Medicine, um who himself was diagnosed Medicine, um who himself was diagnosed with Castleman's disease, and took it with Castleman's disease, and took it with Castleman's disease, and took it upon himself to try essentially every upon himself to try essentially every upon himself to try essentially every approved drug as a last-ditch effort. He approved drug as a last-ditch effort. He approved drug as a last-ditch effort. He was dying, basically. And he came up was dying, basically. And he came up was dying, basically. And he came up with a combination, a small kit of with a combination, a small kit of with a combination, a small kit of already approved medications, and he's already approved medications, and he's already approved medications, and he's now been alive 11 years since his now been alive 11 years since his now been alive 11 years since his essentially death diagnosis. Or excuse essentially death diagnosis. Or excuse essentially death diagnosis. Or excuse me, death prognosis. Um and he has a me, death prognosis. Um and he has a me, death prognosis. Um and he has a um not-for-profit called the Every a um not-for-profit called the Every a um not-for-profit called the Every Cure, where people with um Cure, where people with um Cure, where people with um uh diseases that have resisted all other diseases that have resisted all other diseases that have resisted all other forms of treatment, forms of treatment, forms of treatment, people can go there, and they use AI to people can go there, and they use AI to people can go there, and they use AI to come up with, you know, reasonable come up with, you know, reasonable come up with, you know, reasonable candidates to try. Is it because as he candidates to try. Is it because as he candidates to try. Is it because as he said exactly what you said, which is he said exactly what you said, which is he said exactly what you said, which is that many of the solutions to diseases that many of the solutions to diseases that many of the solutions to diseases that are common may already exist, but that are common may already exist, but that are common may already exist, but they've been swamped by the variation in they've been swamped by the variation in they've been swamped by the variation in those diseases when looked at in those diseases when looked at in those diseases when looked at in clinical trials. So, uh the idea that clinical trials. So, uh the idea that clinical trials. So, uh the idea that we're all that we're already sitting on we're all that we're already sitting on we're all that we're already sitting on good treatments and cures that wouldn't good treatments and cures that wouldn't good treatments and cures that wouldn't have to pass through all the testing is have to pass through all the testing is have to pass through all the testing is very interesting. There's also very interesting. There's also very interesting. There's also very little incentive for drug companies to little incentive for drug companies to little incentive for drug companies to invest in those because they passed invest in those because they passed invest in those because they passed through their um patent window. So, through their um patent window. So, through their um patent window. So, there's not a lot of money to be made. there's not a lot of money to be made. there's not a lot of money to be made. &gt;&gt; another problem. I have a question that &gt;&gt; another problem. I have a question that &gt;&gt; another problem. I have a question that I promise I'm just going to be I I've I promise I'm just going to be I I've I promise I'm just going to be I I've had this podcast long enough to know had this podcast long enough to know had this podcast long enough to know that I don't tap dance around things that I don't tap dance around things that I don't tap dance around things anymore. David Sinclair has been very um anymore. David Sinclair has been very um anymore. David Sinclair has been very um I'm not trying to attack David, but I I'm not trying to attack David, but I I'm not trying to attack David, but I want to know David has been very vocal want to know David has been very vocal want to know David has been very vocal about NAD and the NMN pathway, which is, about NAD and the NMN pathway, which is, about NAD and the NMN pathway, which is, you know, upstream of at of and NR. you know, upstream of at of and NR. you know, upstream of at of and NR. Others have talked about NR. There's, Others have talked about NR. There's, Others have talked about NR. There's, you know, Tru Niagen. I'm not trying to you know, Tru Niagen. I'm not trying to you know, Tru Niagen. I'm not trying to go after any one person or company, but go after any one person or company, but go after any one person or company, but for a while for a while for a while there was a lot of excitement mainly there was a lot of excitement mainly there was a lot of excitement mainly generated by David that um generated by David that um generated by David that um NAD, which goes down across development NAD, which goes down across development NAD, which goes down across development into adulthood, um might be a into adulthood, um might be a into adulthood, um might be a pro-longevity treatment. I confess I pro-longevity treatment. I confess I pro-longevity treatment. I confess I take NMN take NMN take NMN um powder. I don't get paid to say this. um powder. I don't get paid to say this. um powder. I don't get paid to say this. I know I won't doesn't even matter what I know I won't doesn't even matter what I know I won't doesn't even matter what company I get it from cuz they I buy it company I get it from cuz they I buy it company I get it from cuz they I buy it like everybody else. like everybody else. like everybody else. Um I don't have any belief that it's Um I don't have any belief that it's Um I don't have any belief that it's going to increase my lifespan, but it going to increase my lifespan, but it going to increase my lifespan, but it seems to have a pro-energy effect that I seems to have a pro-energy effect that I seems to have a pro-energy effect that I like. And for some reason it makes my like. And for some reason it makes my like. And for some reason it makes my hair grow very fast and my nails grow hair grow very fast and my nails grow hair grow very fast and my nails grow very thick, which is a side effect I very thick, which is a side effect I very thick, which is a side effect I wasn't looking for. wasn't looking for. wasn't looking for. &gt;&gt; Okay, maybe I should try it, too. &gt;&gt; Okay, maybe I should try it, too. &gt;&gt; Okay, maybe I should try it, too. &gt;&gt; My sister experiences the same thing, &gt;&gt; My sister experiences the same thing, &gt;&gt; My sister experiences the same thing, but you know, this is all anecdata, but you know, this is all anecdata, but you know, this is all anecdata, right? Again, I make no money for saying right? Again, I make no money for saying right? Again, I make no money for saying this, but I've seen a lot of criticism this, but I've seen a lot of criticism this, but I've seen a lot of criticism of the NAD hypothesis of longevity. And of the NAD hypothesis of longevity. And of the NAD hypothesis of longevity. And so, is there any evidence is there any evidence is there any evidence that increasing NAD levels, either that increasing NAD levels, either that increasing NAD levels, either through NMN or through NR or direct through NMN or through NR or direct through NMN or through NR or direct infusion or injection of NAD, infusion or injection of NAD, infusion or injection of NAD, any of those things, can actually extend any of those things, can actually extend any of those things, can actually extend the lifespan the lifespan the lifespan of humans of humans of humans and or experimental models? and or experimental models? and or experimental models? Yeah, I mean this is not my area of Yeah, I mean this is not my area of Yeah, I mean this is not my area of expertise, but um just as a blank expertise, but um just as a blank expertise, but um just as a blank statement, there is no human statement, there is no human statement, there is no human intervention that can extend lifespan intervention that can extend lifespan intervention that can extend lifespan that has been tested or validated. There that has been tested or validated. There that has been tested or validated. There many that have shown beneficial effects many that have shown beneficial effects many that have shown beneficial effects in animal models including NMN and you in animal models including NMN and you in animal models including NMN and you know, all these metabolites. know, all these metabolites. know, all these metabolites. Um there's actually a clinical study Um there's actually a clinical study Um there's actually a clinical study that shows that if you take these that shows that if you take these that shows that if you take these supplements, they increase your levels supplements, they increase your levels supplements, they increase your levels in the blood. That's a good clinical in the blood. That's a good clinical in the blood. That's a good clinical study, but it doesn't show that it has study, but it doesn't show that it has study, but it doesn't show that it has an effect on lifespan or even on frailty an effect on lifespan or even on frailty an effect on lifespan or even on frailty or any other tangible outcome. And this or any other tangible outcome. And this or any other tangible outcome. And this is the case with many other medications is the case with many other medications is the case with many other medications that might be beneficial, but they have that might be beneficial, but they have that might be beneficial, but they have simply not been tested in a clinical simply not been tested in a clinical simply not been tested in a clinical trial. They have been tested in disease trial. They have been tested in disease trial. They have been tested in disease sometimes and they are sometimes and they are sometimes and they are you know, very good drugs to treat a you know, very good drugs to treat a you know, very good drugs to treat a person who is sick, but they have not person who is sick, but they have not person who is sick, but they have not test been tested in healthy elder people test been tested in healthy elder people test been tested in healthy elder people and see whether they reduce aging or and see whether they reduce aging or and see whether they reduce aging or increase health span. There's really increase health span. There's really increase health span. There's really nothing out there except exercise and nothing out there except exercise and nothing out there except exercise and diets. Um those have sort of proven diets. Um those have sort of proven diets. Um those have sort of proven um effects. There's a very good study um effects. There's a very good study um effects. There's a very good study from a researcher in Singapore from a researcher in Singapore from a researcher in Singapore who tested 10 different preparations of who tested 10 different preparations of who tested 10 different preparations of NMN and she found that many of them of NMN and she found that many of them of NMN and she found that many of them actually don't contain what is on the actually don't contain what is on the actually don't contain what is on the label. That doesn't surprise me. And label. That doesn't surprise me. And label. That doesn't surprise me. And that's the case for most supplements. that's the case for most supplements. that's the case for most supplements. For half the supplements, there's you For half the supplements, there's you For half the supplements, there's you know, many resources out there you can know, many resources out there you can know, many resources out there you can check or you can just ask ChatGPT. Um check or you can just ask ChatGPT. Um check or you can just ask ChatGPT. Um there's not in there what it says and there's not in there what it says and there's not in there what it says and with NMN apparently and according with NMN apparently and according with NMN apparently and according ChatGPT, um is very unstable and so it ChatGPT, um is very unstable and so it ChatGPT, um is very unstable and so it degrades quite quickly. So you want it degrades quite quickly. So you want it degrades quite quickly. So you want to make sure I think with any supplement to make sure I think with any supplement to make sure I think with any supplement if you want to try it, make sure it's if you want to try it, make sure it's if you want to try it, make sure it's from a good source um and that it has from a good source um and that it has from a good source um and that it has been That it has been third-party been That it has been third-party been That it has been third-party tested. Yeah. And and you use it tested. Yeah. And and you use it tested. Yeah. And and you use it within the you know, within the you know, within the you know, time frame. time frame. time frame. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I appreciate you saying &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I appreciate you saying &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I appreciate you saying that. I As you said, I that. I As you said, I that. I As you said, I don't expect to live longer because of don't expect to live longer because of don't expect to live longer because of taking N A D. I just sort of like the taking N A D. I just sort of like the taking N A D. I just sort of like the effect that it appears to give me. I'd effect that it appears to give me. I'd effect that it appears to give me. I'd like to talk about the relationship like to talk about the relationship like to talk about the relationship between things that increase vitality between things that increase vitality between things that increase vitality that are abundant in youth that are abundant in youth that are abundant in youth versus their possible role in decreasing their possible role in decreasing their possible role in decreasing longevity. I've been fascinated by this longevity. I've been fascinated by this longevity. I've been fascinated by this for a long time. So, for a long time. So, for a long time. So, um bear with me here and I'll try and set bear with me here and I'll try and set bear with me here and I'll try and set the stage and then I'll be quiet. Puberty is perhaps the fastest rate of Puberty is perhaps the fastest rate of Puberty is perhaps the fastest rate of aging that we undergo in our entire aging that we undergo in our entire aging that we undergo in our entire lifespan. Within 2 years, we transform lifespan. Within 2 years, we transform lifespan. Within 2 years, we transform as an organism, right? Some people as an organism, right? Some people as an organism, right? Some people progress through puberty much faster. progress through puberty much faster. progress through puberty much faster. Other people seem to have a more Other people seem to have a more Other people seem to have a more protracted puberty. And here I'm protracted puberty. And here I'm protracted puberty. And here I'm defining puberty as the acquisition of defining puberty as the acquisition of defining puberty as the acquisition of secondary sex characteristics. secondary sex characteristics. secondary sex characteristics. Facial hair, etc. Uh uh reproductive Facial hair, etc. Uh uh reproductive Facial hair, etc. Uh uh reproductive ability, etc. Okay? So, um ability, etc. Okay? So, um ability, etc. Okay? So, um puberty is a constellation of things puberty is a constellation of things puberty is a constellation of things that obviously differs in males and that obviously differs in males and that obviously differs in males and females. It's correlated with hormones like It's correlated with hormones like It's correlated with hormones like testosterone, estrogen, gonadotropins, testosterone, estrogen, gonadotropins, testosterone, estrogen, gonadotropins, etc. But really it's a brain thing that etc. But really it's a brain thing that etc. But really it's a brain thing that switches on that then start that switches on that then start that switches on that then start that initiates all of this. initiates all of this. initiates all of this. So, there've been many attempts in the So, there've been many attempts in the So, there've been many attempts in the kind of health and wellness space to the kind of health and wellness space to the kind of health and wellness space to take the hormones, usually testosterone, take the hormones, usually testosterone, take the hormones, usually testosterone, estrogen, and growth hormone being the estrogen, and growth hormone being the estrogen, and growth hormone being the three primary ones, and then supply three primary ones, and then supply three primary ones, and then supply those to people in adulthood. those to people in adulthood. those to people in adulthood. Perimenopausal women taking estrogen and Perimenopausal women taking estrogen and Perimenopausal women taking estrogen and or testosterone nowadays quite frequent. or testosterone nowadays quite frequent. or testosterone nowadays quite frequent. It This happens a lot. Men taking It This happens a lot. Men taking It This happens a lot. Men taking testosterone either because they need to testosterone either because they need to testosterone either because they need to quote unquote replace it or they're just quote unquote replace it or they're just quote unquote replace it or they're just trying to augment what they already trying to augment what they already trying to augment what they already have. Growth hormone. Certainly, all of have. Growth hormone. Certainly, all of have. Growth hormone. Certainly, all of these things dosed appropriately, we these things dosed appropriately, we these things dosed appropriately, we know, will increase vitality, energy, know, will increase vitality, energy, know, will increase vitality, energy, libido, recovery from exercise, in some libido, recovery from exercise, in some libido, recovery from exercise, in some cases maybe cognition, etc. cases maybe cognition, etc. cases maybe cognition, etc. But it's also been demonstrated that when it's also been demonstrated that when it's also been demonstrated that when you increase growth hormone and IGF-1 you increase growth hormone and IGF-1 you increase growth hormone and IGF-1 that you decrease lifespan. This is seen that you decrease lifespan. This is seen that you decrease lifespan. This is seen in large dogs versus small dogs. The in large dogs versus small dogs. The in large dogs versus small dogs. The reason larger dogs live so much shorter reason larger dogs live so much shorter reason larger dogs live so much shorter lives than small dogs lives than small dogs lives than small dogs is because of the dosing of IGF-1. is because of the dosing of IGF-1. is because of the dosing of IGF-1. So, how do you look at the balance So, how do you look at the balance So, how do you look at the balance between vitality and longevity? And are between vitality and longevity? And are between vitality and longevity? And are there factors that can increase both there factors that can increase both there factors that can increase both vitality and longevity? Because to my vitality and longevity? Because to my vitality and longevity? Because to my knowledge, the things that these knowledge, the things that these knowledge, the things that these hormones, mainly, that increase vitality hormones, mainly, that increase vitality hormones, mainly, that increase vitality well, if they allow you to exercise more well, if they allow you to exercise more well, if they allow you to exercise more and perhaps be leaner, then perhaps they and perhaps be leaner, then perhaps they and perhaps be leaner, then perhaps they buy you some time, additional time in buy you some time, additional time in buy you some time, additional time in life. But they also decrease the amount of But they also decrease the amount of But they also decrease the amount of time you have alive. So, it's a very time you have alive. So, it's a very time you have alive. So, it's a very interesting interplay, and most people interesting interplay, and most people interesting interplay, and most people um conflate longevity and vitality. That's an longevity and vitality. That's an longevity and vitality. That's an excellent question. And excellent question. And excellent question. And you know, short answer is we don't know. you know, short answer is we don't know. you know, short answer is we don't know. We don't really know. And in the aging We don't really know. And in the aging We don't really know. And in the aging field, this is called antagonistic field, this is called antagonistic field, this is called antagonistic pleiotropy. So, something that is good pleiotropy. So, something that is good pleiotropy. So, something that is good when you're young can be bad when you're when you're young can be bad when you're when you're young can be bad when you're old, right? It it relates to this to old, right? It it relates to this to old, right? It it relates to this to this concept. And humans are, of course this concept. And humans are, of course this concept. And humans are, of course you know, they're sort of exempt from you know, they're sort of exempt from you know, they're sort of exempt from evolution, uh if you will, right? So, evolution, uh if you will, right? So, evolution, uh if you will, right? So, our natural lifespan is probably around our natural lifespan is probably around our natural lifespan is probably around 30 to 40 if you look back in history. 30 to 40 if you look back in history. 30 to 40 if you look back in history. That's how long people lived. I mean, That's how long people lived. I mean, That's how long people lived. I mean, there were always individuals who had there were always individuals who had there were always individuals who had you know, exceptional lifespan, but most you know, exceptional lifespan, but most you know, exceptional lifespan, but most people would die much earlier. people would die much earlier. people would die much earlier. &gt;&gt; Infections, um &gt;&gt; Infections, um &gt;&gt; Infections, um and it was probably mostly infectious it was probably mostly infectious it was probably mostly infectious diseases. Um diseases. Um diseases. Um But you know, you could argue from an you know, you could argue from an you know, you could argue from an evolutionary perspective, once you're evolutionary perspective, once you're evolutionary perspective, once you're sexually mature, you reproduced and you sexually mature, you reproduced and you sexually mature, you reproduced and you guaranteed your offspring, which is guaranteed your offspring, which is guaranteed your offspring, which is around 30 to 40 years around 30 to 40 years around 30 to 40 years nature doesn't care about you anymore. nature doesn't care about you anymore. nature doesn't care about you anymore. And so, there's no longer It's very And so, there's no longer It's very And so, there's no longer It's very brutal to hear, but brutal to hear, but brutal to hear, but &gt;&gt; as your kids are sufficient enough &gt;&gt; as your kids are sufficient enough &gt;&gt; as your kids are sufficient enough to raise it. to raise it. to raise it. An infant can't raise itself. An infant can't raise itself. An infant can't raise itself. &gt;&gt; right. A 7-year-old maybe could if they &gt;&gt; right. A 7-year-old maybe could if they &gt;&gt; right. A 7-year-old maybe could if they were very industrious, you know, but were very industrious, you know, but were very industrious, you know, but kids need us at least until they're kids need us at least until they're kids need us at least until they're late teens, late teens, late teens, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And then, you know, you may have &gt;&gt; And then, you know, you may have &gt;&gt; And then, you know, you may have some evolutionary pressure to maintain evolutionary pressure to maintain evolutionary pressure to maintain individuals who have knowledge and individuals who have knowledge and individuals who have knowledge and wisdom to help the, you know, the wisdom to help the, you know, the wisdom to help the, you know, the group to survive. Mhm. group to survive. Mhm. group to survive. Mhm. But, that's probably a much weaker um But, that's probably a much weaker um But, that's probably a much weaker um force of evolution to keep you alive, force of evolution to keep you alive, force of evolution to keep you alive, right? And so, that's why people right? And so, that's why people right? And so, that's why people increasingly see now that there are increasingly see now that there are increasingly see now that there are these inflection points that, you know, these inflection points that, you know, these inflection points that, you know, menopause, but also in men around age 30 menopause, but also in men around age 30 menopause, but also in men around age 30 to 40, dramatic changes in the to 40, dramatic changes in the to 40, dramatic changes in the composition again of the blood. We just composition again of the blood. We just composition again of the blood. We just looked at this mentioned earlier. If you looked at this mentioned earlier. If you looked at this mentioned earlier. If you look at the composition of the blood look at the composition of the blood look at the composition of the blood across human lifespan from 20 to 90, we across human lifespan from 20 to 90, we across human lifespan from 20 to 90, we call these waves of aging. The first call these waves of aging. The first call these waves of aging. The first wave is around 35 years of age. Dramatic wave is around 35 years of age. Dramatic wave is around 35 years of age. Dramatic changes in concentrations of lots of changes in concentrations of lots of changes in concentrations of lots of factors, and not just in women, in men factors, and not just in women, in men factors, and not just in women, in men as well. 35 to 35 to 40 as well. 35 to 35 to 40 as well. 35 to 35 to 40 &gt;&gt; degradation, any improvements? Some go &gt;&gt; degradation, any improvements? Some go &gt;&gt; degradation, any improvements? Some go up, some go down, and up, some go down, and up, some go down, and you know, it's speculative, but you know, it's speculative, but you know, it's speculative, but does that have something to do with this does that have something to do with this does that have something to do with this is how long nature needs us, and then it is how long nature needs us, and then it is how long nature needs us, and then it doesn't care. And, you know, the doesn't care. And, you know, the doesn't care. And, you know, the fact that we live now 80 or even longer fact that we live now 80 or even longer fact that we live now 80 or even longer on average, right? Is really thanks to on average, right? Is really thanks to on average, right? Is really thanks to hygiene and, you know, um hygiene and, you know, um hygiene and, you know, um certain medications that, you know, certain medications that, you know, certain medications that, you know, blood pressure and heart disease blood pressure and heart disease blood pressure and heart disease that we have been able that we have been able that we have been able &gt;&gt; I have a friend who's called me over the &gt;&gt; I have a friend who's called me over the &gt;&gt; I have a friend who's called me over the weekend. He's got some weekend. He's got some weekend. He's got some He had a cruel infection that could He had a cruel infection that could He had a cruel infection that could almost took out his vision in one eye. almost took out his vision in one eye. almost took out his vision in one eye. Antibiotics infused, boom, done. I know Antibiotics infused, boom, done. I know Antibiotics infused, boom, done. I know uh listeners don't like antibiotics and uh listeners don't like antibiotics and uh listeners don't like antibiotics and they're concerned about it. I'll tell they're concerned about it. I'll tell they're concerned about it. I'll tell you, if you have a brutal infection you, if you have a brutal infection you, if you have a brutal infection that's aggressive and it's near your that's aggressive and it's near your that's aggressive and it's near your brain or your eye and you get on brain or your eye and you get on brain or your eye and you get on systemic antibiotics and they're the systemic antibiotics and they're the systemic antibiotics and they're the right one, you are one lucky individual. right one, you are one lucky individual. right one, you are one lucky individual. And if you don't, you're you could be And if you don't, you're you could be And if you don't, you're you could be looking at excavating one or both eyes. looking at excavating one or both eyes. looking at excavating one or both eyes. It's brutal. It's brutal. It's brutal. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, for many different &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, for many different &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, for many different infections, antibiotics are, you know, a infections, antibiotics are, you know, a infections, antibiotics are, you know, a lifesaver. Absolutely. Yeah, so Absolutely. Yeah, so Absolutely. Yeah, so um it's a really good point. And um it's a really good point. And um it's a really good point. And actually, my friend Tom Rando, actually, my friend Tom Rando, actually, my friend Tom Rando, uh mentioned earlier, he always makes uh mentioned earlier, he always makes uh mentioned earlier, he always makes that point that, you know, a lot of the that point that, you know, a lot of the that point that, you know, a lot of the study look at lifespan as an outcome in study look at lifespan as an outcome in study look at lifespan as an outcome in animal models, but they don't really animal models, but they don't really animal models, but they don't really look at how look at how look at how active or, you know, what is sort active or, you know, what is sort active or, you know, what is sort of the level of that extended of the level of that extended of the level of that extended lifespan is are they just hanging in lifespan is are they just hanging in lifespan is are they just hanging in there, these organisms, or are they there, these organisms, or are they there, these organisms, or are they still strong and vital, right? still strong and vital, right? still strong and vital, right? Is the vitality still there? And and I Is the vitality still there? And and I Is the vitality still there? And and I think we don't we haven't found a magic think we don't we haven't found a magic think we don't we haven't found a magic that would keep everything together for that would keep everything together for that would keep everything together for a longer period of time. And certainly a longer period of time. And certainly a longer period of time. And certainly not in humans. not in humans. not in humans. If you're a regular listener of the If you're a regular listener of the If you're a regular listener of the Huberman Lab Podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab Podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab Podcast, you've no doubt heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been on the fence about it, now's an awesome on the fence about it, now's an awesome on the fence about it, now's an awesome time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full supplement package with your first supplement package with your first supplement package with your first subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away a free bottle of vitamin D3K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3K2, a bottle of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a sample pack of the new sleep formula sample pack of the new sleep formula sample pack of the new sleep formula AGZ, which by the way, is now the only AGZ, which by the way, is now the only AGZ, which by the way, is now the only sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It tastes great, and like I said, it has me tastes great, and like I said, it has me tastes great, and like I said, it has me sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, so make sure to go to so make sure to go to so make sure to go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get started today. Today's episode is to get started today. Today's episode is to get started today. Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka. I'm excited also brought to us by Roka. I'm excited also brought to us by Roka. I'm excited to share that Roka and I recently teamed to share that Roka and I recently teamed to share that Roka and I recently teamed up to create a new pair of red lens up to create a new pair of red lens up to create a new pair of red lens glasses. These red lens glasses are glasses. These red lens glasses are glasses. These red lens glasses are meant to be worn in the evening after meant to be worn in the evening after meant to be worn in the evening after the sun goes down. They filter out short the sun goes down. They filter out short the sun goes down. They filter out short wavelength light that comes from screens wavelength light that comes from screens wavelength light that comes from screens and from LED lights, which are the most and from LED lights, which are the most and from LED lights, which are the most common indoor lighting nowadays. I want common indoor lighting nowadays. I want common indoor lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize Roka red lens glasses are to emphasize Roka red lens glasses are to emphasize Roka red lens glasses are not traditional blue blockers. They do not traditional blue blockers. They do not traditional blue blockers. They do filter out blue light, but they filter out blue light, but they filter out blue light, but they filter out a lot more than just blue light. In out a lot more than just blue light. In out a lot more than just blue light. In fact, they filter out the full range of fact, they filter out the full range of fact, they filter out the full range of short wavelength light that suppresses short wavelength light that suppresses short wavelength light that suppresses the hormone melatonin. By the way, you the hormone melatonin. By the way, you the hormone melatonin. By the way, you want melatonin high in the evening and want melatonin high in the evening and want melatonin high in the evening and at night, makes it easy to fall and stay at night, makes it easy to fall and stay at night, makes it easy to fall and stay asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and at night. These Roka red lens glasses at night. These Roka red lens glasses at night. These Roka red lens glasses ensure normal healthy increases in ensure normal healthy increases in ensure normal healthy increases in melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing so, these Roka red lens glasses really so, these Roka red lens glasses really so, these Roka red lens glasses really help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your transition to sleep. If you'd like to transition to sleep. If you'd like to transition to sleep. If you'd like to try Roka, go to roka.com. That's r o k try Roka, go to roka.com. That's r o k try Roka, go to roka.com. That's r o k a.com and enter the code Huberman to a.com and enter the code Huberman to a.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, save 20% off your first order. Again, save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code that's roka.com and enter the code that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Lately, I've been Huberman at checkout. Lately, I've been Huberman at checkout. Lately, I've been um somewhat surprised, although not somewhat surprised, although not somewhat surprised, although not entirely by some of the data on um entirely by some of the data on um entirely by some of the data on um sunlight exposure and lifespan. There's sunlight exposure and lifespan. There's sunlight exposure and lifespan. There's this really interesting large-scale this really interesting large-scale this really interesting large-scale study out of Sweden where peop- the more study out of Sweden where peop- the more study out of Sweden where peop- the more sunlight exposure people got, the longer sunlight exposure people got, the longer sunlight exposure people got, the longer they lived. Even smokers who get more they lived. Even smokers who get more they lived. Even smokers who get more sunlight appear to, on average, these sunlight appear to, on average, these sunlight appear to, on average, these are averages, folks, seem to So, are averages, folks, seem to So, are averages, folks, seem to So, overlapping distributions, but uh live overlapping distributions, but uh live overlapping distributions, but uh live longer than um non-smokers who don't get longer than um non-smokers who don't get longer than um non-smokers who don't get sufficient sunlight. Now, getting a lot sufficient sunlight. Now, getting a lot sufficient sunlight. Now, getting a lot of sunlight is also correlated with of sunlight is also correlated with of sunlight is also correlated with outdoor activity, fresh air, a number of outdoor activity, fresh air, a number of outdoor activity, fresh air, a number of things. So, it's not it's far from things. So, it's not it's far from things. So, it's not it's far from perfect study, but um yeah, the perfect study, but um yeah, the perfect study, but um yeah, the interplay between vitality and I think interplay between vitality and I think interplay between vitality and I think of sunlight as pro-vitality um and of sunlight as pro-vitality um and of sunlight as pro-vitality um and longevity is such an interesting one longevity is such an interesting one longevity is such an interesting one because the dance that we seem to be because the dance that we seem to be because the dance that we seem to be playing now with medications and playing now with medications and playing now with medications and could be supplements, but really could be supplements, but really could be supplements, but really medication and lifestyle is what can we medication and lifestyle is what can we medication and lifestyle is what can we do and take to get more life, but also do and take to get more life, but also do and take to get more life, but also to enjoy that life more. And there are to enjoy that life more. And there are to enjoy that life more. And there are certain things like growth hormone, certain things like growth hormone, certain things like growth hormone, which will make people feel much more which will make people feel much more which will make people feel much more youthful, much more youthful. Skin, youthful, much more youthful. Skin, youthful, much more youthful. Skin, hair, even cognition, etc. Ability to hair, even cognition, etc. Ability to hair, even cognition, etc. Ability to maintain or put on muscle, lose fat, and maintain or put on muscle, lose fat, and maintain or put on muscle, lose fat, and on and on. But on and on. But on and on. But higher IGF-1 and growth hormone higher IGF-1 and growth hormone higher IGF-1 and growth hormone broadly speaking means a shorter life. broadly speaking means a shorter life. broadly speaking means a shorter life. &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe comes at a price, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe comes at a price, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe comes at a price, yeah. Yeah. So, I guess um, I mean, that can Yeah. So, I guess um, I mean, that can Yeah. So, I guess um, I mean, that can be determined individually whether or be determined individually whether or be determined individually whether or not somebody wants to make that not somebody wants to make that not somebody wants to make that trade-off, but what I'm excited about trade-off, but what I'm excited about trade-off, but what I'm excited about are the things that are possibly in are the things that are possibly in are the things that are possibly in these uh blood transfusions these uh blood transfusions these uh blood transfusions that come from younger humans, maybe us, that come from younger humans, maybe us, that come from younger humans, maybe us, but younger humans, you said pooled, um, but younger humans, you said pooled, um, but younger humans, you said pooled, um, that are getting to cellular function in that are getting to cellular function in that are getting to cellular function in a different way. a different way. a different way. That are restoring vitality and That are restoring vitality and That are restoring vitality and longevity. And longevity. And longevity. And maybe there are a few candidates that maybe there are a few candidates that maybe there are a few candidates that you could discuss with us and what you could discuss with us and what you could discuss with us and what pathways they impinge on. I probably pathways they impinge on. I probably pathways they impinge on. I probably won't be familiar with the specific won't be familiar with the specific won't be familiar with the specific molecules, but are they impacting molecules, but are they impacting molecules, but are they impacting DNA? The the epigenome? Are they impacting The the epigenome? Are they impacting The the epigenome? Are they impacting mitochondrial function? If you would mitochondrial function? If you would mitochondrial function? If you would maybe pick your two or three favorite maybe pick your two or three favorite maybe pick your two or three favorite candidates, if you if you are can, I candidates, if you if you are can, I candidates, if you if you are can, I know some of these are still under know some of these are still under know some of these are still under study. The factors often are growth factors. The factors often are growth factors. The factors often are growth factors. Um, GDF11 is one of them that has Um, GDF11 is one of them that has Um, GDF11 is one of them that has been described, growth and been described, growth and been described, growth and differentiation factor 11. There is, you differentiation factor 11. There is, you differentiation factor 11. There is, you know, IGF-1 actually also has been know, IGF-1 actually also has been know, IGF-1 actually also has been described to be in young blood is described to be in young blood is described to be in young blood is higher. There factors that have been identified There factors that have been identified There factors that have been identified through an approach that is similar to through an approach that is similar to through an approach that is similar to transferring young versus old. So, what transferring young versus old. So, what transferring young versus old. So, what one of my trainees did, so later when he one of my trainees did, so later when he one of my trainees did, so later when he was graduate soon in my life he did was graduate soon in my life he did was graduate soon in my life he did these parabiosis experiments. these parabiosis experiments. these parabiosis experiments. And then his lab and my lab And then his lab and my lab And then his lab and my lab independently um did an experiment where we exercised um did an experiment where we exercised um did an experiment where we exercised mice young mice, we took their blood and we young mice, we took their blood and we young mice, we took their blood and we injected it in non-exercised mice and we injected it in non-exercised mice and we injected it in non-exercised mice and we could show that the beneficial effects could show that the beneficial effects could show that the beneficial effects of exercise on the brain were of exercise on the brain were of exercise on the brain were transmitted again by blood. Were you transmitted again by blood. Were you transmitted again by blood. Were you going young to young? So We went young going young to young? So We went young going young to young? So We went young to young. Saul went young to old and to young. Saul went young to old and to young. Saul went young to old and could show that he can has a stronger could show that he can has a stronger could show that he can has a stronger effect on effect on effect on these brains than just young blood. on these brains than just young blood. on these brains than just young blood. If it's exercised young blood, it's even If it's exercised young blood, it's even If it's exercised young blood, it's even better. So surprising to me because um better. So surprising to me because um better. So surprising to me because um I think of exercise as a I think of exercise as a I think of exercise as a purposeful stress purposeful stress purposeful stress that induces that induces that induces inflammatory molecules that then induce inflammatory molecules that then induce inflammatory molecules that then induce an adaptation. Are there factors that an adaptation. Are there factors that an adaptation. Are there factors that are liberated during exercise are liberated during exercise are liberated during exercise brain-derived neurotrophic factor etc. brain-derived neurotrophic factor etc. brain-derived neurotrophic factor etc. that are that are pro health and that are that are pro health and that are that are pro health and vitality that are not vitality that are not vitality that are not designed to get up an adaptation that designed to get up an adaptation that designed to get up an adaptation that are just good stuff coming out of the are just good stuff coming out of the are just good stuff coming out of the cells when we exercise? cells when we exercise? cells when we exercise? What both actually he and What both actually he and What both actually he and my lab found is that somehow this my lab found is that somehow this my lab found is that somehow this exercise seemed to trigger the release exercise seemed to trigger the release exercise seemed to trigger the release of factors from the liver that then go of factors from the liver that then go of factors from the liver that then go to the brain and make the brain function to the brain and make the brain function to the brain and make the brain function better. In our case we described the better. In our case we described the better. In our case we described the protein is called clusterin. protein is called clusterin. protein is called clusterin. It's has many different roles. It can It's has many different roles. It can It's has many different roles. It can bind to lipids. It's also called bind to lipids. It's also called bind to lipids. It's also called apolipoprotein J. It's involved in apolipoprotein J. It's involved in apolipoprotein J. It's involved in coagulation and complement pathway. Very coagulation and complement pathway. Very coagulation and complement pathway. Very complicated. We couldn't quite figure complicated. We couldn't quite figure complicated. We couldn't quite figure out how does it have these effects, but out how does it have these effects, but out how does it have these effects, but we could show that if we if we make we could show that if we if we make we could show that if we if we make recombinant synthetic recombinant synthetic recombinant synthetic clusterin and injected into mice, we clusterin and injected into mice, we clusterin and injected into mice, we could mimic some of the effects. could mimic some of the effects. could mimic some of the effects. &gt;&gt; clusterin? Yeah. It's in the complement &gt;&gt; clusterin? Yeah. It's in the complement &gt;&gt; clusterin? Yeah. It's in the complement pathway. Complement pathway. Complement pathway. Complement initially identified as part of the initially identified as part of the initially identified as part of the immune system, immune system, immune system, coats cells as a part of the eat me coats cells as a part of the eat me coats cells as a part of the eat me signal uh in the immune system or the eat me uh in the immune system or the eat me uh in the immune system or the eat me system, um but does many other things, system, um but does many other things, system, um but does many other things, too. Right, involved in synapse too. Right, involved in synapse too. Right, involved in synapse formation and remodeling, and we know formation and remodeling, and we know formation and remodeling, and we know from Beth Stevens' work and others. from Beth Stevens' work and others. from Beth Stevens' work and others. Um, wild. Wild, yeah. Wild. And then uh Um, wild. Wild, yeah. Wild. And then uh Um, wild. Wild, yeah. Wild. And then uh Saul found another factor that is called Saul found another factor that is called Saul found another factor that is called GPLDH um that again uh he can clearly GPLDH um that again uh he can clearly GPLDH um that again uh he can clearly show has an effect um but how exactly show has an effect um but how exactly show has an effect um but how exactly does that is not clear. Most recently does that is not clear. Most recently does that is not clear. Most recently does did another really creative does did another really creative does did another really creative experiment where he um did caloric experiment where he um did caloric experiment where he um did caloric restriction of mice and again that's restriction of mice and again that's restriction of mice and again that's sort of sort of sort of an accepted, you know, beneficial effect an accepted, you know, beneficial effect an accepted, you know, beneficial effect in longevity in longevity in longevity promoting potentially promoting potentially promoting potentially um and takes the plasma from mice, puts it and takes the plasma from mice, puts it and takes the plasma from mice, puts it into other mice, and again can isolate into other mice, and again can isolate into other mice, and again can isolate factors that mimic this effect. factors that mimic this effect. factors that mimic this effect. &gt;&gt; Because of intermittent fasting. &gt;&gt; Because of intermittent fasting. &gt;&gt; Because of intermittent fasting. Yeah. What this tells us is that this is Yeah. What this tells us is that this is Yeah. What this tells us is that this is physiology, right? We call this physiology, right? We call this physiology, right? We call this physiology, but organs in our body physiology, but organs in our body physiology, but organs in our body communicate with each other and communicate with each other and communicate with each other and there's an orchestration of effects that there's an orchestration of effects that there's an orchestration of effects that leads to factors that are leads to factors that are leads to factors that are released into the blood and then they go released into the blood and then they go released into the blood and then they go to different organs and have in this to different organs and have in this to different organs and have in this case beneficial effect. So, the exercise case beneficial effect. So, the exercise case beneficial effect. So, the exercise effect is not just because you think effect is not just because you think effect is not just because you think you're exercising, but there are you're exercising, but there are you're exercising, but there are actually factors released that seem to actually factors released that seem to actually factors released that seem to benefit your brain. benefit your brain. benefit your brain. So interesting. There's this idea that So interesting. There's this idea that So interesting. There's this idea that was at least to me first put forth in a book at least to me first put forth in a book at least to me first put forth in a book called Spark. Do you know John Ratey's called Spark. Do you know John Ratey's called Spark. Do you know John Ratey's book? It's some It's you know, came out book? It's some It's you know, came out book? It's some It's you know, came out some years ago. He's a physician. some years ago. He's a physician. some years ago. He's a physician. Believe it trained at Harvard Med. Believe it trained at Harvard Med. Believe it trained at Harvard Med. Um and he talked about the essential and he talked about the essential and he talked about the essential requirements for movement and brain requirements for movement and brain requirements for movement and brain plasticity. This was early days of plasticity. This was early days of plasticity. This was early days of understanding neuroplasticity, but uh he understanding neuroplasticity, but uh he understanding neuroplasticity, but uh he talked about brain derived neurotrophic talked about brain derived neurotrophic talked about brain derived neurotrophic factor other things are liberated by factor other things are liberated by factor other things are liberated by exercise, but he described some exercise, but he described some exercise, but he described some interesting experiments in there of for interesting experiments in there of for interesting experiments in there of for instance, there's a instance, there's a instance, there's a sea dwelling creature that swims around sea dwelling creature that swims around sea dwelling creature that swims around and has a fairly elaborate nervous and has a fairly elaborate nervous and has a fairly elaborate nervous system at least for it, but then at some system at least for it, but then at some system at least for it, but then at some point in its life settles down on a rock point in its life settles down on a rock point in its life settles down on a rock and eats its own nervous system and eats its own nervous system and eats its own nervous system basically. And there's been some interesting And there's been some interesting And there's been some interesting experiments looking at what happens when experiments looking at what happens when experiments looking at what happens when you get you get you get that organism or other organisms I that organism or other organisms I that organism or other organisms I believe I think it was that organism, believe I think it was that organism, believe I think it was that organism, but other organisms to continue moving. but other organisms to continue moving. but other organisms to continue moving. It seems like there's feedback from the It seems like there's feedback from the It seems like there's feedback from the process of process of process of moving the musculature and then it could moving the musculature and then it could moving the musculature and then it could be neuromuscular in origin. It could be neuromuscular in origin. It could be neuromuscular in origin. It could be hormonal in origin. I don't think we hormonal in origin. I don't think we hormonal in origin. I don't think we know that it comes from muscle, but know that it comes from muscle, but know that it comes from muscle, but there's something about the requirement there's something about the requirement there's something about the requirement for movement that signals to the brain for movement that signals to the brain for movement that signals to the brain that it needs to continue to exist that it needs to continue to exist that it needs to continue to exist and not just the motor portions of the and not just the motor portions of the and not just the motor portions of the brain and that it or the portions of the brain and that it or the portions of the brain and that it or the portions of the brain controlling motor activity, but brain controlling motor activity, but brain controlling motor activity, but that the body may supply chemical or that the body may supply chemical or that the body may supply chemical or other types of feedback to the brain other types of feedback to the brain other types of feedback to the brain that if it's moving and continues to that if it's moving and continues to that if it's moving and continues to move that the brain needs to continue move that the brain needs to continue move that the brain needs to continue to be robust, which I find very to be robust, which I find very to be robust, which I find very interesting because few things interesting because few things interesting because few things to me explain how to me explain how to me explain how movement of the body would signal movement of the body would signal movement of the body would signal vitality to the brain aside from hormone vitality to the brain aside from hormone vitality to the brain aside from hormone born factors, but it kind of makes born factors, but it kind of makes born factors, but it kind of makes sense, right? Continuing to move the sense, right? Continuing to move the sense, right? Continuing to move the body is essential for keeping the brain body is essential for keeping the brain body is essential for keeping the brain healthy. And I mean exercise interventions, you And I mean exercise interventions, you And I mean exercise interventions, you know, there's thousands of studies that know, there's thousands of studies that know, there's thousands of studies that show that exercise is beneficial show that exercise is beneficial show that exercise is beneficial cardiovascular, but also other exercise. cardiovascular, but also other exercise. cardiovascular, but also other exercise. &gt;&gt; Yeah, now it seems everyone's excited &gt;&gt; Yeah, now it seems everyone's excited &gt;&gt; Yeah, now it seems everyone's excited about resistance training. I mean, I about resistance training. I mean, I about resistance training. I mean, I think both is clearly the answer. I think both is clearly the answer. I think both is clearly the answer. I mean, you look good. What what's I mean, you look good. What what's I mean, you look good. What what's I mean, you're not in your 80s, but mean, you're not in your 80s, but mean, you're not in your 80s, but um I might be. I might be. I might be. &gt;&gt; Do you exercise? Right, right, yeah. &gt;&gt; Do you exercise? Right, right, yeah. &gt;&gt; Do you exercise? Right, right, yeah. That would be impressive. That would be impressive. That would be impressive. What what is your exercise regimen? What what is your exercise regimen? What what is your exercise regimen? People want to know. Yeah, I run. I People want to know. Yeah, I run. I People want to know. Yeah, I run. I like running outdoors. I like the sun. I like running outdoors. I like the sun. I like running outdoors. I like the sun. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Um I try to get two runs, 5 to 10k per &gt;&gt; Um I try to get two runs, 5 to 10k per &gt;&gt; Um I try to get two runs, 5 to 10k per week. Yeah. That's the main exercise I week. Yeah. That's the main exercise I week. Yeah. That's the main exercise I do. I do some Pilates in the morning. do. I do some Pilates in the morning. do. I do some Pilates in the morning. I'm struck by how quickly the body I'm struck by how quickly the body I'm struck by how quickly the body degrades after an injury, especially if degrades after an injury, especially if degrades after an injury, especially if that injury occurs after age 60. that injury occurs after age 60. that injury occurs after age 60. When we are injured as kids, we heal up. When we are injured as kids, we heal up. When we are injured as kids, we heal up. Mhm. It's amazing, right? I mean, kids Mhm. It's amazing, right? I mean, kids Mhm. It's amazing, right? I mean, kids getting cuts and they're just like, getting cuts and they're just like, getting cuts and they're just like, "What happened?" And they just like heal "What happened?" And they just like heal "What happened?" And they just like heal right up. Do we know why we heal more right up. Do we know why we heal more right up. Do we know why we heal more quickly as kids than as adults? We do quickly as kids than as adults? We do quickly as kids than as adults? We do know that the immune system ages like know that the immune system ages like know that the immune system ages like everything, and it has this bias that it everything, and it has this bias that it everything, and it has this bias that it goes from a more specific response to a goes from a more specific response to a goes from a more specific response to a non-specific response, and that is often non-specific response, and that is often non-specific response, and that is often associated with inflammation. associated with inflammation. associated with inflammation. So, it's possible that um So, it's possible that um So, it's possible that um part of it is that part of it is that part of it is that if you have a wound, there's too much of if you have a wound, there's too much of if you have a wound, there's too much of an inflammatory response and less of a an inflammatory response and less of a an inflammatory response and less of a healing response. healing response. healing response. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. But if we also saw know from But if we also saw know from But if we also saw know from aging organisms that if you have a cut, aging organisms that if you have a cut, aging organisms that if you have a cut, there is more of um there is more of um there is more of um there's proteins in the extracellular um there's proteins in the extracellular um there's proteins in the extracellular matrix like collagens and things like matrix like collagens and things like matrix like collagens and things like that are often overproduced, that are often overproduced, that are often overproduced, and they may interfere with a quick and they may interfere with a quick and they may interfere with a quick healing response. So, I think everything healing response. So, I think everything healing response. So, I think everything is a little bit out of tune, and that is a little bit out of tune, and that is a little bit out of tune, and that might be the reason uh might be the reason uh might be the reason uh but it's not really something I wouldn't but it's not really something I wouldn't but it's not really something I wouldn't know the details. I've always been know the details. I've always been know the details. I've always been fascinated by the fact that if we get a fascinated by the fact that if we get a fascinated by the fact that if we get a cut on the surface of our body um that it on the surface of our body um that it on the surface of our body um that it may or may not heal with a scar. may or may not heal with a scar. may or may not heal with a scar. But if we get a cut on the inside of our But if we get a cut on the inside of our But if we get a cut on the inside of our mouth, which is loaded with bacteria and mouth, which is loaded with bacteria and mouth, which is loaded with bacteria and warm and moist and in contact with the warm and moist and in contact with the warm and moist and in contact with the outside world all day long, it tends to outside world all day long, it tends to outside world all day long, it tends to heal with either zero or much less of a heal with either zero or much less of a heal with either zero or much less of a scar. There has to be something in the scar. There has to be something in the scar. There has to be something in the mouth that's pro healing. And I believe people that's pro healing. And I believe people that's pro healing. And I believe people are studying this, but someone's got to are studying this, but someone's got to are studying this, but someone's got to figure this out. And it could be saliva. figure this out. And it could be saliva. figure this out. And it could be saliva. Wild, right? I mean that the rate of Wild, right? I mean that the rate of Wild, right? I mean that the rate of healing, I know there's a lot of blood healing, I know there's a lot of blood healing, I know there's a lot of blood supply, but there's also a lot of blood supply but there's also a lot of blood supply but there's also a lot of blood supply to the nose and to the hands and to the nose and to the hands and to the nose and to the hands and there scars form on the hands and on the there scars form on the hands and on the there scars form on the hands and on the nose. Yes, also scarring in babies, nose. Yes, also scarring in babies, nose. Yes, also scarring in babies, right? It may not leave or a cut in a right? It may not leave or a cut in a right? It may not leave or a cut in a baby may not leave any trace, but the baby may not leave any trace, but the baby may not leave any trace, but the same type of wound in an older person same type of wound in an older person same type of wound in an older person may leave a may leave a may leave a scar for the rest of their life, yeah. a scar for the rest of their life, yeah. a scar for the rest of their life, yeah. So, how do we move past correlation into So, how do we move past correlation into So, how do we move past correlation into really understand positive stuff? So, really understand positive stuff? So, really understand positive stuff? So, we'll get back to lifestyle factors, but we'll get back to lifestyle factors, but we'll get back to lifestyle factors, but I mean, it's so very clear from the I mean, it's so very clear from the I mean, it's so very clear from the animal studies and from the human animal studies and from the human animal studies and from the human studies that you described that there's studies that you described that there's studies that you described that there's something in young blood or things in something in young blood or things in something in young blood or things in young blood that are pro rejuvenation young blood that are pro rejuvenation young blood that are pro rejuvenation for the brain and other tissues. for the brain and other tissues. for the brain and other tissues. How do we get to a real pro longevity How do we get to a real pro longevity How do we get to a real pro longevity molecule medication molecule medication molecule medication treatment? Or pro health, maybe more, treatment? Or pro health, maybe more, treatment? Or pro health, maybe more, right? I think most people in the field right? I think most people in the field right? I think most people in the field are not really interested in extending are not really interested in extending are not really interested in extending lifespan, which would be longevity, but health which would be longevity, but health which would be longevity, but health span. So, span. So, span. So, and we talked about this before, right? and we talked about this before, right? and we talked about this before, right? That you try to maintain That you try to maintain That you try to maintain the function of your organs until you the function of your organs until you the function of your organs until you die. So, that your brain would still be die. So, that your brain would still be die. So, that your brain would still be functioning, you're cognitively intact, functioning, you're cognitively intact, functioning, you're cognitively intact, all your organs would still be all your organs would still be all your organs would still be functioning relatively well, and then, functioning relatively well, and then, functioning relatively well, and then, you know, you know, you know, you fall asleep and that's the end you fall asleep and that's the end you fall asleep and that's the end of your life, um of your life, um of your life, um and not necessarily extending lifespan, and not necessarily extending lifespan, and not necessarily extending lifespan, as you said, it could be that we extend as you said, it could be that we extend as you said, it could be that we extend lifespan and you just have 10 more lifespan and you just have 10 more lifespan and you just have 10 more miserable years. miserable years. miserable years. That certainly nobody would want that, That certainly nobody would want that, That certainly nobody would want that, right? But I think to get to causation, we need But I think to get to causation, we need But I think to get to causation, we need these types of experiments, these types of experiments, these types of experiments, physiological experiments in animal physiological experiments in animal physiological experiments in animal models first to isolate individual models first to isolate individual models first to isolate individual factors and then test them on an factors and then test them on an factors and then test them on an individual basis with very rigorous individual basis with very rigorous individual basis with very rigorous methods which we can do and say okay, methods which we can do and say okay, methods which we can do and say okay, this factor this factor this factor has the capacity to has the capacity to has the capacity to maintain, for example, brain function in maintain, for example, brain function in maintain, for example, brain function in the mouse and then we have to test it in the mouse and then we have to test it in the mouse and then we have to test it in humans and do it in a in a careful clinically and do it in a in a careful clinically and do it in a in a careful clinically controlled trial where people are controlled trial where people are controlled trial where people are blinded whether they got the treatment blinded whether they got the treatment blinded whether they got the treatment or not or not or not and do a big enough study that we can and do a big enough study that we can and do a big enough study that we can say okay, this truly works and then we say okay, this truly works and then we say okay, this truly works and then we have a drug. How close are we to have a drug. How close are we to have a drug. How close are we to the clinical trial? There are the clinical trial? There are the clinical trial? There are different molecules. Klotho is actually different molecules. Klotho is actually different molecules. Klotho is actually another one. It's this another one. It's this another one. It's this protein that has been described protein that has been described protein that has been described to have beneficial effects on multiple to have beneficial effects on multiple to have beneficial effects on multiple different organs. The biology again not different organs. The biology again not different organs. The biology again not exactly clear but exactly clear but exactly clear but &gt;&gt; O T H O, Klotho. &gt;&gt; O T H O, Klotho. &gt;&gt; O T H O, Klotho. &gt;&gt; That's right, yeah. Yeah. &gt;&gt; That's right, yeah. Yeah. &gt;&gt; That's right, yeah. Yeah. Um and you know, there's companies you know, there's companies you know, there's companies trying to move this into humans, into trying to move this into humans, into trying to move this into humans, into human trials. human trials. human trials. Um some of these other factors, I think some of these other factors, I think some of these other factors, I think they're their companies are trying or they're their companies are trying or they're their companies are trying or inhibiting detrimental factors inhibiting detrimental factors inhibiting detrimental factors and with with, you know, individual and with with, you know, individual and with with, you know, individual clinical trials you could get there. clinical trials you could get there. clinical trials you could get there. Um in the next 5, 10 years there may be Um in the next 5, 10 years there may be Um in the next 5, 10 years there may be something that has an effect. I think we something that has an effect. I think we something that has an effect. I think we will not have a factor, [snorts] will not have a factor, [snorts] will not have a factor, [snorts] an individual factor that just has, you an individual factor that just has, you an individual factor that just has, you know, this miracle effect on everything. know, this miracle effect on everything. know, this miracle effect on everything. This is very clear from the studies of This is very clear from the studies of This is very clear from the studies of young blood. It's many different factors young blood. It's many different factors young blood. It's many different factors and they target different pathways, and they target different pathways, and they target different pathways, different cell types in different cell types in different cell types in different tissues. So you really need to you may tissues. So you really need to you may tissues. So you really need to you may have to decide have to decide have to decide you know, for this organ we need this you know, for this organ we need this you know, for this organ we need this treatment for this organ we need that treatment for this organ we need that treatment for this organ we need that treatment to optimize its function and treatment to optimize its function and treatment to optimize its function and keep it you know, running at full keep it you know, running at full keep it you know, running at full capacity until you're 100 years old. I'm capacity until you're 100 years old. I'm capacity until you're 100 years old. I'm not suggesting anyone do this, but I not suggesting anyone do this, but I not suggesting anyone do this, but I do seem to hear now and again that do seem to hear now and again that do seem to hear now and again that people are taking clotho already. people are taking clotho already. people are taking clotho already. Um not surprising people will you know, Um not surprising people will you know, Um not surprising people will you know, get ahead of the curve so to speak. get ahead of the curve so to speak. get ahead of the curve so to speak. Yeah, also read people taking this GDF Yeah, also read people taking this GDF Yeah, also read people taking this GDF 11 and um I don't know where to get it. 11 and um I don't know where to get it. 11 and um I don't know where to get it. I'm guessing it's just I'm guessing it's just I'm guessing it's just Mexico and um Mexico and um Mexico and um Central and South America. There's there Central and South America. There's there Central and South America. There's there a lot of clinics that do this sort of a lot of clinics that do this sort of a lot of clinics that do this sort of thing. I will put out a true story thing. I will put out a true story thing. I will put out a true story um cautionary note a friend um cautionary note a friend um cautionary note a friend who when people whenever people say I who when people whenever people say I who when people whenever people say I have a friend and so you know, but this have a friend and so you know, but this have a friend and so you know, but this is a medical doctor um who is a medical doctor um who is a medical doctor um who had a back pain that was uh had a back pain that was uh had a back pain that was uh giving him a lot of issues and he went giving him a lot of issues and he went giving him a lot of issues and he went to a stem cell clinic in Mexico, got an to a stem cell clinic in Mexico, got an to a stem cell clinic in Mexico, got an injection of stem cells into a spinal injection of stem cells into a spinal injection of stem cells into a spinal disc which my neurosurgeon friends tell disc which my neurosurgeon friends tell disc which my neurosurgeon friends tell me is a terrible idea. It turns out the me is a terrible idea. It turns out the me is a terrible idea. It turns out the disc cannot accept cellular injections. disc cannot accept cellular injections. disc cannot accept cellular injections. A neurosurgeon a chair of neurosurgery A neurosurgeon a chair of neurosurgery A neurosurgeon a chair of neurosurgery told me that. So told me that. So told me that. So you can come at me if you want folks, you can come at me if you want folks, you can come at me if you want folks, but he's the chair of neurosurgery but he's the chair of neurosurgery but he's the chair of neurosurgery at a prominent medical school and so at a prominent medical school and so at a prominent medical school and so that the disc cannot accept uh direct that the disc cannot accept uh direct that the disc cannot accept uh direct injections of foreign cells. injections of foreign cells. injections of foreign cells. Uh anyway, this guy went a different guy Uh anyway, this guy went a different guy Uh anyway, this guy went a different guy different MD went and got this injection different MD went and got this injection different MD went and got this injection and ended up with a um and ended up with a um and ended up with a um an egg-sized infection that left him an egg-sized infection that left him an egg-sized infection that left him paralyzed. He was fortunate enough to be uh He was fortunate enough to be uh He was fortunate enough to be uh airlifted to a certain clinic and in the United to a certain clinic and in the United to a certain clinic and in the United States and told he was that's it. You're States and told he was that's it. You're States and told he was that's it. You're done. We're going to have to just sever done. We're going to have to just sever done. We're going to have to just sever your spinal cord. your spinal cord. your spinal cord. Uh he was uh taken to another clinic Uh he was uh taken to another clinic Uh he was uh taken to another clinic where fortunately they were able to where fortunately they were able to where fortunately they were able to excise this um excise this um excise this um this infection and he's mobile today. He this infection and he's mobile today. He this infection and he's mobile today. He will tell you and I'll tell you that you will tell you and I'll tell you that you will tell you and I'll tell you that you have to be very, very careful getting have to be very, very careful getting have to be very, very careful getting injections of cells in anywhere, but the injections of cells in anywhere, but the injections of cells in anywhere, but the regulations out of country often are regulations out of country often are regulations out of country often are not as stringent. not as stringent. not as stringent. And I tell that story because a number And I tell that story because a number And I tell that story because a number of people are excited about stem cells, of people are excited about stem cells, of people are excited about stem cells, they're excited about they're excited about they're excited about these technologies, but it really can these technologies, but it really can these technologies, but it really can be quite dangerous. be quite dangerous. be quite dangerous. &gt;&gt; And again, this, you know, is what we &gt;&gt; And again, this, you know, is what we &gt;&gt; And again, this, you know, is what we discussed earlier, that this discussed earlier, that this discussed earlier, that this you know, experience that we have in the you know, experience that we have in the you know, experience that we have in the medical field that you really need to medical field that you really need to medical field that you really need to test something in people test something in people test something in people in a very controlled fashion, very in a very controlled fashion, very in a very controlled fashion, very carefully with the dose and then carefully with the dose and then carefully with the dose and then test it in a blinded fashion, ideally, test it in a blinded fashion, ideally, test it in a blinded fashion, ideally, so that you know it really works and so that you know it really works and so that you know it really works and it's safe. it's safe. it's safe. And what you mentioned earlier with stem And what you mentioned earlier with stem And what you mentioned earlier with stem cells, there are no such treatments that cells, there are no such treatments that cells, there are no such treatments that have been tested rigorously. have been tested rigorously. have been tested rigorously. And for many of these other factors, And for many of these other factors, And for many of these other factors, they work in some animal models, there they work in some animal models, there they work in some animal models, there are some mouse studies that showed they are some mouse studies that showed they are some mouse studies that showed they might have an effect, but you cannot might have an effect, but you cannot might have an effect, but you cannot translate that to humans. It's just a translate that to humans. It's just a translate that to humans. It's just a long road. long road. long road. And I would be extremely cautious to And I would be extremely cautious to And I would be extremely cautious to take anything that is not really take anything that is not really take anything that is not really prescribed to you from a prescribed to you from a prescribed to you from a from a clinician that you trust. Thank from a clinician that you trust. Thank from a clinician that you trust. Thank you. By way of contrast, you. By way of contrast, you. By way of contrast, platelet rich plasma, PRP, is approved platelet rich plasma, PRP, is approved platelet rich plasma, PRP, is approved by the FDA. People who are undergoing by the FDA. People who are undergoing by the FDA. People who are undergoing fertility treatments will get injected fertility treatments will get injected fertility treatments will get injected into their ovary. People are getting PRP into their ovary. People are getting PRP into their ovary. People are getting PRP injected into their shoulders, their injected into their shoulders, their injected into their shoulders, their knees, their whatever. I'm not trying to knees, their whatever. I'm not trying to knees, their whatever. I'm not trying to be disparaging of this. It is FDA be disparaging of this. It is FDA be disparaging of this. It is FDA approved. To my knowledge, platelet rich approved. To my knowledge, platelet rich approved. To my knowledge, platelet rich plasma does not contain stem cells. plasma does not contain stem cells. plasma does not contain stem cells. That's correct. But it seems to be That's correct. But it seems to be That's correct. But it seems to be beneficial enough and safe enough that beneficial enough and safe enough that beneficial enough and safe enough that the FDA has approved it. What is the FDA has approved it. What is the FDA has approved it. What is the deal with platelet rich plasma? What the deal with platelet rich plasma? What the deal with platelet rich plasma? What has it been shown to be actually useful has it been shown to be actually useful has it been shown to be actually useful for? Because just because something is for? Because just because something is for? Because just because something is allowed for one indication and is used allowed for one indication and is used allowed for one indication and is used broadly for a bunch of things, doesn't broadly for a bunch of things, doesn't broadly for a bunch of things, doesn't mean that there's evidence that it works mean that there's evidence that it works mean that there's evidence that it works for all those things. That's right. for all those things. That's right. for all those things. That's right. That's right. That's right. That's right. So, platelet-rich plasma has these So, platelet-rich plasma has these So, platelet-rich plasma has these platelets in there that are full of platelets in there that are full of platelets in there that are full of growth factors. They have these granules growth factors. They have these granules growth factors. They have these granules that help in wound healing. It's a that help in wound healing. It's a that help in wound healing. It's a primary function. And um somehow that primary function. And um somehow that primary function. And um somehow that seems to be beneficial in sports seems to be beneficial in sports seems to be beneficial in sports injuries. It's often given. And as far injuries. It's often given. And as far injuries. It's often given. And as far as I know, I think it's from your own as I know, I think it's from your own as I know, I think it's from your own blood. You concentrate these blood. You concentrate these blood. You concentrate these plat- platelets and then they release plat- platelets and then they release plat- platelets and then they release these factors. So, you may have a these factors. So, you may have a these factors. So, you may have a massive load of growth factors that help massive load of growth factors that help massive load of growth factors that help you heal these various tissues that you heal these various tissues that you heal these various tissues that you mentioned, yeah. Yeah, I haven't tried mentioned, yeah. Yeah, I haven't tried mentioned, yeah. Yeah, I haven't tried it, but I know people who have and it, but I know people who have and it, but I know people who have and reported some positive effect. I've reported some positive effect. I've reported some positive effect. I've heard also a lot about exosomes. heard also a lot about exosomes. heard also a lot about exosomes. And there [snorts] are some clinics, I And there [snorts] are some clinics, I And there [snorts] are some clinics, I believe, where believe, where believe, where I think exosomes are FDA-approved as a I think exosomes are FDA-approved as a I think exosomes are FDA-approved as a treatment. What are exosomes and what treatment. What are exosomes and what treatment. What are exosomes and what have they been shown to be useful what have they been shown to be useful what have they been shown to be useful for in studies and or clinical? for in studies and or clinical? for in studies and or clinical? I don't know in clinical studies how I don't know in clinical studies how I don't know in clinical studies how they're used, but um so, they're used, but um so, they're used, but um so, cells can release sort of little cells can release sort of little cells can release sort of little packages of material that is filled with packages of material that is filled with packages of material that is filled with proteins, but there's also RNA molecules proteins, but there's also RNA molecules proteins, but there's also RNA molecules in there, lipids, metabolites. in there, lipids, metabolites. in there, lipids, metabolites. And some cells do this all the time. And some cells do this all the time. And some cells do this all the time. Cancer cells, for example, do it, but Cancer cells, for example, do it, but Cancer cells, for example, do it, but also some immune cells have very active also some immune cells have very active also some immune cells have very active release of these little release of these little release of these little um sort of like little packages, um sort of like little packages, um sort of like little packages, vesicles we call them, that are filled vesicles we call them, that are filled vesicles we call them, that are filled with um again all these different with um again all these different with um again all these different molecules. In the blood, [snorts] you molecules. In the blood, [snorts] you molecules. In the blood, [snorts] you find large numbers of these exosomes, find large numbers of these exosomes, find large numbers of these exosomes, and that's where they're usually and that's where they're usually and that's where they're usually purified from. purified from. purified from. Different cells have different cargo in Different cells have different cargo in Different cells have different cargo in these in these vesicles. And it seems these in these vesicles. And it seems these in these vesicles. And it seems that they function to some extent to that they function to some extent to that they function to some extent to deliver information from one cell to deliver information from one cell to deliver information from one cell to another. It's still a very new field, another. It's still a very new field, another. It's still a very new field, but people explore, you know, whether but people explore, you know, whether but people explore, you know, whether they can be used for treatment they can be used for treatment they can be used for treatment purposes, but also for diagnostic purposes, but also for diagnostic purposes, but also for diagnostic purposes. Do they tell you something purposes. Do they tell you something purposes. Do they tell you something about a specific organ or a tumor that about a specific organ or a tumor that about a specific organ or a tumor that is developing? So, when we measure these is developing? So, when we measure these is developing? So, when we measure these proteins that have been talked about proteins that have been talked about proteins that have been talked about earlier in the blood, earlier in the blood, earlier in the blood, um we actually measure what's in the um we actually measure what's in the um we actually measure what's in the exosomes also. So, these exosomes, they exosomes also. So, these exosomes, they exosomes also. So, these exosomes, they float basically like immune cells, they float basically like immune cells, they float basically like immune cells, they float in the blood. And uh we open them float in the blood. And uh we open them float in the blood. And uh we open them up and we measure what's inside. up and we measure what's inside. up and we measure what's inside. We should probably talk about some of We should probably talk about some of We should probably talk about some of the things that the things that the things that damage vitality and longevity. damage vitality and longevity. damage vitality and longevity. Accident and injury aside, Accident and injury aside, Accident and injury aside, we know that smoking, we know that smoking, we know that smoking, especially nicotine, especially nicotine, especially nicotine, um damages DNA, um damages DNA, um damages DNA, uh increases inflammation, and will uh increases inflammation, and will uh increases inflammation, and will shorten your life. I don't think there's shorten your life. I don't think there's shorten your life. I don't think there's any debate about that, right? any debate about that, right? any debate about that, right? &gt;&gt; But what about some of the other things &gt;&gt; But what about some of the other things &gt;&gt; But what about some of the other things that might produce low-level DNA damage? that might produce low-level DNA damage? that might produce low-level DNA damage? In particular, these days I'm really In particular, these days I'm really In particular, these days I'm really interested in EMFs. interested in EMFs. interested in EMFs. Uh I don't actually believe that the low Uh I don't actually believe that the low Uh I don't actually believe that the low levels of EMFs that are present in most levels of EMFs that are present in most levels of EMFs that are present in most technologies are damaging in the acute technologies are damaging in the acute technologies are damaging in the acute uh way that, you know, being near them uh way that, you know, being near them uh way that, you know, being near them is going to harm you, but is going to harm you, but is going to harm you, but there is the idea that things can be there is the idea that things can be there is the idea that things can be cumulative, right? I mean, I get one cumulative, right? I mean, I get one cumulative, right? I mean, I get one x-ray every few years when I go to the x-ray every few years when I go to the x-ray every few years when I go to the dentist, but there's a reason the clinic dentist, but there's a reason the clinic dentist, but there's a reason the clinic the technician runs behind the technician runs behind the technician runs behind the wall. Uh he or she doesn't want to be wall. Uh he or she doesn't want to be wall. Uh he or she doesn't want to be exposed to that on a daily basis. exposed to that on a daily basis. exposed to that on a daily basis. So, how do we feel about things that at So, how do we feel about things that at So, how do we feel about things that at a low dose don't damage DNA a low dose don't damage DNA a low dose don't damage DNA um or mutate proteins either, but that if or mutate proteins either, but that if or mutate proteins either, but that if we are exposed to them over a lot of we are exposed to them over a lot of we are exposed to them over a lot of time could very well do that. Um what time could very well do that. Um what time could very well do that. Um what are your thoughts on this? A very are your thoughts on this? A very are your thoughts on this? A very difficult question. I mean, you could difficult question. I mean, you could difficult question. I mean, you could ask the same question about ask the same question about ask the same question about any chemical that we invent and we put any chemical that we invent and we put any chemical that we invent and we put into food or we get exposed to, right? into food or we get exposed to, right? into food or we get exposed to, right? The you know, the plastic we you know, The you know, the plastic we you know, The you know, the plastic we you know, we drink out of cups, hot stuff out of a we drink out of cups, hot stuff out of a we drink out of cups, hot stuff out of a cup that is coated with plastic and, you cup that is coated with plastic and, you cup that is coated with plastic and, you know, we're full of plastic. How is that going we're full of plastic. How is that going we're full of plastic. How is that going to change our lifespan? to change our lifespan? to change our lifespan? It hasn't in a in a It hasn't in a in a It hasn't in a in a measurable way so far, right? But we measurable way so far, right? But we measurable way so far, right? But we don't know what's going to happen in 20, don't know what's going to happen in 20, don't know what's going to happen in 20, 30 years or if people, 30 years or if people, 30 years or if people, you know, synthesize a compound that is you know, synthesize a compound that is you know, synthesize a compound that is detrimental. It doesn't look detrimental. It doesn't look detrimental. It doesn't look detrimental. It has been tested and is detrimental. It has been tested and is detrimental. It has been tested and is safe, but as I said, if it accumulates, safe, but as I said, if it accumulates, safe, but as I said, if it accumulates, maybe, or in combination with other maybe, or in combination with other maybe, or in combination with other stuff, it may be detrimental. I think stuff, it may be detrimental. I think stuff, it may be detrimental. I think about this from time to time and I about this from time to time and I about this from time to time and I wonder about what's in my environment wonder about what's in my environment wonder about what's in my environment that I can easily control. I try not to that I can easily control. I try not to that I can easily control. I try not to drink out of plastic. Um drink out of plastic. Um drink out of plastic. Um Uh you know, I try and drink out of cans Uh you know, I try and drink out of cans Uh you know, I try and drink out of cans that don't have BPAs and things like that don't have BPAs and things like that don't have BPAs and things like that if I can. Yeah, if you if you go that if I can. Yeah, if you if you go that if I can. Yeah, if you if you go down that route, you know, it drives you down that route, you know, it drives you down that route, you know, it drives you crazy and you could, you know, sort of crazy and you could, you know, sort of crazy and you could, you know, sort of not do anything anymore or not eat not do anything anymore or not eat not do anything anymore or not eat anything. Well, it's getting harder anything. Well, it's getting harder anything. Well, it's getting harder nowadays to live a clean life. I nowadays to live a clean life. I nowadays to live a clean life. I mean, how long were you in Switzerland mean, how long were you in Switzerland mean, how long were you in Switzerland before you came to the States? I was 26. before you came to the States? I was 26. before you came to the States? I was 26. Yeah. You were weaned in a very clean Yeah. You were weaned in a very clean Yeah. You were weaned in a very clean environment. Very, you know, uh that's not just a Very, you know, uh that's not just a Very, you know, uh that's not just a uh stereotype about the Swiss uh stereotype about the Swiss uh stereotype about the Swiss being and things are yes, very tidy and being and things are yes, very tidy and being and things are yes, very tidy and clean. The streets are remarkably clean. The streets are remarkably clean. The streets are remarkably clean. You could drink out of the lake in You could drink out of the lake in You could drink out of the lake in Zurich, right? Maybe not the lake, but Zurich, right? Maybe not the lake, but Zurich, right? Maybe not the lake, but you know, most There are still you know, most There are still you know, most There are still fountains with ground water where you fountains with ground water where you fountains with ground water where you can drink in any village, but Yeah. can drink in any village, but Yeah. can drink in any village, but Yeah. Yeah, if you're lucky enough to grow up Yeah, if you're lucky enough to grow up Yeah, if you're lucky enough to grow up in a place where the tap water is clean, in a place where the tap water is clean, in a place where the tap water is clean, Mhm. the food tends to be pretty devoid Mhm. the food tends to be pretty devoid Mhm. the food tends to be pretty devoid of dyes and preservatives. dyes and preservatives. dyes and preservatives. And your home is centered around eating And your home is centered around eating And your home is centered around eating mostly whole foods. mostly whole foods. mostly whole foods. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Foods that you cook, yeah, fresh &gt;&gt; Mhm. Foods that you cook, yeah, fresh &gt;&gt; Mhm. Foods that you cook, yeah, fresh fruits and vegetables that are freshly fruits and vegetables that are freshly fruits and vegetables that are freshly prepared, right? Even desserts that are prepared, right? Even desserts that are prepared, right? Even desserts that are fresh that are prepared, right? As fresh that are prepared, right? As fresh that are prepared, right? As opposed to a lot of packaged foods. It opposed to a lot of packaged foods. It opposed to a lot of packaged foods. It seems that that's a far and away seems that that's a far and away seems that that's a far and away different experience than most certainly different experience than most certainly different experience than most certainly Americans would get nowadays. Right. And Americans would get nowadays. Right. And Americans would get nowadays. Right. And you wonder what the effect of that is you wonder what the effect of that is you wonder what the effect of that is going to be. We simply don't know. Yeah, going to be. We simply don't know. Yeah, going to be. We simply don't know. Yeah, we don't know. And I know now there's a we don't know. And I know now there's a we don't know. And I know now there's a big, you know, kind of attack on food big, you know, kind of attack on food big, you know, kind of attack on food dyes as the thing. And there no there's dyes as the thing. And there no there's dyes as the thing. And there no there's no smoking gun data on any of those. But no smoking gun data on any of those. But no smoking gun data on any of those. But yeah, I think the cumulative effects of yeah, I think the cumulative effects of yeah, I think the cumulative effects of things are worth considering, I things are worth considering, I things are worth considering, I think, for most people. think, for most people. think, for most people. &gt;&gt; not to think too much about it, but I &gt;&gt; not to think too much about it, but I &gt;&gt; not to think too much about it, but I also I mean, growing up in an environment I mean, growing up in an environment I mean, growing up in an environment where, you know, we had a big vegetable where, you know, we had a big vegetable where, you know, we had a big vegetable garden, I have a vegetable garden, you garden, I have a vegetable garden, you garden, I have a vegetable garden, you know, I have lots of fruit trees, and know, I have lots of fruit trees, and know, I have lots of fruit trees, and try to get, you know, stuff out of my try to get, you know, stuff out of my try to get, you know, stuff out of my own garden. That's a luxury, of course, own garden. That's a luxury, of course, own garden. That's a luxury, of course, for a lot of people. for a lot of people. for a lot of people. Um but, as you said, you can, you know, Um but, as you said, you can, you know, Um but, as you said, you can, you know, you can also buy uh fresh fruit. It's you can also buy uh fresh fruit. It's you can also buy uh fresh fruit. It's more work, right? It's more work than more work, right? It's more work than more work, right? It's more work than just buying a ready-made food, but you just buying a ready-made food, but you just buying a ready-made food, but you know what you're cooking and what's in know what you're cooking and what's in know what you're cooking and what's in there. I'm fascinated these days by the um the I'm fascinated these days by the um the I'm fascinated these days by the um the data on organic versus non-organic data on organic versus non-organic data on organic versus non-organic fruits and vegetables. I spend the extra fruits and vegetables. I spend the extra fruits and vegetables. I spend the extra money on organic, but the more I look money on organic, but the more I look money on organic, but the more I look into it, the more you find that into it, the more you find that into it, the more you find that the differences aren't that great. Now, the differences aren't that great. Now, the differences aren't that great. Now, taste can be different, and ideally taste can be different, and ideally taste can be different, and ideally you're sourcing from local farms, but I you're sourcing from local farms, but I you're sourcing from local farms, but I have a friend um actually I'll just he have a friend um actually I'll just he have a friend um actually I'll just he will he'll be okay with me saying this. will he'll be okay with me saying this. will he'll be okay with me saying this. We had uh he's a physician, Dr. Teo We had uh he's a physician, Dr. Teo We had uh he's a physician, Dr. Teo Soleimani. He's a Soleimani. He's a Soleimani. He's a uh derm oncologist um whose son ran an uh derm oncologist um whose son ran an uh derm oncologist um whose son ran an experiment for his uh school project uh experiment for his uh school project uh experiment for his uh school project uh looking at uh the differences between looking at uh the differences between looking at uh the differences between organic and non-organic fruits and organic and non-organic fruits and organic and non-organic fruits and vegetables in terms of what contaminants vegetables in terms of what contaminants vegetables in terms of what contaminants and things uh and things uh and things uh are on them, pesticides, et cetera, and are on them, pesticides, et cetera, and are on them, pesticides, et cetera, and found, this is one kid's study, but um found, this is one kid's study, but um found, this is one kid's study, but um uh n- essentially no significant n- essentially no significant n- essentially no significant differences in that particular set uh differences in that particular set uh differences in that particular set uh set of batches of fruits and vegetables. set of batches of fruits and vegetables. set of batches of fruits and vegetables. And so, that is I would say reassuring And so, that is I would say reassuring And so, that is I would say reassuring on the one hand, because it means that on the one hand, because it means that on the one hand, because it means that people who can't afford organic will um people who can't afford organic will um people who can't afford organic will um probably be doing about as well as probably be doing about as well as probably be doing about as well as people who can, but I think if you can people who can, but I think if you can people who can, but I think if you can grow your own or access from local grow your own or access from local grow your own or access from local farms, I mean surely it's cleaner. I farms, I mean surely it's cleaner. I farms, I mean surely it's cleaner. I mean the highest rates of endocrine mean the highest rates of endocrine mean the highest rates of endocrine disruptors are found in rural areas. I disruptors are found in rural areas. I disruptors are found in rural areas. I always thought that being in a big city always thought that being in a big city always thought that being in a big city was the most dangerous for your lungs was the most dangerous for your lungs was the most dangerous for your lungs and endocrine health and we had shot and endocrine health and we had shot and endocrine health and we had shot Shauna Swan on the podcast, serious Shauna Swan on the podcast, serious Shauna Swan on the podcast, serious researcher in this area and she said no, researcher in this area and she said no, researcher in this area and she said no, I mean if you live in an area where I mean if you live in an area where I mean if you live in an area where they're spraying crops, spraying crops, spraying crops, cancer risk, endocrine disruption. It's cancer risk, endocrine disruption. It's cancer risk, endocrine disruption. It's very serious. very serious. very serious. &gt;&gt; Association with Parkinson's disease in &gt;&gt; Association with Parkinson's disease in &gt;&gt; Association with Parkinson's disease in the brain, yeah. Right. the brain, yeah. Right. the brain, yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PFASs or harmful plastics and tests for PFASs or harmful plastics and tests for PFASs or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC, supplementing with NAC, supplementing with NAC, N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. I should say by taking a detoxification. I should say by taking a detoxification. I should say by taking a second Function test, that approach second Function test, that approach second Function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is worked. Comprehensive blood testing is worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so many vitally important. There's so many vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and things related to your mental and things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. Well, as long as we're talking about Well, as long as we're talking about Well, as long as we're talking about food, we should talk about not eating. food, we should talk about not eating. food, we should talk about not eating. We should talk about fasting. We should talk about fasting. We should talk about fasting. So many studies now showing in worms, in So many studies now showing in worms, in So many studies now showing in worms, in mice, in monkeys, and perhaps even in mice, in monkeys, and perhaps even in mice, in monkeys, and perhaps even in humans that subcaloric intake or humans that subcaloric intake or humans that subcaloric intake or intermi- uh for long periods of time, or intermi- uh for long periods of time, or intermi- uh for long periods of time, or perhaps intermittent fasting, we can perhaps intermittent fasting, we can perhaps intermittent fasting, we can talk about how we define that, um can talk about how we define that, um can talk about how we define that, um can extend life. How is that thought to extend life. How is that thought to extend life. How is that thought to work? Is it the reduction in this mTOR, work? Is it the reduction in this mTOR, work? Is it the reduction in this mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin? Is it um mammalian target of rapamycin? Is it um mammalian target of rapamycin? Is it um reduction inflammation? Is it clearing reduction inflammation? Is it clearing reduction inflammation? Is it clearing of senescent cells? of senescent cells? of senescent cells? You know, give us the overview and You know, give us the overview and You know, give us the overview and any specifics about intermittent and any specifics about intermittent and any specifics about intermittent fasting and perhaps start by saying fasting and perhaps start by saying fasting and perhaps start by saying how you define intermittent fasting. Is how you define intermittent fasting. Is how you define intermittent fasting. Is it daily or is it 2 3 days? I think to it daily or is it 2 3 days? I think to it daily or is it 2 3 days? I think to stand to that, there is no to stand to that, there is no to stand to that, there is no definition. Okay. There is no definition. Okay. There is no definition. Okay. There is no definition, and the whole field is also definition, and the whole field is also definition, and the whole field is also a mess. Um a mess. Um a mess. Um you know, it's again you know, it's again you know, it's again taking studies in mice, for example, taking studies in mice, for example, taking studies in mice, for example, um and then translating them to humans, um and then translating them to humans, um and then translating them to humans, you know, that the lifespan, the you know, that the lifespan, the you know, that the lifespan, the their whole rhythm, um their whole rhythm, um their whole rhythm, um their environment is so different from their environment is so different from their environment is so different from our environment, right? That to our environment, right? That to our environment, right? That to translate these translate these translate these um is always a stretch, and there's no is always a stretch, and there's no is always a stretch, and there's no clinical studies that show a clear clinical studies that show a clear clinical studies that show a clear benefit of fasting in humans. And benefit of fasting in humans. And benefit of fasting in humans. And some studies in monkeys actually suggest some studies in monkeys actually suggest some studies in monkeys actually suggest that it's detrimental um for monkeys to that it's detrimental um for monkeys to that it's detrimental um for monkeys to fast, for example. They had more um fast, for example. They had more um fast, for example. They had more um uh I think uh I think uh I think worse kidney function and things like worse kidney function and things like worse kidney function and things like that. Um, so overall in from animal studies, it's very clear in from animal studies, it's very clear in from animal studies, it's very clear that you activate sort of beneficial that you activate sort of beneficial that you activate sort of beneficial pathways. They're very diverse. Um, again, we can They're very diverse. Um, again, we can They're very diverse. Um, again, we can now use unbiased um, assessment of many now use unbiased um, assessment of many now use unbiased um, assessment of many different cell types in an organism at different cell types in an organism at different cell types in an organism at you know, gene expression across you know, gene expression across you know, gene expression across thousands of genes and we see that thousands of genes and we see that thousands of genes and we see that different cells respond in different cells respond in different cells respond in different ways and you get functional ways and you get functional ways and you get functional improvements. But they're very broad. They're in part But they're very broad. They're in part But they're very broad. They're in part reduced inflammation reduced inflammation reduced inflammation and other cells, um, you get benefits on and other cells, um, you get benefits on and other cells, um, you get benefits on their energy metabolism, protein their energy metabolism, protein their energy metabolism, protein turnover, how they handle sort of what turnover, how they handle sort of what turnover, how they handle sort of what we call the garbage that accumulates in we call the garbage that accumulates in we call the garbage that accumulates in cells. Um, overall from these animal studies, overall from these animal studies, overall from these animal studies, clearly benefits from reducing calorie clearly benefits from reducing calorie clearly benefits from reducing calorie intake. Uh, also less what we call intake. Uh, also less what we call intake. Uh, also less what we call oxidative damage. So, it's like you oxidative damage. So, it's like you oxidative damage. So, it's like you burn a fire, right? And if that fire burn a fire, right? And if that fire burn a fire, right? And if that fire is really intense, you may cause more is really intense, you may cause more is really intense, you may cause more damage. But how you translate this really to But how you translate this really to But how you translate this really to tangible benefits in humans, I'm not tangible benefits in humans, I'm not tangible benefits in humans, I'm not sure. Do you practice intermittent sure. Do you practice intermittent sure. Do you practice intermittent fasting? Rarely. You like breakfast? fasting? Rarely. You like breakfast? fasting? Rarely. You like breakfast? &gt;&gt; I tried um, &gt;&gt; I tried um, &gt;&gt; I tried um, you know, Longo's uh, diet uh, a few you know, Longo's uh, diet uh, a few you know, Longo's uh, diet uh, a few times where I reduce you times where I reduce you times where I reduce you reduce calorie Walter Longo diet. reduce calorie Walter Longo diet. reduce calorie Walter Longo diet. &gt;&gt; with him. What's what's the contour &gt;&gt; with him. What's what's the contour &gt;&gt; with him. What's what's the contour of the diet? So, it's mostly you switch of the diet? So, it's mostly you switch of the diet? So, it's mostly you switch to a ketogenic diet, so a fat rich diet. to a ketogenic diet, so a fat rich diet. to a ketogenic diet, so a fat rich diet. So, your metabolism changes basically So, your metabolism changes basically So, your metabolism changes basically from a regular sort of glucose driven from a regular sort of glucose driven from a regular sort of glucose driven diet to diet to diet to burning fat. Um, burning fat. Um, burning fat. Um, and you feel that when you start to and you feel that when you start to and you feel that when you start to starve that somehow it's almost like starve that somehow it's almost like starve that somehow it's almost like your body changes a little bit and your body changes a little bit and your body changes a little bit and um, you get a bit more alert almost. um, you get a bit more alert almost. um, you get a bit more alert almost. And in a way that makes sense, right? If And in a way that makes sense, right? If And in a way that makes sense, right? If you think you're out there in a wild in you think you're out there in a wild in you think you're out there in a wild in the wild, whether you're an animal or a the wild, whether you're an animal or a the wild, whether you're an animal or a human being, human being, human being, if you don't have enough food, the last if you don't have enough food, the last if you don't have enough food, the last thing you want is that your brain thing you want is that your brain thing you want is that your brain doesn't work well. doesn't work well. doesn't work well. &gt;&gt; Right. I imagine the catecholamines, &gt;&gt; Right. I imagine the catecholamines, &gt;&gt; Right. I imagine the catecholamines, dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine increase. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you get more alert, &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you get more alert, &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you get more alert, right? &gt;&gt; hangry. &gt;&gt; hangry. &gt;&gt; hangry. &gt;&gt; Yeah, hangry, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, hangry, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, hangry, exactly. But, um, I'm not sure how long that But, um, I'm not sure how long that But, um, I'm not sure how long that lasts and how beneficial this is in the lasts and how beneficial this is in the lasts and how beneficial this is in the long run. But, yeah, I've done it a long run. But, yeah, I've done it a long run. But, yeah, I've done it a few times, you know, you do 1 week, you few times, you know, you do 1 week, you few times, you know, you do 1 week, you lower your calories, I think to down you lower your calories, I think to down you lower your calories, I think to down to 1,000 per day. So, it's pretty to 1,000 per day. So, it's pretty to 1,000 per day. So, it's pretty brutal. pretty brutal. pretty brutal. But, only for 5 days and then we go back But, only for 5 days and then we go back But, only for 5 days and then we go back to normal, yeah. I know of a few people to normal, yeah. I know of a few people to normal, yeah. I know of a few people who've done, um, long-term fasts. So, 3 who've done, um, long-term fasts. So, 3 who've done, um, long-term fasts. So, 3 or 4 days with just water and or 4 days with just water and or 4 days with just water and electrolytes, maybe some ketones, and electrolytes, maybe some ketones, and electrolytes, maybe some ketones, and they were very overweight, carrying a they were very overweight, carrying a they were very overweight, carrying a lot of excess body fat. And when they lot of excess body fat. And when they lot of excess body fat. And when they returned to eating, claimed that their returned to eating, claimed that their returned to eating, claimed that their appetite was forever changed, in appetite was forever changed, in appetite was forever changed, in particular the types of foods they were particular the types of foods they were particular the types of foods they were hungry for. And, um, that's thought to hungry for. And, um, that's thought to hungry for. And, um, that's thought to be, uh, an effect on the gut microbiome, be, uh, an effect on the gut microbiome, be, uh, an effect on the gut microbiome, uh, which then impacts the brain. So, uh, which then impacts the brain. So, uh, which then impacts the brain. So, there may be a place for those longer there may be a place for those longer there may be a place for those longer fasts, um, fasts, um, fasts, um, uh, what do they call them? Medically uh, what do they call them? Medically uh, what do they call them? Medically supervised fasts. supervised fasts. supervised fasts. &gt;&gt; exactly. &gt;&gt; exactly. &gt;&gt; exactly. &gt;&gt; I generally just like caffeine, &gt;&gt; I generally just like caffeine, &gt;&gt; I generally just like caffeine, electrolytes, and water until about electrolytes, and water until about electrolytes, and water until about 10 or 11 a.m. Um, 10 or 11 a.m. Um, 10 or 11 a.m. Um, and then I like to eat no later than no and then I like to eat no later than no and then I like to eat no later than no later than nowadays at 7:00 p.m. because later than nowadays at 7:00 p.m. because later than nowadays at 7:00 p.m. because I go to bed earlier. So, is that I go to bed earlier. So, is that I go to bed earlier. So, is that intermittent fasting or is that just, intermittent fasting or is that just, intermittent fasting or is that just, um, being a busy person um, being a busy person um, being a busy person who wants to still sleep well and who wants to still sleep well and who wants to still sleep well and exercise? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, it is exercise? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, it is exercise? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, it is sort of a fast, right? I mean, in sort of a fast, right? I mean, in sort of a fast, right? I mean, in English we call it a breakfast, right? English we call it a breakfast, right? English we call it a breakfast, right? Um, and it is like, you know, 12 Um, and it is like, you know, 12 Um, and it is like, you know, 12 hours maybe where you have no food and I hours maybe where you have no food and I hours maybe where you have no food and I think that think that think that probably triggers some metabolic that probably triggers some metabolic that probably triggers some metabolic activity that is different than if you activity that is different than if you activity that is different than if you continue to eat. I think the worst is continue to eat. I think the worst is continue to eat. I think the worst is probably for the body to eat all the probably for the body to eat all the probably for the body to eat all the time, like a lot of people snack the time, like a lot of people snack the time, like a lot of people snack the whole day. whole day. whole day. That's not how we were That's not how we were That's not how we were um how we evolved, right? We evolved um how we evolved, right? We evolved um how we evolved, right? We evolved being starved on a regular basis. being starved on a regular basis. being starved on a regular basis. But is that a good thing or a bad thing? But is that a good thing or a bad thing? But is that a good thing or a bad thing? For sure our body is used to it. That's For sure our body is used to it. That's For sure our body is used to it. That's a fair statement. It can handle That's a fair statement. It can handle That's a fair statement. It can handle it. I can't do the one meal per day it. I can't do the one meal per day it. I can't do the one meal per day thing because that meal ends up being so thing because that meal ends up being so thing because that meal ends up being so large that I get a lot of gastric large that I get a lot of gastric large that I get a lot of gastric discomfort, and then it disrupts my discomfort, and then it disrupts my discomfort, and then it disrupts my sleep. And that's what I'd like to sleep. And that's what I'd like to sleep. And that's what I'd like to discuss also is sleep. If there's been discuss also is sleep. If there's been discuss also is sleep. If there's been at least one at least one at least one There's probably been three in my mind, There's probably been three in my mind, There's probably been three in my mind, but at least one major triumph in the but at least one major triumph in the but at least one major triumph in the public health discussion over the last public health discussion over the last public health discussion over the last let's say 10 years, it's and we can let's say 10 years, it's and we can let's say 10 years, it's and we can really truly thank the great Matt Walker really truly thank the great Matt Walker really truly thank the great Matt Walker for this, for this, for this, um who wrote Why We Sleep. You know, he um who wrote Why We Sleep. You know, he um who wrote Why We Sleep. You know, he was the first person to really say, was the first person to really say, was the first person to really say, "Hey, these are all the terrible things "Hey, these are all the terrible things "Hey, these are all the terrible things that are going to happen to you if you that are going to happen to you if you that are going to happen to you if you don't sleep enough." And everyone needs don't sleep enough." And everyone needs don't sleep enough." And everyone needs different amounts. I'm fine on 6 hours, different amounts. I'm fine on 6 hours, different amounts. I'm fine on 6 hours, so I don't believe everyone needs eight. so I don't believe everyone needs eight. so I don't believe everyone needs eight. I Seven, I'm great, but I'm fine on I Seven, I'm great, but I'm fine on I Seven, I'm great, but I'm fine on six, especially with a little nap here six, especially with a little nap here six, especially with a little nap here and there. But Matt got people scared, and there. But Matt got people scared, and there. But Matt got people scared, then he got people thinking about how to then he got people thinking about how to then he got people thinking about how to improve their sleep, and I and others improve their sleep, and I and others improve their sleep, and I and others have spent time on this. I think that's have spent time on this. I think that's have spent time on this. I think that's one of the great victories of public one of the great victories of public one of the great victories of public health communication around um health communication around um health communication around um the best science. the best science. the best science. Uh the other would be the importance of Uh the other would be the importance of Uh the other would be the importance of exercise. Um both cardiovascular and exercise. Um both cardiovascular and exercise. Um both cardiovascular and resistance training, but during sleep we resistance training, but during sleep we resistance training, but during sleep we know that there's this so-called know that there's this so-called know that there's this so-called glymphatic clearance, that the clearance glymphatic clearance, that the clearance glymphatic clearance, that the clearance of junk from of junk from of junk from uh all the tissues, but in particular uh all the tissues, but in particular uh all the tissues, but in particular from the brain, uh from the brain, uh from the brain, uh that's facilitated by the glia, hence that's facilitated by the glia, hence that's facilitated by the glia, hence glymph- phatic. Um have you guys glymph- phatic. Um have you guys glymph- phatic. Um have you guys looked at lymph between young and old looked at lymph between young and old looked at lymph between young and old animals? I'm fascinated by animals? I'm fascinated by animals? I'm fascinated by &gt;&gt; That would be very interesting to do. &gt;&gt; That would be very interesting to do. &gt;&gt; That would be very interesting to do. Because it's the debris from the blood, Because it's the debris from the blood, Because it's the debris from the blood, right? It's the Well, it's the debris right? It's the Well, it's the debris right? It's the Well, it's the debris from the extracellular space that from the extracellular space that from the extracellular space that doesn't get picked up by the doesn't get picked up by the doesn't get picked up by the It's essentially the It's essentially the It's essentially the extra bad stuff, all the extra bad stuff, all the extra bad stuff, all the ammonia and cellular debris and ammonia and cellular debris and ammonia and cellular debris and fragments. I would love for you guys to fragments. I would love for you guys to fragments. I would love for you guys to do an experiment looking at lymph from do an experiment looking at lymph from do an experiment looking at lymph from young and old young and old young and old animals. &gt;&gt; we looked at cerebrospinal fluid, but &gt;&gt; we looked at cerebrospinal fluid, but &gt;&gt; we looked at cerebrospinal fluid, but it's of course different. And that it's of course different. And that it's of course different. And that again, differs dramatically with age. again, differs dramatically with age. again, differs dramatically with age. The composition changes dramatically. The composition changes dramatically. The composition changes dramatically. And I had a fellow who was heroic enough And I had a fellow who was heroic enough And I had a fellow who was heroic enough or crazy enough to collect um young CSF or crazy enough to collect um young CSF or crazy enough to collect um young CSF from animals, from mice. from animals, from mice. from animals, from mice. Wow. And then infuse it Wow. And then infuse it Wow. And then infuse it via a pump um via a pump um via a pump um over a month into old animals, and she over a month into old animals, and she over a month into old animals, and she could show that you can regenerate the could show that you can regenerate the could show that you can regenerate the brain, um improve cognitive function in brain, um improve cognitive function in brain, um improve cognitive function in these mice. these mice. these mice. And um And um And um oligodendrocytes, these cells that wrap oligodendrocytes, these cells that wrap oligodendrocytes, these cells that wrap the connections between neurons, it's the connections between neurons, it's the connections between neurons, it's like they produce the like they produce the like they produce the plastic around the wire, right? If the plastic around the wire, right? If the plastic around the wire, right? If you will. you will. you will. They were the strongest target They were the strongest target They were the strongest target if we look in a non-biased way. if we look in a non-biased way. if we look in a non-biased way. Uh and so she's studying that now in her Uh and so she's studying that now in her Uh and so she's studying that now in her own lab. But it shows you in another way own lab. But it shows you in another way own lab. But it shows you in another way how a fluid changes from young to old, how a fluid changes from young to old, how a fluid changes from young to old, and the young fluid somehow and the young fluid somehow and the young fluid somehow um has beneficial factors that benefit um has beneficial factors that benefit um has beneficial factors that benefit uh the old brain. And so I wouldn't be uh the old brain. And so I wouldn't be uh the old brain. And so I wouldn't be surprised that um surprised that um surprised that um there could be beneficial factor in the there could be beneficial factor in the there could be beneficial factor in the glymphatic or the lymphatics that um glymphatic or the lymphatics that um glymphatic or the lymphatics that um might benefit an old organism. We might benefit an old organism. We might benefit an old organism. We thought about it, but it's I think in thought about it, but it's I think in thought about it, but it's I think in mice it's mice it's mice it's extremely difficult. There's also the extremely difficult. There's also the extremely difficult. There's also the interstitial fluid itself that people interstitial fluid itself that people interstitial fluid itself that people have collected, but they usually collect have collected, but they usually collect have collected, but they usually collect it by infusing it by infusing it by infusing artificial spinal fluid, and then um you artificial spinal fluid, and then um you artificial spinal fluid, and then um you almost wash out what is in there. you almost wash out what is in there. you almost wash out what is in there. People have used that in the People have used that in the People have used that in the neurotransmitter field, and also more neurotransmitter field, and also more neurotransmitter field, and also more recently to look at, you know, a beta or recently to look at, you know, a beta or recently to look at, you know, a beta or accumulation of protein deposits accumulation of protein deposits accumulation of protein deposits in the brain. in the brain. in the brain. Why not just go straight to humans? I Why not just go straight to humans? I Why not just go straight to humans? I mean, I feel like I mean, I've worked on mean, I feel like I mean, I've worked on mean, I feel like I mean, I've worked on rats for a long rats for a long rats for a long time. I've worked on so many different time. I've worked on so many different time. I've worked on so many different species, including humans, but it seems species, including humans, but it seems species, including humans, but it seems like given the relatively equal expense like given the relatively equal expense like given the relatively equal expense of doing exploratory science in mice and of doing exploratory science in mice and of doing exploratory science in mice and humans that unless there's a question humans that unless there's a question humans that unless there's a question you can only address in mice, why not you can only address in mice, why not you can only address in mice, why not just take CSF from young and old humans just take CSF from young and old humans just take CSF from young and old humans and &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah, that's what we have done. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah, that's what we have done. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah, that's what we have done. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, okay. CSF is no problem. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, okay. CSF is no problem. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, okay. CSF is no problem. Yeah. So, we measure proteins in the CSF. So, we measure proteins in the CSF. So, we measure proteins in the CSF. And again, thousands of proteins, and we And again, thousands of proteins, and we And again, thousands of proteins, and we ask are there proteins that correlate with are there proteins that correlate with are there proteins that correlate with cognitive function, with resilience or cognitive function, with resilience or cognitive function, with resilience or decline? What's really interesting is, so we did What's really interesting is, so we did What's really interesting is, so we did this in a completely unbiased way, you this in a completely unbiased way, you this in a completely unbiased way, you find um proteins that go up and go down find um proteins that go up and go down find um proteins that go up and go down together with cognition, so that together with cognition, so that together with cognition, so that positively or negatively correlate. And positively or negatively correlate. And positively or negatively correlate. And almost all the top proteins are synaptic almost all the top proteins are synaptic almost all the top proteins are synaptic proteins. And we then use the top two, proteins. And we then use the top two, proteins. And we then use the top two, the one that goes up the most and goes the one that goes up the most and goes the one that goes up the most and goes down the most, and made a ratio of the down the most, and made a ratio of the down the most, and made a ratio of the two. And that ratio is a very strong And that ratio is a very strong And that ratio is a very strong predictor uh for cognitive resilience or predictor uh for cognitive resilience or predictor uh for cognitive resilience or decline. And what's or decline. And what's or decline. And what's scary is that ratio continues to change scary is that ratio continues to change scary is that ratio continues to change from early adulthood. from early adulthood. from early adulthood. So, you get you get a continuous So, you get you get a continuous So, you get you get a continuous basically degradation of that signal. basically degradation of that signal. basically degradation of that signal. And we get uh very prominent um risk And we get uh very prominent um risk And we get uh very prominent um risk uh prediction between the top and the uh prediction between the top and the uh prediction between the top and the bottom quartile. And this is based on bottom quartile. And this is based on bottom quartile. And this is based on 3,000 individuals where we had CSF from. 3,000 individuals where we had CSF from. 3,000 individuals where we had CSF from. And it's independent of pathological And it's independent of pathological And it's independent of pathological markers. So, we also had people with markers. So, we also had people with markers. So, we also had people with Alzheimer's and um uh Alzheimer's and um uh Alzheimer's and um uh Alzheimer's disease in their different stages of disease in their different stages of disease in their different stages of disease. So, if you look for what is disease. So, if you look for what is disease. So, if you look for what is only predicted of cognitive function only predicted of cognitive function only predicted of cognitive function based on a memory test, based on a memory test, based on a memory test, we find these synaptic proteins are very we find these synaptic proteins are very we find these synaptic proteins are very strong predictors. strong predictors. strong predictors. Um So, again, suggesting that the So, again, suggesting that the So, again, suggesting that the composition change, and then you can composition change, and then you can composition change, and then you can ask, is this a reflection of the change, or is this a reflection of the change, or is this a reflection of the change, or is it actually driving the change? And is it actually driving the change? And is it actually driving the change? And it seems to be both, again. it seems to be both, again. it seems to be both, again. It's always tough to get to causality, It's always tough to get to causality, It's always tough to get to causality, but uh anytime I see a study that looks in a uh anytime I see a study that looks in a uh anytime I see a study that looks in a correlative way at, you know, like which correlative way at, you know, like which correlative way at, you know, like which athletes live the longest. athletes live the longest. athletes live the longest. &gt;&gt; Mhm. It's pretty interesting, right? &gt;&gt; Mhm. It's pretty interesting, right? &gt;&gt; Mhm. It's pretty interesting, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I have no desire to run a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I have no desire to run a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I have no desire to run a marathon. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um but if I knew that it was going to add but if I knew that it was going to add but if I knew that it was going to add 20 years to my life or 15 years, I might 20 years to my life or 15 years, I might 20 years to my life or 15 years, I might start becoming a marathoner. But a start becoming a marathoner. But a start becoming a marathoner. But a recent study showed that um it's the recent study showed that um it's the recent study showed that um it's the pole vaulters, not going to get into pole vaulters, not going to get into pole vaulters, not going to get into that, and the gymnasts, that, and the gymnasts, that, and the gymnasts, and I think the high jumpers, and the and I think the high jumpers, and the and I think the high jumpers, and the sprinters, so the fast-twitch muscle sprinters, so the fast-twitch muscle sprinters, so the fast-twitch muscle folks that they get a substantial folks that they get a substantial folks that they get a substantial longevity effect, you know, 5 to 8 years longevity effect, you know, 5 to 8 years longevity effect, you know, 5 to 8 years on average, more than their, you know, on average, more than their, you know, on average, more than their, you know, age-matched cohorts, even compared to age-matched cohorts, even compared to age-matched cohorts, even compared to other high highly trained athletes. high highly trained athletes. high highly trained athletes. &gt;&gt; So, I see a result like that, and then &gt;&gt; So, I see a result like that, and then &gt;&gt; So, I see a result like that, and then of course the of course the of course the reductionist scientist in me says, the reductionist scientist in me says, the reductionist scientist in me says, "Okay, so is it the running? Is it the "Okay, so is it the running? Is it the "Okay, so is it the running? Is it the jumping? Is it" jumping? Is it" jumping? Is it" Then you think like, "Oh, using the Then you think like, "Oh, using the Then you think like, "Oh, using the Weiss Cory model, I mean, you could Weiss Cory model, I mean, you could Weiss Cory model, I mean, you could essentially look at the blood from essentially look at the blood from essentially look at the blood from sprinters versus marathoners." And of sprinters versus marathoners." And of sprinters versus marathoners." And of course they're going to differ. These course they're going to differ. These course they're going to differ. These are different people, after all. are different people, after all. are different people, after all. &gt;&gt; They live in lifestyles in a number of &gt;&gt; They live in lifestyles in a number of &gt;&gt; They live in lifestyles in a number of different ways, but different ways, but different ways, but you have to kind of wonder, again, you have to kind of wonder, again, you have to kind of wonder, again, whether or not the feed I wonder whether or not the feed I wonder whether or not the feed I wonder whether the feedback signals from the body the feedback signals from the body the feedback signals from the body there's some feedback signal in the form there's some feedback signal in the form there's some feedback signal in the form of a chemical that says, "Okay, this of a chemical that says, "Okay, this of a chemical that says, "Okay, this body is body is body is moving fast, moving fast, moving fast, jumping, um and doing explosive jumping, um and doing explosive jumping, um and doing explosive activity, essentially, on a regular activity, essentially, on a regular activity, essentially, on a regular basis, that supplies the brain with a basis, that supplies the brain with a basis, that supplies the brain with a cocktail of things, presumably, cocktail of things, presumably, cocktail of things, presumably, that keeps neurons healthy, keeps them that keeps neurons healthy, keeps them that keeps neurons healthy, keeps them um you know keeps the oligodendrocytes um you know keeps the oligodendrocytes um you know keeps the oligodendrocytes proliferating right that make sure that proliferating right that make sure that proliferating right that make sure that you know you got plenty of myelin to for you know you got plenty of myelin to for you know you got plenty of myelin to for those fast transmission signals those fast transmission signals those fast transmission signals and to me that's where I like the field of to me that's where I like the field of to me that's where I like the field of health span and lifespan but health span and lifespan but health span and lifespan but especially health span really needs to especially health span really needs to especially health span really needs to go because otherwise it's just like pick go because otherwise it's just like pick go because otherwise it's just like pick it pick the exercise you're going to do it pick the exercise you're going to do it pick the exercise you're going to do regularly that's great that's a great regularly that's great that's a great regularly that's great that's a great first step but then ultimately it really first step but then ultimately it really first step but then ultimately it really does become about quality of life does become about quality of life does become about quality of life and if and if and if so the importance of doing these kinds so the importance of doing these kinds so the importance of doing these kinds of studies to me is immense of studies to me is immense of studies to me is immense because otherwise it's just for like because otherwise it's just for like because otherwise it's just for like well you do a little cardio do all this well you do a little cardio do all this well you do a little cardio do all this do all that and do all that and do all that and I don't know I mean that's like saying I don't know I mean that's like saying I don't know I mean that's like saying oh you can get the same level of social oh you can get the same level of social oh you can get the same level of social connection and social media as you can connection and social media as you can connection and social media as you can get can from in person connect it's two get can from in person connect it's two get can from in person connect it's two totally different landscapes totally different landscapes totally different landscapes so I'm anyway I'm struck by the idea so I'm anyway I'm struck by the idea so I'm anyway I'm struck by the idea that exercise is not one thing exercise is not one thing exercise is not one thing and that there may be there are certain and that there may be there are certain and that there may be there are certain forms of exercise that are much more forms of exercise that are much more forms of exercise that are much more potent which means there's probably potent which means there's probably potent which means there's probably molecules associated with certain forms molecules associated with certain forms molecules associated with certain forms of exercise that are much more potent of exercise that are much more potent of exercise that are much more potent in terms of in terms of in terms of brain function yeah that's very brain function yeah that's very brain function yeah that's very interesting so John Long at Stanford has interesting so John Long at Stanford has interesting so John Long at Stanford has a lab and he looked a lab and he looked a lab and he looked at metabolites in the blood of at metabolites in the blood of at metabolites in the blood of dogs sprinter dogs horses that do races dogs sprinter dogs horses that do races dogs sprinter dogs horses that do races and then also human sprinters and then also human sprinters and then also human sprinters and he found this and he found this and he found this interesting modified amino acid that is interesting modified amino acid that is interesting modified amino acid that is conjugated to lactate lack fee it's conjugated to lactate lack fee it's conjugated to lactate lack fee it's called and that compound seems to spike with and that compound seems to spike with and that compound seems to spike with these extreme bursts of muscle activity these extreme bursts of muscle activity these extreme bursts of muscle activity and he could then show in animals that and he could then show in animals that and he could then show in animals that it's actually beneficial and mediates it's actually beneficial and mediates it's actually beneficial and mediates some of the beneficial effects he some of the beneficial effects he some of the beneficial effects he identified the receptor so it's a really identified the receptor so it's a really identified the receptor so it's a really very exciting direction of research but very exciting direction of research but very exciting direction of research but it speaks to what you're saying, it speaks to what you're saying, it speaks to what you're saying, right? That there's different ways, uh right? That there's different ways, uh right? That there's different ways, uh different forms of exercise, and they different forms of exercise, and they different forms of exercise, and they may have different effects. may have different effects. may have different effects. And they may all be beneficial, better And they may all be beneficial, better And they may all be beneficial, better than not doing anything, but they may than not doing anything, but they may than not doing anything, but they may have different effects, and you may have different effects, and you may have different effects, and you may be able to harness one or the other. be able to harness one or the other. be able to harness one or the other. And also, some of us may benefit more And also, some of us may benefit more And also, some of us may benefit more from one or the other. from one or the other. from one or the other. It's extremely hard to do a rigorous It's extremely hard to do a rigorous It's extremely hard to do a rigorous clinical study on any of this, right? clinical study on any of this, right? clinical study on any of this, right? Obviously, if you exercise, you always Obviously, if you exercise, you always Obviously, if you exercise, you always know it, so you can't be blinded. And if know it, so you can't be blinded. And if know it, so you can't be blinded. And if you hate it, or if you love it, your you hate it, or if you love it, your you hate it, or if you love it, your brain is probably going to send very brain is probably going to send very brain is probably going to send very different signals, right? I mean, I have different signals, right? I mean, I have different signals, right? I mean, I have friends who just hate exercise, and they friends who just hate exercise, and they friends who just hate exercise, and they never want to do it. never want to do it. never want to do it. So, how are you going to tell them, you So, how are you going to tell them, you So, how are you going to tell them, you know, you should do this or that? know, you should do this or that? know, you should do this or that? Uh well, if it buys you life. All right, Uh well, if it buys you life. All right, Uh well, if it buys you life. All right, anyway, I'm fortunate that I've always anyway, I'm fortunate that I've always anyway, I'm fortunate that I've always loved exercise. I've always loved it. I loved exercise. I've always loved it. I loved exercise. I've always loved it. I feel great going into it. I feel great feel great going into it. I feel great feel great going into it. I feel great during and I feel after. I mean, during and I feel after. I mean, during and I feel after. I mean, sometimes it's painful, but I always sometimes it's painful, but I always sometimes it's painful, but I always enjoy it. But, I realize that not enjoy it. But, I realize that not enjoy it. But, I realize that not everyone not everyone feels that way. not everyone feels that way. not everyone feels that way. &gt;&gt; right? Our our colleague Robert Sapolsky &gt;&gt; right? Our our colleague Robert Sapolsky &gt;&gt; right? Our our colleague Robert Sapolsky told me about a study where they have told me about a study where they have told me about a study where they have rodents run on a wheel regularly, and um rodents run on a wheel regularly, and um rodents run on a wheel regularly, and um rodents love to run on wheels, as you rodents love to run on wheels, as you rodents love to run on wheels, as you know. And they um know. And they um know. And they um they of course experience reductions in they of course experience reductions in they of course experience reductions in blood pressure, blood lipids improve, et blood pressure, blood lipids improve, et blood pressure, blood lipids improve, et cetera, after the exercise, right? cetera, after the exercise, right? cetera, after the exercise, right? During the exercise and immediately During the exercise and immediately During the exercise and immediately after, there's inflammation, but you get after, there's inflammation, but you get after, there's inflammation, but you get the adaptation, they improve. But, if the adaptation, they improve. But, if the adaptation, they improve. But, if you tether the running you tether the running you tether the running of that animal, you like it's sort of that animal, you like it's sort of that animal, you like it's sort of like your parabiosis experiment. If you like your parabiosis experiment. If you like your parabiosis experiment. If you tether the running of that animal to tether the running of that animal to tether the running of that animal to another animal that's trapped in a another animal that's trapped in a another animal that's trapped in a running wheel, it can't leave the running wheel, it can't leave the running wheel, it can't leave the running wheel, and it has to run when running wheel, and it has to run when running wheel, and it has to run when the other one runs. the other one runs. the other one runs. &gt;&gt; They're doing the same exercise, &gt;&gt; They're doing the same exercise, &gt;&gt; They're doing the same exercise, and they're genetically identical and they're genetically identical and they're genetically identical animals. And the one that's forced to run And the one that's forced to run And the one that's forced to run experiences long-term increases in blood experiences long-term increases in blood experiences long-term increases in blood pressure, stress, markers of stress, and pressure, stress, markers of stress, and pressure, stress, markers of stress, and um and deficits in memory associated um and deficits in memory associated um and deficits in memory associated with hippocampal not damage but with hippocampal not damage but with hippocampal not damage but rewiring. So, you realize that the rewiring. So, you realize that the rewiring. So, you realize that the choice is big in all of this. the choice is big in all of this. the choice is big in all of this. &gt;&gt; That's for me running on a treadmill in &gt;&gt; That's for me running on a treadmill in &gt;&gt; That's for me running on a treadmill in a warm versus outside. a warm versus outside. a warm versus outside. &gt;&gt; I'm exactly the same way. I mean, not to &gt;&gt; I'm exactly the same way. I mean, not to &gt;&gt; I'm exactly the same way. I mean, not to spin off into every study, but a lot of spin off into every study, but a lot of spin off into every study, but a lot of Stanford citations here. Our colleague Stanford citations here. Our colleague Stanford citations here. Our colleague Joe Parvizi Mhm. uh neurosurgeon did Joe Parvizi Mhm. uh neurosurgeon did Joe Parvizi Mhm. uh neurosurgeon did this amazing experiment where he this amazing experiment where he this amazing experiment where he stimulates uh for other reasons, he stimulates uh for other reasons, he stimulates uh for other reasons, he landed in the anterior mid-cingulate landed in the anterior mid-cingulate landed in the anterior mid-cingulate cortex, and when he stimulates there, cortex, and when he stimulates there, cortex, and when he stimulates there, people feel as if people feel as if people feel as if there's some impending pressure there's some impending pressure there's some impending pressure on them, like they're driving into a on them, like they're driving into a on them, like they're driving into a storm, and they feel motivated. They storm, and they feel motivated. They storm, and they feel motivated. They feel the subjectively tenacity. feel the subjectively tenacity. feel the subjectively tenacity. And it turns out that the anterior And it turns out that the anterior And it turns out that the anterior cingulate cortex grows in people who cingulate cortex grows in people who cingulate cortex grows in people who successfully diet, who push through successfully diet, who push through successfully diet, who push through challenges in exercise, and cognitive challenges in exercise, and cognitive challenges in exercise, and cognitive things. So, pushing ourselves You can things. So, pushing ourselves You can things. So, pushing ourselves You can tell your friends that if you enjoy tell your friends that if you enjoy tell your friends that if you enjoy doing something, you actually get less doing something, you actually get less doing something, you actually get less benefit. &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe. If you hate it, you get &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe. If you hate it, you get &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe. If you hate it, you get more benefit, but not if you're forced more benefit, but not if you're forced more benefit, but not if you're forced to do it. So, choose electing to do to do it. So, choose electing to do to do it. So, choose electing to do things that you hate and doing them things that you hate and doing them things that you hate and doing them anyway is where the real where you get the is where the real where you get the is where the real where you get the double benefit. Um so, in any case, this double benefit. Um so, in any case, this double benefit. Um so, in any case, this is the brain structure associated with is the brain structure associated with is the brain structure associated with super aging. super aging. super aging. &gt;&gt; to do a marathon, right? And you go &gt;&gt; to do a marathon, right? And you go &gt;&gt; to do a marathon, right? And you go through the torture. through the torture. through the torture. &gt;&gt; That's right. I think I'll sprint &gt;&gt; That's right. I think I'll sprint &gt;&gt; That's right. I think I'll sprint instead. I now do this thing where I hop instead. I now do this thing where I hop instead. I now do this thing where I hop on the Airdyne bike, the one with on the Airdyne bike, the one with on the Airdyne bike, the one with handles, and I'll go handles, and I'll go handles, and I'll go warm up a minute, I'll go hard for 20, warm up a minute, I'll go hard for 20, warm up a minute, I'll go hard for 20, 30 seconds, and then rest 10 seconds, 30 seconds, and then rest 10 seconds, 30 seconds, and then rest 10 seconds, and just repeat. And it's over in like 7 and just repeat. And it's over in like 7 and just repeat. And it's over in like 7 minutes. But it's amazing where the brain goes. But it's amazing where the brain goes. But it's amazing where the brain goes. Like, I hate this. I want to get off Like, I hate this. I want to get off Like, I hate this. I want to get off this thing. But afterwards, it feels this thing. But afterwards, it feels this thing. But afterwards, it feels pretty great. Well, I would love for you pretty great. Well, I would love for you pretty great. Well, I would love for you guys to look at CSF or other factors in guys to look at CSF or other factors in guys to look at CSF or other factors in let's just call it high-intensity versus let's just call it high-intensity versus let's just call it high-intensity versus long-endurance type exercise. It's long-endurance type exercise. It's long-endurance type exercise. It's also hard to do in animals, so but you also hard to do in animals, so but you also hard to do in animals, so but you can do it very easily in humans. I mean, can do it very easily in humans. I mean, can do it very easily in humans. I mean, I'm trying to think about the ways that I'm trying to think about the ways that I'm trying to think about the ways that we can use lifestyle interventions until we can use lifestyle interventions until we can use lifestyle interventions until you come up with the magic pill. you come up with the magic pill. you come up with the magic pill. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you know, it's interesting that you And you know, it's interesting that you And you know, it's interesting that you say that. Um Jill Livingston and others, say that. Um Jill Livingston and others, say that. Um Jill Livingston and others, um you know, they have studied um you know, they have studied um you know, they have studied um sort of how lifestyle influences the sort of how lifestyle influences the sort of how lifestyle influences the development of dementia and Alzheimer's development of dementia and Alzheimer's development of dementia and Alzheimer's disease. And it's a dramatic component disease. And it's a dramatic component disease. And it's a dramatic component that you can influence that you can influence that you can influence um easier or not, right? I mean, some of easier or not, right? I mean, some of easier or not, right? I mean, some of them are very hard to get out of, but them are very hard to get out of, but them are very hard to get out of, but you know, poverty is a risk, of course. you know, poverty is a risk, of course. you know, poverty is a risk, of course. Um childhood obesity, Um childhood obesity, Um childhood obesity, uh lower education, uh lower education, uh lower education, um smoking, excessive alcohol use. Um um smoking, excessive alcohol use. Um um smoking, excessive alcohol use. Um many of these things that we know, you many of these things that we know, you many of these things that we know, you know, they're good or bad. If you have know, they're good or bad. If you have know, they're good or bad. If you have all these all these all these if you optimize everything, your risk if you optimize everything, your risk if you optimize everything, your risk for dementia is much lower. I mean, for dementia is much lower. I mean, for dementia is much lower. I mean, there's now, there's now, there's now, you know, countless studies that you know, countless studies that you know, countless studies that show that. So, there are things show that. So, there are things show that. So, there are things that you can do, the lifestyle factors, that you can do, the lifestyle factors, that you can do, the lifestyle factors, right? Um and they're easier to do for right? Um and they're easier to do for right? Um and they're easier to do for some people than for others, but it's some people than for others, but it's some people than for others, but it's clear that um there's incredible power clear that um there's incredible power clear that um there's incredible power in um lifestyle and what we do. um lifestyle and what we do. um lifestyle and what we do. Are you aware of any correlates to the Are you aware of any correlates to the Are you aware of any correlates to the exercise thing we were just talking exercise thing we were just talking exercise thing we were just talking about, whereby certain um cognitive about, whereby certain um cognitive about, whereby certain um cognitive exercises can it uh help us hold on to exercises can it uh help us hold on to exercises can it uh help us hold on to cognition? For instance, we've heard cognition? For instance, we've heard cognition? For instance, we've heard doing crossword puzzles or, you know, uh doing crossword puzzles or, you know, uh doing crossword puzzles or, you know, uh reading good books. I mean, I think this reading good books. I mean, I think this reading good books. I mean, I think this is becoming increasingly important is becoming increasingly important is becoming increasingly important because it's so easy to have one's time because it's so easy to have one's time because it's so easy to have one's time sucked away on the internet or on social sucked away on the internet or on social sucked away on the internet or on social media um nowadays, which requires media um nowadays, which requires media um nowadays, which requires essentially no work. I mean, you just essentially no work. I mean, you just essentially no work. I mean, you just scroll and read. I mean, I mean, scroll and read. I mean, I mean, scroll and read. I mean, I mean, articles have become very brief. Is articles have become very brief. Is articles have become very brief. Is there any known benefit of trying to there any known benefit of trying to there any known benefit of trying to tackle cognitive uh gymnastics? Is there any cognitive uh gymnastics? Is there any cognitive uh gymnastics? Is there any data? Not to my knowledge. Unfortunately, you Not to my knowledge. Unfortunately, you Not to my knowledge. Unfortunately, you know, the studies that looked um know, the studies that looked um know, the studies that looked um patients who already have cognitive patients who already have cognitive patients who already have cognitive impairment and impairment and impairment and uh you try to give them sort of exercise uh you try to give them sort of exercise uh you try to give them sort of exercise and mental exercise, they don't do much, and mental exercise, they don't do much, and mental exercise, they don't do much, unfortunately. It's probably more complex and It's probably more complex and It's probably more complex and you of course also have again, you know, you of course also have again, you know, you of course also have again, you know, what we discussed earlier with exercise, what we discussed earlier with exercise, what we discussed earlier with exercise, right? Some people just love to be right? Some people just love to be right? Some people just love to be stimulated and you know, they want to stimulated and you know, they want to stimulated and you know, they want to learn something new, you know, want to learn something new, you know, want to learn something new, you know, want to learn a new language or a new instrument learn a new language or a new instrument learn a new language or a new instrument and their mind is already attuned to and their mind is already attuned to and their mind is already attuned to that, right? They they crave for this that, right? They they crave for this that, right? They they crave for this and for others um that might be much and for others um that might be much and for others um that might be much harder and they may not harder and they may not harder and they may not benefit from it. Um benefit from it. Um benefit from it. Um but you're the neuroscientist, you know, but you're the neuroscientist, you know, but you're the neuroscientist, you know, what I mean, if you know, what I mean, if you know, what I mean, if you know, what could you get out of something like could you get out of something like could you get out of something like that? And if somebody is really that? And if somebody is really that? And if somebody is really um excited about, you know, doing any of um excited about, you know, doing any of um excited about, you know, doing any of these mental exercises versus these mental exercises versus these mental exercises versus you know, it doesn't speak to them. you know, it doesn't speak to them. you know, it doesn't speak to them. Yeah, I think that if we should all find Yeah, I think that if we should all find Yeah, I think that if we should all find the things that the things that the things that we want to do enough that we would elect to want to do enough that we would elect to want to do enough that we would elect to do them, but that are challenging. Like do them, but that are challenging. Like do them, but that are challenging. Like there are data coming out now showing there are data coming out now showing there are data coming out now showing that handwriting is very important to that handwriting is very important to that handwriting is very important to development of certain brain circuits. development of certain brain circuits. development of certain brain circuits. It's kind of a no surprise, but this is It's kind of a no surprise, but this is It's kind of a no surprise, but this is important for the younger generation important for the younger generation important for the younger generation who's no longer handwriting so much. The who's no longer handwriting so much. The who's no longer handwriting so much. The phrase use it or lose it makes perfect phrase use it or lose it makes perfect phrase use it or lose it makes perfect sense to me. I mean, if you don't walk sense to me. I mean, if you don't walk sense to me. I mean, if you don't walk enough or run enough or cycle enough or enough or run enough or cycle enough or enough or run enough or cycle enough or do anything with your legs, eventually do anything with your legs, eventually do anything with your legs, eventually the neural systems that control your the neural systems that control your the neural systems that control your legs will atrophy as well the muscles. legs will atrophy as well the muscles. legs will atrophy as well the muscles. We tend to think about the muscles, but We tend to think about the muscles, but We tend to think about the muscles, but we don't think about the neural control we don't think about the neural control we don't think about the neural control over the muscles. So I think as since over the muscles. So I think as since over the muscles. So I think as since I'm 50 now, I think I'm 50 now, I think I'm 50 now, I think you know, I make it a point to read at you know, I make it a point to read at you know, I make it a point to read at least it's going to sound so paltry, but least it's going to sound so paltry, but least it's going to sound so paltry, but at least one page and ideally one at least one page and ideally one at least one page and ideally one chapter of a book every day. Sometimes chapter of a book every day. Sometimes chapter of a book every day. Sometimes it's just one page, but just with a book it's just one page, but just with a book it's just one page, but just with a book with my phone out of the room. And I do with my phone out of the room. And I do with my phone out of the room. And I do and I read papers and things like that, and I read papers and things like that, and I read papers and things like that, but doing things that feel unnatural but doing things that feel unnatural but doing things that feel unnatural um but that I know I will benefit from um but that I know I will benefit from um but that I know I will benefit from when they're over. There's such a deep when they're over. There's such a deep when they're over. There's such a deep feeling of satisfaction from having done feeling of satisfaction from having done feeling of satisfaction from having done that sort of thing. And for me the that sort of thing. And for me the that sort of thing. And for me the higher intensity cardio is that. I'd higher intensity cardio is that. I'd higher intensity cardio is that. I'd much rather jog than sprint, so I make much rather jog than sprint, so I make much rather jog than sprint, so I make it a point to sprint, you know. So I it a point to sprint, you know. So I it a point to sprint, you know. So I think maybe we should think about think maybe we should think about think maybe we should think about exercise and cognitive stuff the same exercise and cognitive stuff the same exercise and cognitive stuff the same way. Who knows? Yeah. I mean is there way. Who knows? Yeah. I mean is there way. Who knows? Yeah. I mean is there anything that in Switzerland anything that in Switzerland anything that in Switzerland that they do that they don't do here in that they do that they don't do here in that they do that they don't do here in terms of food and exercise and terms of food and exercise and terms of food and exercise and lifestyle? Cuz the Swiss are very lifestyle? Cuz the Swiss are very lifestyle? Cuz the Swiss are very healthy. The Swiss also as I recall from The Swiss also as I recall from The Swiss also as I recall from something in the Economist a few years something in the Economist a few years something in the Economist a few years ago when I used to I no longer subscribe ago when I used to I no longer subscribe ago when I used to I no longer subscribe to them, but the highest caffeine intake to them, but the highest caffeine intake to them, but the highest caffeine intake in the world is the Swiss. Really? They in the world is the Swiss. Really? They in the world is the Swiss. Really? They drink so much caffeine. drink so much caffeine. drink so much caffeine. &gt;&gt; Also chocolate. Yeah. Good &gt;&gt; Also chocolate. Yeah. Good &gt;&gt; Also chocolate. Yeah. Good chocolate. Chocolate and cheese um chocolate. Chocolate and cheese um chocolate. Chocolate and cheese um and people eat a lot of it. I eat almost and people eat a lot of it. I eat almost and people eat a lot of it. I eat almost every day I eat chocolate. Do you? Yeah. every day I eat chocolate. Do you? Yeah. every day I eat chocolate. Do you? Yeah. You're making some people very happy. You're making some people very happy. You're making some people very happy. &gt;&gt; I eat 100% chocolate. &gt;&gt; I eat 100% chocolate. &gt;&gt; I eat 100% chocolate. &gt;&gt; my diet. When? When you eat it? Usually &gt;&gt; my diet. When? When you eat it? Usually &gt;&gt; my diet. When? When you eat it? Usually after you know with a coffee after lunch after you know with a coffee after lunch after you know with a coffee after lunch or so. High in polyphenols. Mhm. Yeah. or so. High in polyphenols. Mhm. Yeah. or so. High in polyphenols. Mhm. Yeah. And tasty delicious. Yeah. And tasty delicious. Yeah. And tasty delicious. &gt;&gt; and tasty. Yeah. Stimulates your brain. &gt;&gt; and tasty. Yeah. Stimulates your brain. &gt;&gt; and tasty. Yeah. Stimulates your brain. Makes you happy. I eat the raw or Makes you happy. I eat the raw or Makes you happy. I eat the raw or roasted cacao beans. Yeah. Cuz I like roasted cacao beans. Yeah. Cuz I like roasted cacao beans. Yeah. Cuz I like bitter things. bitter things. bitter things. &gt;&gt; Those are good, too. Yeah. Those are &gt;&gt; Those are good, too. Yeah. Those are &gt;&gt; Those are good, too. Yeah. Those are good a good punch. You own a good a good punch. You own a good a good punch. You own a winery. That's right. That runs counter winery. That's right. That runs counter winery. That's right. That runs counter to everything I understand about to everything I understand about to everything I understand about longevity, but it runs No, it doesn't. longevity, but it runs No, it doesn't. longevity, but it runs No, it doesn't. Okay. All right. Here we go. Educate me. Okay. All right. Here we go. Educate me. Okay. All right. Here we go. Educate me. Alcohol itself is probably not good for Alcohol itself is probably not good for Alcohol itself is probably not good for our body, right? Just pure alcohol. But our body, right? Just pure alcohol. But our body, right? Just pure alcohol. But a lot of drinks are part of a social a lot of drinks are part of a social a lot of drinks are part of a social environment and I think one of the environment and I think one of the environment and I think one of the major benefits that people have major benefits that people have major benefits that people have attributed to you know, wine um is the attributed to you know, wine um is the attributed to you know, wine um is the social aspects of it. I mean some people social aspects of it. I mean some people social aspects of it. I mean some people may drink a bottle of wine by may drink a bottle of wine by may drink a bottle of wine by themselves, but I think the majority themselves, but I think the majority themselves, but I think the majority you know, they have a meal together and you know, they have a meal together and you know, they have a meal together and you share a bottle of wine. you share a bottle of wine. you share a bottle of wine. And that's And that's And that's We talked about this earlier, you know, We talked about this earlier, you know, We talked about this earlier, you know, how you dissociate one thing from how you dissociate one thing from how you dissociate one thing from another. I think another. I think another. I think you know, this is complexity that you know, this is complexity that you know, this is complexity that you see actually in almost all studies that see actually in almost all studies that see actually in almost all studies that look at centenarians, you know, where look at centenarians, you know, where look at centenarians, you know, where people lived a long as one of the most people lived a long as one of the most people lived a long as one of the most common aspects is that they're all very common aspects is that they're all very common aspects is that they're all very social. They're not left alone when social. They're not left alone when social. They're not left alone when they're old. They have a community and they're old. They have a community and they're old. They have a community and they meet other people, right? And they meet other people, right? And they meet other people, right? And so I think that's part of the wine so I think that's part of the wine so I think that's part of the wine culture is really being social, being culture is really being social, being culture is really being social, being together. Yeah, I mean the data on social Yeah, I mean the data on social Yeah, I mean the data on social connection and stress reduction is huge. connection and stress reduction is huge. connection and stress reduction is huge. Yeah, I've gone on record saying that Yeah, I've gone on record saying that Yeah, I've gone on record saying that the data say zero alcohol better than the data say zero alcohol better than the data say zero alcohol better than any two drinks per week is probably the any two drinks per week is probably the any two drinks per week is probably the upper limit for non-alcoholic adults, upper limit for non-alcoholic adults, upper limit for non-alcoholic adults, after which I just say, you know, make after which I just say, you know, make after which I just say, you know, make sure you're doing other things sure you're doing other things sure you're doing other things correctly. One thing that I would correctly. One thing that I would correctly. One thing that I would I want to be really um I want to be really um I want to be really um clear on is clear on is clear on is since I'm talking to since I'm talking to since I'm talking to someone from originally from someone from originally from someone from originally from Switzerland, although you're a US Switzerland, although you're a US Switzerland, although you're a US citizen now, citizen now, citizen now, is that the United States has never had is that the United States has never had is that the United States has never had a history of healthy food or drinking a history of healthy food or drinking a history of healthy food or drinking habits. You know, if you think about classic You know, if you think about classic You know, if you think about classic American cuisine, it's all unhealthy American cuisine, it's all unhealthy American cuisine, it's all unhealthy stuff. Apple pie, French fries, stuff. Apple pie, French fries, stuff. Apple pie, French fries, hamburgers, hot dogs, pizza, which was hamburgers, hot dogs, pizza, which was hamburgers, hot dogs, pizza, which was originally not ours, right? And and on originally not ours, right? And and on originally not ours, right? And and on and on, right? There's been a culture and on, right? There's been a culture and on, right? There's been a culture of volume and abundance volume and abundance volume and abundance and kind of amusement park food, and kind of amusement park food, and kind of amusement park food, frankly. And the same is true for frankly. And the same is true for frankly. And the same is true for drinking. I mean, certainly not speaking drinking. I mean, certainly not speaking drinking. I mean, certainly not speaking for everybody, but there's been a for everybody, but there's been a for everybody, but there's been a culture around alcohol in the United culture around alcohol in the United culture around alcohol in the United States of drinking a lot of beer or a States of drinking a lot of beer or a States of drinking a lot of beer or a lot of spirits. Whereas I think in lot of spirits. Whereas I think in lot of spirits. Whereas I think in Europe, the food, including the desserts, have a the food, including the desserts, have a the food, including the desserts, have a have a tradition of nourishment, of have a tradition of nourishment, of have a tradition of nourishment, of social connection. And sure, we have social connection. And sure, we have social connection. And sure, we have bars in the United States and people bars in the United States and people bars in the United States and people drink beer while they watch games and drink beer while they watch games and drink beer while they watch games and things like that, but things like that, but things like that, but I think sometimes that gets lost in the I think sometimes that gets lost in the I think sometimes that gets lost in the conversation. Um that the United States has never been Um that the United States has never been Um that the United States has never been a particularly healthy place except be a particularly healthy place except be a particularly healthy place except be for its level of engagement in sports for its level of engagement in sports for its level of engagement in sports and exercise until recently. So I and exercise until recently. So I and exercise until recently. So I totally agree with what you're saying. totally agree with what you're saying. totally agree with what you're saying. If you're getting together with friends If you're getting together with friends If you're getting together with friends and having a couple drinks or something and having a couple drinks or something and having a couple drinks or something like that, that sounds entirely like that, that sounds entirely like that, that sounds entirely healthy, but um healthy, but um healthy, but um the problem is that's usually not how it the problem is that's usually not how it the problem is that's usually not how it looks. On certainly not on college campuses, but certainly not on college campuses, but certainly not on college campuses, but that's another thing. Well, excess is that's another thing. Well, excess is that's another thing. Well, excess is right anything. If you also with food, I right anything. If you also with food, I right anything. If you also with food, I mean I eat any food. You can eat any mean I eat any food. You can eat any mean I eat any food. You can eat any food, but you don't want to just eat one food, but you don't want to just eat one food, but you don't want to just eat one food. I mean I eat french fries or food. I mean I eat french fries or food. I mean I eat french fries or burger. There's nothing wrong with it, burger. There's nothing wrong with it, burger. There's nothing wrong with it, but if that's your only diet, that's not but if that's your only diet, that's not but if that's your only diet, that's not good. Uh if you eat no fruit, that's probably Uh if you eat no fruit, that's probably Uh if you eat no fruit, that's probably not good if you have no vegetables in not good if you have no vegetables in not good if you have no vegetables in your diet. your diet. your diet. And the same I think with drinks. I mean And the same I think with drinks. I mean And the same I think with drinks. I mean I have drinks, but I try not to get I have drinks, but I try not to get I have drinks, but I try not to get drunk every day, right? drunk every day, right? drunk every day, right? Um so I think so I think so I think moderation is really moderation is really moderation is really uh I think the magic. Mhm. uh I think the magic. Mhm. uh I think the magic. Mhm. I'm going to get a little uh I'm going to get a little uh I'm going to get a little uh wacky here, not woo wacky. So there's wacky here, not woo wacky. So there's wacky here, not woo wacky. So there's some really interesting stories about some really interesting stories about some really interesting stories about improving health and vitality, maybe improving health and vitality, maybe improving health and vitality, maybe lifespan, with things that adjust blood lifespan, with things that adjust blood lifespan, with things that adjust blood flow. So for instance, in the literature flow. So for instance, in the literature flow. So for instance, in the literature around qigong breathing, around qigong breathing, around qigong breathing, right? I mean there's a lot of different right? I mean there's a lot of different right? I mean there's a lot of different forms of this, but we can we can forms of this, but we can we can forms of this, but we can we can distill things down to the fact that distill things down to the fact that distill things down to the fact that inhales, vigorous inhales, increase the inhales, vigorous inhales, increase the inhales, vigorous inhales, increase the heart rate. Um exhales, deliberate heart rate. Um exhales, deliberate heart rate. Um exhales, deliberate exhales, extended exhales, decrease the exhales, extended exhales, decrease the exhales, extended exhales, decrease the heart rate through something called heart rate through something called heart rate through something called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. respiratory sinus arrhythmia. respiratory sinus arrhythmia. So in a number of cultures, they'll do So in a number of cultures, they'll do So in a number of cultures, they'll do um qigong, tai chi, um qigong, tai chi, um qigong, tai chi, which is deliberate breathing and which is deliberate breathing and which is deliberate breathing and movement, of course. And the idea is movement, of course. And the idea is movement, of course. And the idea is that you're improving circulation, that you're improving circulation, that you're improving circulation, that it feeds the brain, you know, in of it feeds the brain, you know, in of it feeds the brain, you know, in of these things, that it's feeding the these things, that it's feeding the these things, that it's feeding the brain nutrients, and it all makes brain nutrients, and it all makes brain nutrients, and it all makes perfect sense given what you're perfect sense given what you're perfect sense given what you're saying. It's also interesting I I've saying. It's also interesting I I've saying. It's also interesting I I've been looking at um how patterns of been looking at um how patterns of been looking at um how patterns of breathing change as people age, and breathing change as people age, and breathing change as people age, and talking to people who work in hospitals talking to people who work in hospitals talking to people who work in hospitals and with and there's some actually a and with and there's some actually a and with and there's some actually a little bit of data around this. As little bit of data around this. As little bit of data around this. As people get older and their cognitive people get older and their cognitive people get older and their cognitive function goes, they tend to become mouth function goes, they tend to become mouth function goes, they tend to become mouth breathers. &gt;&gt; [gasps and panting] &gt;&gt; [gasps and panting] &gt;&gt; [gasps and panting] &gt;&gt; That's interesting. &gt;&gt; That's interesting. &gt;&gt; That's interesting. &gt;&gt; having trouble oxygenating their brain. &gt;&gt; having trouble oxygenating their brain. &gt;&gt; having trouble oxygenating their brain. Now, it could be the mouth breathing is Now, it could be the mouth breathing is Now, it could be the mouth breathing is the cause, or it could be reflective of the cause, or it could be reflective of the cause, or it could be reflective of something else. of something else. of something else. Kind of interesting to think about Kind of interesting to think about Kind of interesting to think about because the relationship between because the relationship between because the relationship between breathing and blood flow is a is an breathing and blood flow is a is an breathing and blood flow is a is an obvious and well-established one. So, obvious and well-established one. So, obvious and well-established one. So, there are all these things about the there are all these things about the there are all these things about the young blood versus old blood young blood versus old blood young blood versus old blood that might be independent of pure that might be independent of pure that might be independent of pure biochemistry of aging that could be biochemistry of aging that could be biochemistry of aging that could be controlled with controlled with controlled with lifestyle factors. And we say exercise lifestyle factors. And we say exercise lifestyle factors. And we say exercise improves uh health span, but exercise increases uh health span, but exercise increases uh health span, but exercise increases breathing rate. So, have you um breathing rate. So, have you um breathing rate. So, have you um are you at all interested in I'm trying are you at all interested in I'm trying are you at all interested in I'm trying to get a bunch of studies going here, to get a bunch of studies going here, to get a bunch of studies going here, you can tell. And people that do some you can tell. And people that do some you can tell. And people that do some sort of deliberate deep breathing, it sort of deliberate deep breathing, it sort of deliberate deep breathing, it doesn't have to be tai chi doesn't have to be tai chi doesn't have to be tai chi &gt;&gt; super interesting. Yeah. &gt;&gt; super interesting. Yeah. &gt;&gt; super interesting. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right? Because you're changing the &gt;&gt; Right? Because you're changing the &gt;&gt; Right? Because you're changing the chemistry of the blood. chemistry of the blood. chemistry of the blood. &gt;&gt; You know what we discussed earlier, it's &gt;&gt; You know what we discussed earlier, it's &gt;&gt; You know what we discussed earlier, it's this cause and effect. And the this cause and effect. And the this cause and effect. And the really the way to show that something really the way to show that something really the way to show that something has an effect is you have a study where has an effect is you have a study where has an effect is you have a study where some people you take their blood, some people you take their blood, some people you take their blood, they do an exercise, and then you take they do an exercise, and then you take they do an exercise, and then you take their blood again, and you look, does it their blood again, and you look, does it their blood again, and you look, does it change something? Very easy to do. Can change something? Very easy to do. Can change something? Very easy to do. Can we do this experiment? Absolutely. we do this experiment? Absolutely. we do this experiment? Absolutely. &gt;&gt; ran a study with David with David &gt;&gt; ran a study with David with David &gt;&gt; ran a study with David with David Money we can get. Money we can get. The Money we can get. Money we can get. The Money we can get. Money we can get. The um I'm not worried about that. David um I'm not worried about that. David um I'm not worried about that. David Spiegel and I ran a study on breath Spiegel and I ran a study on breath Spiegel and I ran a study on breath work, and but we didn't look at how work, and but we didn't look at how work, and but we didn't look at how different patterns of breathing change a different patterns of breathing change a different patterns of breathing change a blood chemistry. blood chemistry. blood chemistry. &gt;&gt; would be super interesting. &gt;&gt; would be super interesting. &gt;&gt; would be super interesting. Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Cuz these are things that people can do &gt;&gt; Cuz these are things that people can do &gt;&gt; Cuz these are things that people can do at any age. Absolutely. And they're zero at any age. Absolutely. And they're zero at any age. Absolutely. And they're zero cost, but we don't have mechanistic cost, but we don't have mechanistic cost, but we don't have mechanistic data. We just have oh, you know, people data. We just have oh, you know, people data. We just have oh, you know, people who do chi gong or tai chi, live a who do chi gong or tai chi, live a who do chi gong or tai chi, live a long time, but then there's so many long time, but then there's so many long time, but then there's so many variables. They're outdoors, they're variables. They're outdoors, they're variables. They're outdoors, they're moving, it's social. And so, the thing moving, it's social. And so, the thing moving, it's social. And so, the thing that concerns me about the health span that concerns me about the health span that concerns me about the health span longevity space, if you will, is that we longevity space, if you will, is that we longevity space, if you will, is that we keep going around the merry-go-round, keep going around the merry-go-round, keep going around the merry-go-round, and then we keep going exercise, sleep, and then we keep going exercise, sleep, and then we keep going exercise, sleep, nutrition, social connection, sunlight, nutrition, social connection, sunlight, nutrition, social connection, sunlight, and don't smoke, drink in excess, play a and don't smoke, drink in excess, play a and don't smoke, drink in excess, play a contact sport where you hit your We just contact sport where you hit your We just contact sport where you hit your We just keep going around and around, and we keep going around and around, and we keep going around and around, and we need tools. Right. So, I think that's need tools. Right. So, I think that's need tools. Right. So, I think that's exactly what we recognized at Vero, exactly what we recognized at Vero, exactly what we recognized at Vero, um where we want to have tailored um where we want to have tailored um where we want to have tailored interventions that, you know, you give interventions that, you know, you give interventions that, you know, you give very specific advice based on, you know, very specific advice based on, you know, very specific advice based on, you know, if your heart is showing accelerated if your heart is showing accelerated if your heart is showing accelerated aging, this is the exact exercise that aging, this is the exact exercise that aging, this is the exact exercise that will help you based on studies that we will help you based on studies that we will help you based on studies that we just discussed, right? Where you say, just discussed, right? Where you say, just discussed, right? Where you say, "Okay, here we had 50 people who did "Okay, here we had 50 people who did "Okay, here we had 50 people who did this exercise and 50 who didn't or this exercise and 50 who didn't or this exercise and 50 who didn't or something different, and it had a clear something different, and it had a clear something different, and it had a clear benefit and made their heart younger or benefit and made their heart younger or benefit and made their heart younger or made their brain younger." made their brain younger." made their brain younger." That's really what the I think we all That's really what the I think we all That's really what the I think we all want, right? Rather than these broad want, right? Rather than these broad want, right? Rather than these broad sort of oh, live a healthy life. How's sort of oh, live a healthy life. How's sort of oh, live a healthy life. How's that going to help you? You want really that going to help you? You want really that going to help you? You want really tailored um advice, tailored um advice, tailored um advice, and then also validating that it and then also validating that it and then also validating that it actually does something. actually does something. actually does something. And this is not a promotional. I just And this is not a promotional. I just And this is not a promotional. I just learned about Vero uh learned about Vero uh learned about Vero uh today, really. I'd heard of it, but I'm today, really. I'd heard of it, but I'm today, really. I'd heard of it, but I'm learning in detail. So, it's I'm learning in detail. So, it's I'm learning in detail. So, it's now a company that anyone can access now a company that anyone can access now a company that anyone can access these tools. We are live. Um these tools. We are live. Um these tools. We are live. Um uh it's currently um a small number of uh it's currently um a small number of uh it's currently um a small number of clinics that we're working with, and we clinics that we're working with, and we clinics that we're working with, and we hope to, you know, grow and expand it hope to, you know, grow and expand it hope to, you know, grow and expand it quickly. Do you measure your steps or make it a Do you measure your steps or make it a Do you measure your steps or make it a point to walk a lot each day or both? point to walk a lot each day or both? point to walk a lot each day or both? I measure my steps. I have a Garmin. I measure my steps. I have a Garmin. I measure my steps. I have a Garmin. I find it useful. I find also the sleep find it useful. I find also the sleep find it useful. I find also the sleep measurements really useful. Talk about measurements really useful. Talk about measurements really useful. Talk about sleep earlier. Um sleep earlier. Um sleep earlier. Um you know, it tells me how well I slept, you know, it tells me how well I slept, you know, it tells me how well I slept, how much deep sleep. Yeah, I think how much deep sleep. Yeah, I think how much deep sleep. Yeah, I think that's useful. Yeah, it's wild. that's useful. Yeah, it's wild. that's useful. Yeah, it's wild. Nowadays, people just accept, "Oh, yeah, Nowadays, people just accept, "Oh, yeah, Nowadays, people just accept, "Oh, yeah, we track our sleep, etc." I remember we track our sleep, etc." I remember we track our sleep, etc." I remember when I was a postdoc at Stanford in 2005 when I was a postdoc at Stanford in 2005 when I was a postdoc at Stanford in 2005 to 2010, people getting into {quote} to 2010, people getting into {quote} to 2010, people getting into {quote} wearables, that's what they called them wearables, that's what they called them wearables, that's what they called them in the in the in the um And they didn't quite work yet. um And they didn't quite work yet. um And they didn't quite work yet. &gt;&gt; was one graduate student in the &gt;&gt; was one graduate student in the &gt;&gt; was one graduate student in the neuroscience program, this woman neuroscience program, this woman neuroscience program, this woman Rachel, who I think went to go work for Rachel, who I think went to go work for Rachel, who I think went to go work for a wearable company, and she had like a wearable company, and she had like a wearable company, and she had like seven or eight different This is like seven or eight different This is like seven or eight different This is like Mike Snyder. She was Mike Snyder. She was Mike Snyder. She was and we had him on here, yeah. And way and we had him on here, yeah. And way and we had him on here, yeah. And way ahead of the curve with all these ahead of the curve with all these ahead of the curve with all these wearables, and I remember thinking, wearables, and I remember thinking, wearables, and I remember thinking, "Who's going to wear all those watches?" "Who's going to wear all those watches?" "Who's going to wear all those watches?" And she said, "No, no, eventually it And she said, "No, no, eventually it And she said, "No, no, eventually it will all be condensed to one watch, or will all be condensed to one watch, or will all be condensed to one watch, or maybe even just a small ringer device." maybe even just a small ringer device." maybe even just a small ringer device." And I thought, "Here's All right, And I thought, "Here's All right, And I thought, "Here's All right, whatever. I've always been into health whatever. I've always been into health whatever. I've always been into health and wellness, but and wellness, but and wellness, but and sure enough, she was right." But far and sure enough, she was right." But far and sure enough, she was right." But far smarter than me. smarter than me. smarter than me. I think [snorts] we're going there. I think [snorts] we're going there. I think [snorts] we're going there. I think we're going to a place where soon think we're going to a place where soon think we're going to a place where soon many, many things will be measured. many, many things will be measured. many, many things will be measured. Um, like I would love eyeglasses where Um, like I would love eyeglasses where Um, like I would love eyeglasses where the um the um the um uh frames have a uh frames have a uh frames have a uh measure the amount of photons I get measure the amount of photons I get measure the amount of photons I get during the day to make sure I get during the day to make sure I get during the day to make sure I get sufficient sunlight. sufficient sunlight. sufficient sunlight. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's always something that I &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's always something that I &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's always something that I don't understand. There's a lot of don't understand. There's a lot of don't understand. There's a lot of people in this country who have shades, people in this country who have shades, people in this country who have shades, right? They they wear dark glasses all right? They they wear dark glasses all right? They they wear dark glasses all day long. This is so bad for your brain. day long. This is so bad for your brain. day long. This is so bad for your brain. And for your mental health. We know And for your mental health. We know And for your mental health. We know 80,000 plus subjects in this in this UK 80,000 plus subjects in this in this UK 80,000 plus subjects in this in this UK study, the brighter your days, ideally study, the brighter your days, ideally study, the brighter your days, ideally from sunlight, but the brighter your from sunlight, but the brighter your from sunlight, but the brighter your days and the darker your nights, days and the darker your nights, days and the darker your nights, the less susceptible you are to every the less susceptible you are to every the less susceptible you are to every single mental health condition. And if single mental health condition. And if single mental health condition. And if you have a mental health condition, it you have a mental health condition, it you have a mental health condition, it gets way better. So, you need bright gets way better. So, you need bright gets way better. So, you need bright days and dark nights, and artificial days and dark nights, and artificial days and dark nights, and artificial lights during the day are not lights during the day are not lights during the day are not sufficient. And at night a small amount sufficient. And at night a small amount sufficient. And at night a small amount of artificial light is too much. So, of artificial light is too much. So, of artificial light is too much. So, these things should be straightforward these things should be straightforward these things should be straightforward to measure. to measure. to measure. &gt;&gt; Aren't people in the south happier? You &gt;&gt; Aren't people in the south happier? You &gt;&gt; Aren't people in the south happier? You know, in Europe, if you look sort of know, in Europe, if you look sort of know, in Europe, if you look sort of they enjoy life more, they have more they enjoy life more, they have more they enjoy life more, they have more food, they sit together, they have fun. food, they sit together, they have fun. food, they sit together, they have fun. And the more north you go, the more And the more north you go, the more And the more north you go, the more serious and the more depression you serious and the more depression you serious and the more depression you find. &gt;&gt; have Danish relatives. I don't want to &gt;&gt; have Danish relatives. I don't want to &gt;&gt; have Danish relatives. I don't want to insult them. But insult them. But insult them. But and they're and they're very cheerful. and they're and they're very cheerful. and they're and they're very cheerful. But it's interesting people vary a great But it's interesting people vary a great But it's interesting people vary a great deal in their susceptibility to deal in their susceptibility to deal in their susceptibility to artificial light at night. So I've long artificial light at night. So I've long artificial light at night. So I've long said you need to dim the light. Some said you need to dim the light. Some said you need to dim the light. Some people should even wear short wavelength people should even wear short wavelength people should even wear short wavelength blocking glasses, you know, maybe even blocking glasses, you know, maybe even blocking glasses, you know, maybe even red light. Some people a small amount of red light. Some people a small amount of red light. Some people a small amount of artificial light at night increases artificial light at night increases artificial light at night increases their cortisol really substantially and their cortisol really substantially and their cortisol really substantially and can disrupt their sleep. Other people can disrupt their sleep. Other people can disrupt their sleep. Other people less so. So there seems to be some less so. So there seems to be some less so. So there seems to be some divergence and it doesn't correlate with divergence and it doesn't correlate with divergence and it doesn't correlate with light eyes or dark eyes. with light eyes or dark eyes. with light eyes or dark eyes. I am very sensitive to light at I am very sensitive to light at I am very sensitive to light at night. Really disrupt my sleep. Some night. Really disrupt my sleep. Some night. Really disrupt my sleep. Some people not so much. But in terms of people not so much. But in terms of people not so much. But in terms of temperament, I'm going to inspire some temperament, I'm going to inspire some temperament, I'm going to inspire some family arguments here, but I don't know. family arguments here, but I don't know. family arguments here, but I don't know. Yeah. Yeah, it's I mean even growing up Yeah. Yeah, it's I mean even growing up Yeah. Yeah, it's I mean even growing up in Switzerland, you know, we had in Switzerland, you know, we had in Switzerland, you know, we had for very short days in the winter and for very short days in the winter and for very short days in the winter and then often fog. then often fog. then often fog. Um it it's hard to get up in the morning. it it's hard to get up in the morning. it it's hard to get up in the morning. And then coming to California, it's And then coming to California, it's And then coming to California, it's sunny all day, sunny all day, sunny all day, you know, most of the year. you know, most of the year. you know, most of the year. It just makes it easier to get your It just makes it easier to get your It just makes it easier to get your day started and yeah, I love the day started and yeah, I love the day started and yeah, I love the sun. Yeah, I think if people don't have sun. Yeah, I think if people don't have sun. Yeah, I think if people don't have access to sunlight enough sunlight, access to sunlight enough sunlight, access to sunlight enough sunlight, there great data that a 10,000 lux there great data that a 10,000 lux there great data that a 10,000 lux artificial light placed in the kitchen artificial light placed in the kitchen artificial light placed in the kitchen or in the bathroom when you wake up in or in the bathroom when you wake up in or in the bathroom when you wake up in the morning, you don't need a lot of the morning, you don't need a lot of the morning, you don't need a lot of time in front of it. You don't have to time in front of it. You don't have to time in front of it. You don't have to stare at it. That can help offset some stare at it. That can help offset some stare at it. That can help offset some seasonal depression and some people just need depression and some people just need depression and some people just need more photons to get that morning spike more photons to get that morning spike more photons to get that morning spike in cortisol, which is good to get the in cortisol, which is good to get the in cortisol, which is good to get the catecholamines going, dopamine and so catecholamines going, dopamine and so catecholamines going, dopamine and so on. I mean, the power of light over our on. I mean, the power of light over our on. I mean, the power of light over our mood and metabolism is huge. Amazing. mood and metabolism is huge. Amazing. mood and metabolism is huge. Amazing. Yeah. Should do another study on that. I Yeah. Should do another study on that. I Yeah. Should do another study on that. I mean, listen, I I'm due for a mean, listen, I I'm due for a mean, listen, I I'm due for a sabbatical. Can I do a sabbatical in sabbatical. Can I do a sabbatical in sabbatical. Can I do a sabbatical in your lab? Tell me, is there anything your lab? Tell me, is there anything your lab? Tell me, is there anything that you're particularly excited about that I you're particularly excited about that I you're particularly excited about that I did not ask you about. What I You've did not ask you about. What I You've did not ask you about. What I You've been publishing so well for so long now, been publishing so well for so long now, been publishing so well for so long now, and you really put this whole field of and you really put this whole field of and you really put this whole field of looking at blood borne and other um looking at blood borne and other um looking at blood borne and other um factors correlated with youth factors correlated with youth factors correlated with youth um as a therapeutic. You really put that on as a therapeutic. You really put that on as a therapeutic. You really put that on the map in a serious way, and I really the map in a serious way, and I really the map in a serious way, and I really want to congratulate you for doing that want to congratulate you for doing that want to congratulate you for doing that on a backdrop of uh Dracula stories and on a backdrop of uh Dracula stories and on a backdrop of uh Dracula stories and kind of sensationalism around that. kind of sensationalism around that. kind of sensationalism around that. You're clearly a serious scientist You're clearly a serious scientist You're clearly a serious scientist taking things on seriously. And also taking things on seriously. And also taking things on seriously. And also measuring mult- multiple factors from measuring mult- multiple factors from measuring mult- multiple factors from blood, as you know, has a kind of a blood, as you know, has a kind of a blood, as you know, has a kind of a complicated history, but you you've complicated history, but you you've complicated history, but you you've really moved this forward in a in a um really moved this forward in a in a um really moved this forward in a in a um in a very rigorous way, and so that's in a very rigorous way, and so that's in a very rigorous way, and so that's awesome. What are you thinking about awesome. What are you thinking about awesome. What are you thinking about these days that I wouldn't know about? these days that I wouldn't know about? these days that I wouldn't know about? &gt;&gt; for the opportunity. Yeah, so &gt;&gt; for the opportunity. Yeah, so &gt;&gt; for the opportunity. Yeah, so one thing that um one thing that um one thing that um should later this week actually be um should later this week actually be um should later this week actually be um publicly available on a preprint publicly available on a preprint publicly available on a preprint server. So, we took this idea of looking at um So, we took this idea of looking at um So, we took this idea of looking at um organs and, you know, getting an organs and, you know, getting an organs and, you know, getting an estimate of how old is your brain or estimate of how old is your brain or estimate of how old is your brain or your heart. We took this to the next your heart. We took this to the next your heart. We took this to the next level and ask, can we build similar level and ask, can we build similar level and ask, can we build similar models and estimate how old cells are in models and estimate how old cells are in models and estimate how old cells are in your body? So, we have many different your body? So, we have many different your body? So, we have many different cell types, right? That's how we have cell types, right? That's how we have cell types, right? That's how we have specialized organs. So, we were able to specialized organs. So, we were able to specialized organs. So, we were able to with the current technology that with the current technology that with the current technology that measures these thousands of proteins, we measures these thousands of proteins, we measures these thousands of proteins, we were able to assign proteins to 40 were able to assign proteins to 40 were able to assign proteins to 40 different cell types. different cell types. different cell types. And so, we can now make estimates of And so, we can now make estimates of And so, we can now make estimates of specific cell types in your body. One of specific cell types in your body. One of specific cell types in your body. One of the most striking finding was the most striking finding was the most striking finding was we looked in people with different we looked in people with different we looked in people with different neurodegenerative diseases and asked, neurodegenerative diseases and asked, neurodegenerative diseases and asked, how old are all their different cell how old are all their different cell how old are all their different cell types? And we find in this rare disease called And we find in this rare disease called And we find in this rare disease called um amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS. In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS. In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS. In in the US, we often call it Lou Gehrig's in the US, we often call it Lou Gehrig's in the US, we often call it Lou Gehrig's disease because Lou Gehrig was this disease because Lou Gehrig was this disease because Lou Gehrig was this baseball player who got this devastating baseball player who got this devastating baseball player who got this devastating disease. It's a muscle weakness that disease. It's a muscle weakness that disease. It's a muscle weakness that often progresses extremely quickly and often progresses extremely quickly and often progresses extremely quickly and people die. people die. people die. Um and what we found is that these and what we found is that these and what we found is that these individuals had extremely old and individuals had extremely old and individuals had extremely old and enrichment in extremely old muscle enrichment in extremely old muscle enrichment in extremely old muscle cells. Skeletal muscle cells in particular and Skeletal muscle cells in particular and Skeletal muscle cells in particular and also heart muscle cells, cardiomyocytes. also heart muscle cells, cardiomyocytes. also heart muscle cells, cardiomyocytes. So, there is this very strong So, there is this very strong So, there is this very strong association and then we looked in a association and then we looked in a association and then we looked in a progressive in a longitudinal study progressive in a longitudinal study progressive in a longitudinal study cross-sectional but where we had 20 cross-sectional but where we had 20 cross-sectional but where we had 20 years follow-up. It's called the UK years follow-up. It's called the UK years follow-up. It's called the UK Biobank. So, we had blood samples from Biobank. So, we had blood samples from Biobank. So, we had blood samples from people when they entered their start the people when they entered their start the people when they entered their start the study healthy study healthy study healthy and then a number of people developed and then a number of people developed and then a number of people developed about 250 developed ALS over the course about 250 developed ALS over the course about 250 developed ALS over the course of 15 years. of 15 years. of 15 years. And we found a strongly increased risk to we found a strongly increased risk to we found a strongly increased risk to develop the disease if they had these develop the disease if they had these develop the disease if they had these extremely old muscle cells. Hm. So, here extremely old muscle cells. Hm. So, here extremely old muscle cells. Hm. So, here we have now a much we have now a much we have now a much finer resolution and granularity where finer resolution and granularity where finer resolution and granularity where we can we can we can get more predictive power. We can get more predictive power. We can get more predictive power. We can get more precise prediction of what type of more precise prediction of what type of more precise prediction of what type of disease you might get. disease you might get. disease you might get. And of course at the molecular level and And of course at the molecular level and And of course at the molecular level and the cellular level we know where the cellular level we know where the cellular level we know where the problem might be, right? It's not just problem might be, right? It's not just problem might be, right? It's not just the whole organ the whole organ the whole organ but now we know which cell type. but now we know which cell type. but now we know which cell type. Another one was there's these cells we Another one was there's these cells we Another one was there's these cells we call astrocytes in the brain. We find a call astrocytes in the brain. We find a call astrocytes in the brain. We find a very strong association of the age of very strong association of the age of very strong association of the age of astrocytes and development of astrocytes and development of astrocytes and development of Alzheimer's disease. Much stronger than Alzheimer's disease. Much stronger than Alzheimer's disease. Much stronger than just the brain age, so the age of your just the brain age, so the age of your just the brain age, so the age of your whole brain. When we look now at these whole brain. When we look now at these whole brain. When we look now at these individual cells, they are very strong individual cells, they are very strong individual cells, they are very strong predictor of Alzheimer's disease, predictor of Alzheimer's disease, predictor of Alzheimer's disease, especially together with a genetic risk especially together with a genetic risk especially together with a genetic risk factor. So, that's something that we factor. So, that's something that we factor. So, that's something that we have been developing and really excited have been developing and really excited have been developing and really excited about. But my about. But my about. But my ultimate greatest stimulation right now ultimate greatest stimulation right now ultimate greatest stimulation right now is to is to is to build a map of the human proteome across build a map of the human proteome across build a map of the human proteome across different genetic diseases. So, what I'm different genetic diseases. So, what I'm different genetic diseases. So, what I'm trying to do is to ask if somebody has a trying to do is to ask if somebody has a trying to do is to ask if somebody has a disease that is caused by a single genetic that is caused by a single genetic that is caused by a single genetic mutation and there's mutation and there's mutation and there's about 6,000 such we call them monogenic about 6,000 such we call them monogenic about 6,000 such we call them monogenic diseases where if you have a mutation, diseases where if you have a mutation, diseases where if you have a mutation, you will get a disease, childhood you will get a disease, childhood you will get a disease, childhood disease or an adult disease. disease or an adult disease. disease or an adult disease. So, what I want to do is to look at So, what I want to do is to look at So, what I want to do is to look at individuals with these mutations individuals with these mutations individuals with these mutations and profile their plasma. Basically, and profile their plasma. Basically, and profile their plasma. Basically, measure all the proteins and see are measure all the proteins and see are measure all the proteins and see are they different from healthy people? they different from healthy people? they different from healthy people? And if you do that across hundreds of And if you do that across hundreds of And if you do that across hundreds of diseases, you basically get a picture of diseases, you basically get a picture of diseases, you basically get a picture of how our body responds to the disruption how our body responds to the disruption how our body responds to the disruption of specific genes. of specific genes. of specific genes. And the idea is that this will allow us And the idea is that this will allow us And the idea is that this will allow us to look at any type of disease where we to look at any type of disease where we to look at any type of disease where we don't know how it's caused and then say, don't know how it's caused and then say, don't know how it's caused and then say, this looks like this genetic disease. this looks like this genetic disease. this looks like this genetic disease. Basically, what we've been doing in Basically, what we've been doing in Basically, what we've been doing in animals with worms, right? Where we knock out with worms, right? Where we knock out with worms, right? Where we knock out every gene or in flies every gene or in flies every gene or in flies use the human use the human use the human experiment, if you will. experiment, if you will. experiment, if you will. And this may be a bit disparaging. These And this may be a bit disparaging. These And this may be a bit disparaging. These are obviously people who have diseases, are obviously people who have diseases, are obviously people who have diseases, but there are repositories where people but there are repositories where people but there are repositories where people volunteer to make these samples volunteer to make these samples volunteer to make these samples available for research and so available for research and so available for research and so we have had the opportunity already to we have had the opportunity already to we have had the opportunity already to look at 25 different genetic diseases look at 25 different genetic diseases look at 25 different genetic diseases and we find these very specific and we find these very specific and we find these very specific patterns. So, that's what I want to build and then So, that's what I want to build and then So, that's what I want to build and then make it publicly available so that any make it publicly available so that any make it publicly available so that any researcher can ask researcher can ask researcher can ask how does my protein of interest that I how does my protein of interest that I how does my protein of interest that I want to study, how does it change in want to study, how does it change in want to study, how does it change in these different genetic diseases and these different genetic diseases and these different genetic diseases and learn about how they're related to each learn about how they're related to each learn about how they're related to each other and which biological pathways they other and which biological pathways they other and which biological pathways they may change. That's what motivates me the change. That's what motivates me the change. That's what motivates me the most. &gt;&gt; it. I It's so clear that you're a &gt;&gt; it. I It's so clear that you're a &gt;&gt; it. I It's so clear that you're a driven person and it's learning about driven person and it's learning about driven person and it's learning about what the next vista is what the next vista is what the next vista is always exciting. is always exciting. is always exciting. And again, thanks for the incredible And again, thanks for the incredible And again, thanks for the incredible work that you've been doing for all work that you've been doing for all work that you've been doing for all these years. You know, bringing a level these years. You know, bringing a level these years. You know, bringing a level of rigor and seriousness to something of rigor and seriousness to something of rigor and seriousness to something that prior to that was just kind of tossed prior to that was just kind of tossed prior to that was just kind of tossed around as around as around as kind of an observation and a and kind of an observation and a and kind of an observation and a and something to discuss at parties, you something to discuss at parties, you something to discuss at parties, you know, young blood and this kind of know, young blood and this kind of know, young blood and this kind of thing. You're clearly thing. You're clearly thing. You're clearly um shedding light on real mechanistic shedding light on real mechanistic shedding light on real mechanistic knowledge and the ability to measure knowledge and the ability to measure knowledge and the ability to measure aging of different organs now, I think aging of different organs now, I think aging of different organs now, I think is a tremendous technology. I'm very is a tremendous technology. I'm very is a tremendous technology. I'm very curious about that. I know a number of curious about that. I know a number of curious about that. I know a number of other people will be. We'll put links to other people will be. We'll put links to other people will be. We'll put links to the various things and papers, etc. the various things and papers, etc. the various things and papers, etc. Uh And I also want to thank you for coming And I also want to thank you for coming And I also want to thank you for coming here, taking time out of your busy here, taking time out of your busy here, taking time out of your busy schedule, your lab, your family, your schedule, your lab, your family, your schedule, your lab, your family, your vineyard, this is a plural, to educate vineyard, this is a plural, to educate vineyard, this is a plural, to educate us on health and on healthspan and on us on health and on healthspan and on us on health and on healthspan and on the relationship between youthfulness the relationship between youthfulness the relationship between youthfulness and aging and aging and aging and what we can do to really and what we can do to really and what we can do to really ameliorate the ameliorate the ameliorate the degradation of health span. You're degradation of health span. You're degradation of health span. You're developing the things that change lives developing the things that change lives developing the things that change lives for the better. So, thank you so much. I for the better. So, thank you so much. I for the better. So, thank you so much. I really appreciate you. really appreciate you. really appreciate you. &gt;&gt; you so much for having me. &gt;&gt; you so much for having me. &gt;&gt; you so much for having me. &gt;&gt; Yeah, come back again and talk about all &gt;&gt; Yeah, come back again and talk about all &gt;&gt; Yeah, come back again and talk about all the other discoveries and I'll buy the other discoveries and I'll buy the other discoveries and I'll buy a bottle of the wine from your vineyard a bottle of the wine from your vineyard a bottle of the wine from your vineyard and I'll gift it to one of the drinkers and I'll gift it to one of the drinkers and I'll gift it to one of the drinkers in my life. Sounds good. in my life. Sounds good. in my life. Sounds good. &gt;&gt; All right. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; All right. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; All right. Thank you very much. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Tony Weiss Corey. To discussion with Dr. Tony Weiss Corey. To discussion with Dr. Tony Weiss Corey. To learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find links to the various resources we links to the various resources we links to the various resources we discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In terrific zero cost way to support us. In terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Tony Weiss today's discussion with Dr. Tony Weiss today's discussion with Dr. Tony Weiss Corey. And last, but certainly not Corey. And last, but certainly not Corey. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]