Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing memory, in particular how are discussing memory, in particular how are discussing memory, in particular how to improve your memory. We are to improve your memory. We are to improve your memory. We are constantly being bombarded with physical constantly being bombarded with physical constantly being bombarded with physical stimuli, patterns of touch on our skin, stimuli, patterns of touch on our skin, stimuli, patterns of touch on our skin, light to our eyes, light to our skin for light to our eyes, light to our skin for light to our eyes, light to our skin for that matter, smells, tastes, and sound that matter, smells, tastes, and sound that matter, smells, tastes, and sound waves. Each one of and all of those waves. Each one of and all of those waves. Each one of and all of those sensory stimuli are converted into sensory stimuli are converted into sensory stimuli are converted into electricity and chemical signals by your electricity and chemical signals by your electricity and chemical signals by your so-called nervous system, your brain, so-called nervous system, your brain, so-called nervous system, your brain, your spinal cord, and all their your spinal cord, and all their your spinal cord, and all their connections with the organs of the body connections with the organs of the body connections with the organs of the body and all the connections of your organs and all the connections of your organs and all the connections of your organs of the body back to your brain and of the body back to your brain and of the body back to your brain and spinal cord. For instance, if you can spinal cord. For instance, if you can spinal cord. For instance, if you can hear me speaking right now, you are hear me speaking right now, you are hear me speaking right now, you are perceiving my voice, but you are also perceiving my voice, but you are also perceiving my voice, but you are also most likely neglecting the feeling of most likely neglecting the feeling of most likely neglecting the feeling of the contact of your skin with whichever the contact of your skin with whichever the contact of your skin with whichever surface you happen to be sitting or surface you happen to be sitting or surface you happen to be sitting or standing on. It is only by perceiving a standing on. It is only by perceiving a standing on. It is only by perceiving a subset, a small fraction of the sensory subset, a small fraction of the sensory subset, a small fraction of the sensory events in our environment, that we can events in our environment, that we can events in our environment, that we can make sense of the world around us. make sense of the world around us. make sense of the world around us. Otherwise, we would just be overwhelmed Otherwise, we would just be overwhelmed Otherwise, we would just be overwhelmed with all the things that are happening with all the things that are happening with all the things that are happening in any one given moment. in any one given moment. in any one given moment. Now, memory is simply a bias in which Now, memory is simply a bias in which Now, memory is simply a bias in which perceptions will be replayed again in perceptions will be replayed again in perceptions will be replayed again in the future. Now, this might seem the future. Now, this might seem the future. Now, this might seem immensely simple, but it raises this immensely simple, but it raises this immensely simple, but it raises this really interesting question, which we really interesting question, which we really interesting question, which we talked about before, which is why do we talked about before, which is why do we talked about before, which is why do we remember certain things and not others? remember certain things and not others? remember certain things and not others? Because according to what I've just said, according to what I've just said, according to what I've just said, as you go through life, you're as you go through life, you're as you go through life, you're experiencing things all the time. You're experiencing things all the time. You're experiencing things all the time. You're constantly being bombarded with sensory constantly being bombarded with sensory constantly being bombarded with sensory stimuli. Some of those sensory stimuli stimuli. Some of those sensory stimuli stimuli. Some of those sensory stimuli you perceive, and only some of those you perceive, and only some of those you perceive, and only some of those perceptions get stamped down as perceptions get stamped down as perceptions get stamped down as memories. Today I'm going to teach you how certain Today I'm going to teach you how certain Today I'm going to teach you how certain things get stamped down as memories, and things get stamped down as memories, and things get stamped down as memories, and I'm going to teach you how to leverage I'm going to teach you how to leverage I'm going to teach you how to leverage that process in order to remember the that process in order to remember the that process in order to remember the information that you want far better. information that you want far better. information that you want far better. Each individual thing that we remember Each individual thing that we remember Each individual thing that we remember or that we want to remember is linked to or that we want to remember is linked to or that we want to remember is linked to something by either a close, a medium, something by either a close, a medium, something by either a close, a medium, or a very distant association. or a very distant association. or a very distant association. This turns out to be immensely This turns out to be immensely This turns out to be immensely important. I know many of you will read important. I know many of you will read important. I know many of you will read or will encounter programs that are or will encounter programs that are or will encounter programs that are designed to help you enhance your designed to help you enhance your designed to help you enhance your memory. You know, that you have these uh memory. You know, that you have these uh memory. You know, that you have these uh phenoms that can remember 50 names in a phenoms that can remember 50 names in a phenoms that can remember 50 names in a in a room full of people where they can in a room full of people where they can in a room full of people where they can remember a bunch of names of novel remember a bunch of names of novel remember a bunch of names of novel objects or maybe even in different objects or maybe even in different objects or maybe even in different languages. And often times that's done languages. And often times that's done languages. And often times that's done by association. So, people will come up by association. So, people will come up by association. So, people will come up with little mental tricks to, you know, with little mental tricks to, you know, with little mental tricks to, you know, either link the sound of a word or the either link the sound of a word or the either link the sound of a word or the meaning of a word in some way that's meaning of a word in some way that's meaning of a word in some way that's meaningful for them and will enhance meaningful for them and will enhance meaningful for them and will enhance their memory. their memory. their memory. That can be done and is impressive when That can be done and is impressive when That can be done and is impressive when we see it. And for those of you who can we see it. And for those of you who can we see it. And for those of you who can do that, congratulations. Most of us do that, congratulations. Most of us do that, congratulations. Most of us can't do that or at least it requires a can't do that or at least it requires a can't do that or at least it requires a lot of effort and training. lot of effort and training. lot of effort and training. However, there are things that we can do However, there are things that we can do However, there are things that we can do that leverage the natural biology of our that leverage the natural biology of our that leverage the natural biology of our nervous system to enhance learning and nervous system to enhance learning and nervous system to enhance learning and memory of particular perceptions and memory of particular perceptions and memory of particular perceptions and particular information. So, let's talk particular information. So, let's talk particular information. So, let's talk about tools for enhancing memory. Now, about tools for enhancing memory. Now, about tools for enhancing memory. Now, there's one tool that is absolutely there's one tool that is absolutely there's one tool that is absolutely clear works. And that's repetition. clear works. And that's repetition. clear works. And that's repetition. The more often that you perform The more often that you perform The more often that you perform something or that you recite something, something or that you recite something, something or that you recite something, the more likely you are to remember it the more likely you are to remember it the more likely you are to remember it in the future. in the future. in the future. And while that might seem obvious, it's And while that might seem obvious, it's And while that might seem obvious, it's worth thinking about what's happening worth thinking about what's happening worth thinking about what's happening when you repeat something. But when I when you repeat something. But when I when you repeat something. But when I say what's happening, I mean at the say what's happening, I mean at the say what's happening, I mean at the neural level. What's happening is that neural level. What's happening is that neural level. What's happening is that you are encouraging the firing of you are encouraging the firing of you are encouraging the firing of particular chains of neurons particular chains of neurons particular chains of neurons that reside in a particular circuit, that reside in a particular circuit, that reside in a particular circuit, right? So, a particular sequence of right? So, a particular sequence of right? So, a particular sequence of neurons playing neuron A, B, C, D played neurons playing neuron A, B, C, D played neurons playing neuron A, B, C, D played in that particular sequence over and in that particular sequence over and in that particular sequence over and over and over again. And with more over and over again. And with more over and over again. And with more repetitions, you get more strengthening repetitions, you get more strengthening repetitions, you get more strengthening of those nerve connections. The problem of those nerve connections. The problem of those nerve connections. The problem for most people is that they either for most people is that they either for most people is that they either don't have the patience, they don't have don't have the patience, they don't have don't have the patience, they don't have the time, and sometimes they literally the time, and sometimes they literally the time, and sometimes they literally don't have the time because they've got don't have the time because they've got don't have the time because they've got a deadline on something that they're a deadline on something that they're a deadline on something that they're trying to remember and learn. trying to remember and learn. trying to remember and learn. Or they simply would like to be able to Or they simply would like to be able to Or they simply would like to be able to remember things better in general and remember things better in general and remember things better in general and remember them more quickly. This process remember them more quickly. This process remember them more quickly. This process of accelerating repetition-based of accelerating repetition-based of accelerating repetition-based learning so that your learning curve learning so that your learning curve learning so that your learning curve doesn't go from having to perform doesn't go from having to perform doesn't go from having to perform something a thousand times and then something a thousand times and then something a thousand times and then gradually over time it's a thousand, 750 gradually over time it's a thousand, 750 gradually over time it's a thousand, 750 times a day, 500 times a day, 300 times a day, 500 times a day, 300 times a day, 500 times a day, 300 times a day and down to no repetitions, right? a day and down to no repetitions, right? a day and down to no repetitions, right? You can just perform that thing the You can just perform that thing the You can just perform that thing the first time and every time. first time and every time. first time and every time. Well, there is a way to shift that curve Well, there is a way to shift that curve Well, there is a way to shift that curve so that you can essentially establish so that you can essentially establish so that you can essentially establish stronger connections between the neurons stronger connections between the neurons stronger connections between the neurons that are involved in generating that are involved in generating that are involved in generating that memory or behavior more quickly. memory or behavior more quickly. memory or behavior more quickly. How do you do that? Well, in order to How do you do that? Well, in order to How do you do that? Well, in order to answer that we have to look at the answer that we have to look at the answer that we have to look at the beautiful work of James McGaugh and beautiful work of James McGaugh and beautiful work of James McGaugh and Larry Cahill. James McGaugh and Larry Cahill. James McGaugh and Larry Cahill. James McGaugh and Larry Cahill did a number of experiments over Cahill did a number of experiments over Cahill did a number of experiments over several decades really that really several decades really that really several decades really that really established what's required to get established what's required to get established what's required to get better at remembering things and to do better at remembering things and to do better at remembering things and to do so very quickly. They evaluated the so very quickly. They evaluated the so very quickly. They evaluated the capacity for stress and for particular capacity for stress and for particular capacity for stress and for particular neurochemicals associated with stress to neurochemicals associated with stress to neurochemicals associated with stress to improve our ability to learn improve our ability to learn improve our ability to learn information, not just information that information, not just information that information, not just information that is emotional is emotional is emotional but information of all kinds. So, I'm but information of all kinds. So, I'm but information of all kinds. So, I'm going to describe some experiments done going to describe some experiments done going to describe some experiments done in animal models just very briefly and in animal models just very briefly and in animal models just very briefly and then experiments done on human subjects. then experiments done on human subjects. then experiments done on human subjects. If you take a rat or a mouse and put it If you take a rat or a mouse and put it If you take a rat or a mouse and put it in an arena in an arena in an arena where at one location the animal where at one location the animal where at one location the animal receives an electrical shock receives an electrical shock receives an electrical shock and then you come back the next day, you and then you come back the next day, you and then you come back the next day, you remove the shock-evoking device remove the shock-evoking device remove the shock-evoking device and you let the animal move around that and you let the animal move around that and you let the animal move around that arena. That animal will quite arena. That animal will quite arena. That animal will quite understandably avoid the location where understandably avoid the location where understandably avoid the location where it was shocked, so-called conditioned it was shocked, so-called conditioned it was shocked, so-called conditioned place aversion. place aversion. place aversion. That effect of avoiding that particular That effect of avoiding that particular That effect of avoiding that particular location occurs in one trial. That's a location occurs in one trial. That's a location occurs in one trial. That's a good example of one trial learning. So, good example of one trial learning. So, good example of one trial learning. So, somehow the animal knows that it was somehow the animal knows that it was somehow the animal knows that it was shocked at that location. It remembers shocked at that location. It remembers shocked at that location. It remembers that. It is a hippocampal-dependent It is a hippocampal-dependent It is a hippocampal-dependent learning. They remember it after the learning. They remember it after the learning. They remember it after the first time and every time unless first time and every time unless first time and every time unless you are to block the release of certain you are to block the release of certain you are to block the release of certain chemicals in the brain and body and then chemicals in the brain and body and then chemicals in the brain and body and then chemicals I'm referring to are chemicals I'm referring to are chemicals I'm referring to are epinephrine, adrenaline, and to some epinephrine, adrenaline, and to some epinephrine, adrenaline, and to some extent cortisol. Now, we know that the extent cortisol. Now, we know that the extent cortisol. Now, we know that the effect of getting one-trial learning effect of getting one-trial learning effect of getting one-trial learning somehow involves epinephrine at least in somehow involves epinephrine at least in somehow involves epinephrine at least in this particular experimental scenario this particular experimental scenario this particular experimental scenario because if researchers do the exact same because if researchers do the exact same because if researchers do the exact same experiment and they have done the exact experiment and they have done the exact experiment and they have done the exact same experiment, but they introduce a same experiment, but they introduce a same experiment, but they introduce a pharmacological blocker of epinephrine pharmacological blocker of epinephrine pharmacological blocker of epinephrine so that epinephrine is released in so that epinephrine is released in so that epinephrine is released in response to the shock, but it cannot response to the shock, but it cannot response to the shock, but it cannot actually bind to its receptors and have actually bind to its receptors and have actually bind to its receptors and have all of its biological effects well, then all of its biological effects well, then all of its biological effects well, then the animal is perfectly happy to tread the animal is perfectly happy to tread the animal is perfectly happy to tread back into the area where it received the back into the area where it received the back into the area where it received the shock. It's almost as if it didn't know shock. It's almost as if it didn't know shock. It's almost as if it didn't know or we have to assume it didn't remember or we have to assume it didn't remember or we have to assume it didn't remember that it received the shock at that it received the shock at that it received the shock at that location. So, it all seems pretty obvious when you So, it all seems pretty obvious when you So, it all seems pretty obvious when you hear it. Something bad happens in a hear it. Something bad happens in a hear it. Something bad happens in a location, you don't go back to that location, you don't go back to that location, you don't go back to that location. But, it turns out that the location. But, it turns out that the location. But, it turns out that the opposite is also true, meaning for opposite is also true, meaning for opposite is also true, meaning for something called conditioned place something called conditioned place something called conditioned place preference, you can take an animal, put preference, you can take an animal, put preference, you can take an animal, put it into an arena, feed it or reward it into an arena, feed it or reward it into an arena, feed it or reward it somehow at one location, take the animal somehow at one location, take the animal somehow at one location, take the animal out, come back the next day, no food is out, come back the next day, no food is out, come back the next day, no food is introduced, but it'll go back to the introduced, but it'll go back to the introduced, but it'll go back to the location where it received the food, or location where it received the food, or location where it received the food, or you can do any variant of this. You can you can do any variant of this. You can you can do any variant of this. You can make the arena a little bit chilly and make the arena a little bit chilly and make the arena a little bit chilly and provide warmth at that location, or you provide warmth at that location, or you provide warmth at that location, or you can take a male animal, it turns out can take a male animal, it turns out can take a male animal, it turns out male rats and mice will mate at any male rats and mice will mate at any male rats and mice will mate at any point, or a female animal that's at the point, or a female animal that's at the point, or a female animal that's at the particular so-called receptive phase of particular so-called receptive phase of particular so-called receptive phase of her mating cycle, and give them an her mating cycle, and give them an her mating cycle, and give them an opportunity to mate at a given location, opportunity to mate at a given location, opportunity to mate at a given location, they'll go back to that location and they'll go back to that location and they'll go back to that location and wait and wait. This is perhaps why wait and wait. This is perhaps why wait and wait. This is perhaps why people go back to the same bar or the people go back to the same bar or the people go back to the same bar or the bar seat at the bar or the same bar seat at the bar or the same bar seat at the bar or the same restaurant and wait for cuz of the one restaurant and wait for cuz of the one restaurant and wait for cuz of the one time they, you know, things worked out time they, you know, things worked out time they, you know, things worked out for them, what it whatever the context for them, what it whatever the context for them, what it whatever the context was. Conditioned place preference was. Conditioned place preference was. Conditioned place preference as with conditioned place avoidance, as with conditioned place avoidance, as with conditioned place avoidance, depends on the release of adrenaline. depends on the release of adrenaline. depends on the release of adrenaline. Right? It's not just about stress. It's Right? It's not just about stress. It's Right? It's not just about stress. It's about a heightened emotional state in about a heightened emotional state in about a heightened emotional state in the brain and body. Okay, this is really the brain and body. Okay, this is really the brain and body. Okay, this is really important. It's not just about stress. important. It's not just about stress. important. It's not just about stress. You can get one trial learning for You can get one trial learning for You can get one trial learning for positive events, conditioned place positive events, conditioned place positive events, conditioned place preference, and you can get one trial preference, and you can get one trial preference, and you can get one trial learning for negative events. This turns learning for negative events. This turns learning for negative events. This turns out all to be true for humans as well. out all to be true for humans as well. out all to be true for humans as well. We know that because McGaugh and Cahill We know that because McGaugh and Cahill We know that because McGaugh and Cahill did experiments where they gave people a did experiments where they gave people a did experiments where they gave people a boring paragraph to read and only a boring paragraph to read and only a boring paragraph to read and only a boring paragraph to read, boring paragraph to read, boring paragraph to read, but one group of subjects but one group of subjects but one group of subjects was asked to read the paragraph and then was asked to read the paragraph and then was asked to read the paragraph and then to place their arm into very, very cold to place their arm into very, very cold to place their arm into very, very cold water. In fact, it was ice water. We water. In fact, it was ice water. We water. In fact, it was ice water. We know that placing one's arm into ice know that placing one's arm into ice know that placing one's arm into ice water, especially if it's up to the water, especially if it's up to the water, especially if it's up to the shoulder or near to it, evokes the shoulder or near to it, evokes the shoulder or near to it, evokes the release of adrenaline in the body. It's release of adrenaline in the body. It's release of adrenaline in the body. It's not an enormous release, but it's a not an enormous release, but it's a not an enormous release, but it's a significant increase. And yes, they significant increase. And yes, they significant increase. And yes, they measured adrenaline release. In some measured adrenaline release. In some measured adrenaline release. In some cases, they also measured for things cases, they also measured for things cases, they also measured for things like cortisol, et cetera. like cortisol, et cetera. like cortisol, et cetera. And what they found is that And what they found is that And what they found is that if one evokes the release of adrenaline if one evokes the release of adrenaline if one evokes the release of adrenaline through this arm into ice water through this arm into ice water through this arm into ice water approach, the information that they read the information that they read the information that they read previously, just a few minutes before, previously, just a few minutes before, previously, just a few minutes before, was remembered it was retained as well as remembered it was retained as well as remembered it was retained as well as emotionally intense information. But emotionally intense information. But emotionally intense information. But keep in mind the information that they keep in mind the information that they keep in mind the information that they read was not interesting at all, at read was not interesting at all, at read was not interesting at all, at least it wasn't emotionally laden. least it wasn't emotionally laden. least it wasn't emotionally laden. This had to be the effect of adrenaline This had to be the effect of adrenaline This had to be the effect of adrenaline released into the brain and body because released into the brain and body because released into the brain and body because if they blocked the release or the if they blocked the release or the if they blocked the release or the function of adrenaline in the brain function of adrenaline in the brain function of adrenaline in the brain and or body, they could block this and or body, they could block this and or body, they could block this effect. This is absolutely important in effect. This is absolutely important in effect. This is absolutely important in terms of thinking about tools to improve terms of thinking about tools to improve terms of thinking about tools to improve your memory. It is the presence of high your memory. It is the presence of high your memory. It is the presence of high adrenaline, high amounts of norepinephrine and high amounts of norepinephrine and high amounts of norepinephrine and epinephrine, that allows a memory to be epinephrine, that allows a memory to be epinephrine, that allows a memory to be stamped down stamped down stamped down quickly and far and away different than quickly and far and away different than quickly and far and away different than the idea that the idea that the idea that we remember things because they're we remember things because they're we remember things because they're important to us or because they evoke important to us or because they evoke important to us or because they evoke emotion. That's true, but the real emotion. That's true, but the real emotion. That's true, but the real reason, the neurochemical reason, the reason, the neurochemical reason, the reason, the neurochemical reason, the mechanism behind all that, is mechanism behind all that, is mechanism behind all that, is neurochemicals have the ability to neurochemicals have the ability to neurochemicals have the ability to strengthen neural connections strengthen neural connections strengthen neural connections by making them active just once. There's by making them active just once. There's by making them active just once. There's something truly magic about that something truly magic about that something truly magic about that neurochemical cocktail that removes the neurochemical cocktail that removes the neurochemical cocktail that removes the need for repetition. Okay, so let's need for repetition. Okay, so let's need for repetition. Okay, so let's apply this knowledge. Let's establish a apply this knowledge. Let's establish a apply this knowledge. Let's establish a scientifically grounded set of tools, scientifically grounded set of tools, scientifically grounded set of tools, meaning tools that take into account the meaning tools that take into account the meaning tools that take into account the identity of the neurochemicals that are identity of the neurochemicals that are identity of the neurochemicals that are important for enhancing learning and the important for enhancing learning and the important for enhancing learning and the timing of the release of those chemicals timing of the release of those chemicals timing of the release of those chemicals in order to enhance learning. Caffeine in order to enhance learning. Caffeine in order to enhance learning. Caffeine in the form of coffee or yerba mate or in the form of coffee or yerba mate or in the form of coffee or yerba mate or any other form of caffeine any other form of caffeine any other form of caffeine does create a sense of alertness in our does create a sense of alertness in our does create a sense of alertness in our brain and body. So, my typical way of brain and body. So, my typical way of brain and body. So, my typical way of approaching learning and memory would be approaching learning and memory would be approaching learning and memory would be to drink some caffeine and then to drink some caffeine and then to drink some caffeine and then focus really hard on whatever it is that focus really hard on whatever it is that focus really hard on whatever it is that I'm trying to learn, try and eliminate I'm trying to learn, try and eliminate I'm trying to learn, try and eliminate distractions, and then hope, hope distractions, and then hope, hope distractions, and then hope, hope or try, try to remember that or try, try to remember that or try, try to remember that information as best as I could. Frankly, information as best as I could. Frankly, information as best as I could. Frankly, I felt like it was working pretty well I felt like it was working pretty well I felt like it was working pretty well for me. And typically, if I leveraged for me. And typically, if I leveraged for me. And typically, if I leveraged other forms of pharmacology in order to other forms of pharmacology in order to other forms of pharmacology in order to enhance learning and memory, enhance learning and memory, enhance learning and memory, things like alpha GPC things like alpha GPC things like alpha GPC or phosphatidylserine, or phosphatidylserine, or phosphatidylserine, I would do that I would do that I would do that by taking those things before I sat down by taking those things before I sat down by taking those things before I sat down to learn a particular set of information to learn a particular set of information to learn a particular set of information or before I went off to learn a or before I went off to learn a or before I went off to learn a particular physical skill. For those of particular physical skill. For those of particular physical skill. For those of you out there listening this, you're you out there listening this, you're you out there listening this, you're probably thinking, "Well, okay, the probably thinking, "Well, okay, the probably thinking, "Well, okay, the results of McGaugh and Cahill pointed to results of McGaugh and Cahill pointed to results of McGaugh and Cahill pointed to the fact that having adrenaline released the fact that having adrenaline released the fact that having adrenaline released after learning something enhanced learning of learning something enhanced learning of learning something enhanced learning of that thing, but a lot of these things that thing, but a lot of these things that thing, but a lot of these things like caffeine or alpha GPC can increase like caffeine or alpha GPC can increase like caffeine or alpha GPC can increase epinephrine and adrenaline or dopamine epinephrine and adrenaline or dopamine epinephrine and adrenaline or dopamine or other molecules in the brain and body that can molecules in the brain and body that can molecules in the brain and body that can enhance memory for a long period of enhance memory for a long period of enhance memory for a long period of time. So, it makes sense to take it time. So, it makes sense to take it time. So, it makes sense to take it first or even during learning and then first or even during learning and then first or even during learning and then allow that increase to occur and the allow that increase to occur and the allow that increase to occur and the increase will occur over a long period increase will occur over a long period increase will occur over a long period of time and will enhance learning and of time and will enhance learning and of time and will enhance learning and memory. While that is partially true, memory. While that is partially true, memory. While that is partially true, it is not entirely true and it turns out it is not entirely true and it turns out it is not entirely true and it turns out it's not optimal. And it turns out that it's not optimal. And it turns out that it's not optimal. And it turns out that the best time window to evoke the best time window to evoke the best time window to evoke the release of these chemicals, if the goal release of these chemicals, if the goal release of these chemicals, if the goal is to enhance learning and memory of the is to enhance learning and memory of the is to enhance learning and memory of the material, is either immediately after or material, is either immediately after or material, is either immediately after or just a few minutes, 5, 10, maybe 15 just a few minutes, 5, 10, maybe 15 just a few minutes, 5, 10, maybe 15 minutes after you're repeating that minutes after you're repeating that minutes after you're repeating that information. You're trying to learn that information. You're trying to learn that information. You're trying to learn that information. Again, this could be information. Again, this could be information. Again, this could be cognitive information or this could be a cognitive information or this could be a cognitive information or this could be a physical skill. physical skill. physical skill. Now, this really spits in the face of Now, this really spits in the face of Now, this really spits in the face of the way that most of us approach the way that most of us approach the way that most of us approach learning and memory. Most of us, if we learning and memory. Most of us, if we learning and memory. Most of us, if we use stimulants use stimulants use stimulants like caffeine or alpha-GPC, we're taking like caffeine or alpha-GPC, we're taking like caffeine or alpha-GPC, we're taking those before or during an attempt to those before or during an attempt to those before or during an attempt to learn, not afterwards. learn, not afterwards. learn, not afterwards. If you're using those compounds in order If you're using those compounds in order If you're using those compounds in order to enhance learning and memory, well, to enhance learning and memory, well, to enhance learning and memory, well, then I encourage you to try and take then I encourage you to try and take then I encourage you to try and take them either late in the learning episode them either late in the learning episode them either late in the learning episode or immediately after the learning or immediately after the learning or immediately after the learning episode. Now, given everything I've told episode. Now, given everything I've told episode. Now, given everything I've told you up until now, why would I say late you up until now, why would I say late you up until now, why would I say late in the learning episode or immediately in the learning episode or immediately in the learning episode or immediately after? Well, when you ingest something after? Well, when you ingest something after? Well, when you ingest something by drinking it or you take it in capsule by drinking it or you take it in capsule by drinking it or you take it in capsule form, there's a period of time before form, there's a period of time before form, there's a period of time before that gets absorbed into the body. And that gets absorbed into the body. And that gets absorbed into the body. And different substances, such as caffeine, different substances, such as caffeine, different substances, such as caffeine, alpha-GPC, etc., are absorbed in from alpha-GPC, etc., are absorbed in from alpha-GPC, etc., are absorbed in from the gut and into the bloodstream and the gut and into the bloodstream and the gut and into the bloodstream and reach the brain and trigger these reach the brain and trigger these reach the brain and trigger these effects in the brain and body at effects in the brain and body at effects in the brain and body at different rates. So, it's not different rates. So, it's not different rates. So, it's not instantaneous. Some have effects within instantaneous. Some have effects within instantaneous. Some have effects within minutes, others within, you know, tens minutes, others within, you know, tens minutes, others within, you know, tens of minutes and so on. of minutes and so on. of minutes and so on. It's really going to depend on the It's really going to depend on the It's really going to depend on the pharmacology of those things and it's pharmacology of those things and it's pharmacology of those things and it's also going to depend on whether or not also going to depend on whether or not also going to depend on whether or not you have food in your gut, what else you have food in your gut, what else you have food in your gut, what else you happen to have circulating in your happen to have circulating in your happen to have circulating in your bloodstream, etc. But at a very basic bloodstream, etc. But at a very basic bloodstream, etc. But at a very basic level, we can confidently say that there level, we can confidently say that there level, we can confidently say that there are not one, not dozens, but as I are not one, not dozens, but as I are not one, not dozens, but as I mentioned before, hundreds of studies in mentioned before, hundreds of studies in mentioned before, hundreds of studies in animals and in humans that point to the animals and in humans that point to the animals and in humans that point to the fact that triggering the increase of fact that triggering the increase of fact that triggering the increase of adrenaline late in learning or adrenaline late in learning or adrenaline late in learning or immediately after learning is going to immediately after learning is going to immediately after learning is going to be most beneficial if your goal is to be most beneficial if your goal is to be most beneficial if your goal is to retain that information for some period retain that information for some period retain that information for some period of time and to reduce the number of time and to reduce the number of time and to reduce the number of repetitions required in order to learn repetitions required in order to learn repetitions required in order to learn that information. Now, I want to that information. Now, I want to that information. Now, I want to acknowledge that on previous episodes of acknowledge that on previous episodes of acknowledge that on previous episodes of this podcast, I've talked a lot about this podcast, I've talked a lot about this podcast, I've talked a lot about things like non-sleep deep rest and naps things like non-sleep deep rest and naps things like non-sleep deep rest and naps and sleep as vital to the learning and sleep as vital to the learning and sleep as vital to the learning process. And I want to emphasize that process. And I want to emphasize that process. And I want to emphasize that none of that information has changed, none of that information has changed, none of that information has changed, right? I don't look at any of that right? I don't look at any of that right? I don't look at any of that information differently as a consequence information differently as a consequence information differently as a consequence of what I'm talking about today. of what I'm talking about today. of what I'm talking about today. It is still true that the strengthening It is still true that the strengthening It is still true that the strengthening of connections in the brain, the literal of connections in the brain, the literal of connections in the brain, the literal neuroplasticity, the changing of the neuroplasticity, the changing of the neuroplasticity, the changing of the circuits occurs during deep sleep and circuits occurs during deep sleep and circuits occurs during deep sleep and non-sleep deep rest. And it is also non-sleep deep rest. And it is also non-sleep deep rest. And it is also true, and I've mentioned these results true, and I've mentioned these results true, and I've mentioned these results earlier, that two papers were published earlier, that two papers were published earlier, that two papers were published in Cell Reports, in Cell Reports, in Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, over the last few years showing that over the last few years showing that over the last few years showing that brief naps of about 20 to up to 90 brief naps of about 20 to up to 90 brief naps of about 20 to up to 90 minutes in some period of time after an minutes in some period of time after an minutes in some period of time after an attempt to learn can enhance attempt to learn can enhance attempt to learn can enhance the rate of learning and memory. That the rate of learning and memory. That the rate of learning and memory. That still can be performed, still can be performed, still can be performed, but it can be performed some hours later, it can be performed some hours later, it can be performed some hours later, even an hour later. It can be performed even an hour later. It can be performed even an hour later. It can be performed 2 hours later, 4 hours later. Remember, 2 hours later, 4 hours later. Remember, 2 hours later, 4 hours later. Remember, it's in these naps and in deep sleep it's in these naps and in deep sleep it's in these naps and in deep sleep that the actual reconfiguration of the that the actual reconfiguration of the that the actual reconfiguration of the neural circuits occurs, the neural circuits occurs, the neural circuits occurs, the strengthening of those neural circuits strengthening of those neural circuits strengthening of those neural circuits occurs. It is not the case that you need to It is not the case that you need to It is not the case that you need to finish about of learning and drop finish about of learning and drop finish about of learning and drop immediately into a nap or sleep. Some immediately into a nap or sleep. Some immediately into a nap or sleep. Some people might do that, but if you're people might do that, but if you're people might do that, but if you're really trying to optimize and enhance really trying to optimize and enhance really trying to optimize and enhance and improve your memory, and improve your memory, and improve your memory, the data from McGaugh and Cahill and the data from McGaugh and Cahill and the data from McGaugh and Cahill and many other laboratories that stemmed out many other laboratories that stemmed out many other laboratories that stemmed out from their initial work really points to from their initial work really points to from their initial work really points to the fact that the ideal protocol would the fact that the ideal protocol would the fact that the ideal protocol would be focus on the thing you're trying to be focus on the thing you're trying to be focus on the thing you're trying to learn very intensely, still try and get learn very intensely, still try and get learn very intensely, still try and get excellent sleep, excellent sleep, excellent sleep, again, fundamentally important for again, fundamentally important for again, fundamentally important for mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance, and we can now extend from performance, and we can now extend from performance, and we can now extend from performance to saying including learning performance to saying including learning performance to saying including learning and memory. and memory. and memory. Nap, if it doesn't interrupt your night Nap, if it doesn't interrupt your night Nap, if it doesn't interrupt your night time sleep, naps of anywhere from 10 to time sleep, naps of anywhere from 10 to time sleep, naps of anywhere from 10 to 90 minutes or non-sleep deep rest 90 minutes or non-sleep deep rest 90 minutes or non-sleep deep rest protocols will enhance learning and protocols will enhance learning and protocols will enhance learning and memory, but memory, but memory, but we can now add to that spiking we can now add to that spiking we can now add to that spiking adrenaline, provided it can be done in a safe way, provided it can be done in a safe way, provided it can be done in a safe way, is going to reduce the number of is going to reduce the number of is going to reduce the number of repetitions required to learn, and that repetitions required to learn, and that repetitions required to learn, and that should be done at the very tail end or should be done at the very tail end or should be done at the very tail end or immediately after a learning bout, which immediately after a learning bout, which immediately after a learning bout, which is compatible with all the other is compatible with all the other is compatible with all the other protocols that I mentioned. And the protocols that I mentioned. And the protocols that I mentioned. And the reason I'm revisiting the stuff about reason I'm revisiting the stuff about reason I'm revisiting the stuff about sleep and non-sleep deep rest is I think sleep and non-sleep deep rest is I think sleep and non-sleep deep rest is I think that some people got the impression that some people got the impression that some people got the impression that they need to do that immediately after they need to do that immediately after they need to do that immediately after learning, and today I'm saying to the learning, and today I'm saying to the learning, and today I'm saying to the contrary. Immediately after learning, contrary. Immediately after learning, contrary. Immediately after learning, you need to go into a heightened state you need to go into a heightened state you need to go into a heightened state of emotionality and alertness. Now, it's of emotionality and alertness. Now, it's of emotionality and alertness. Now, it's vitally important to point out that you vitally important to point out that you vitally important to point out that you do not need pharmacology. You don't need do not need pharmacology. You don't need do not need pharmacology. You don't need caffeine. You don't need alpha GPC. You caffeine. You don't need alpha GPC. You caffeine. You don't need alpha GPC. You don't need any pharmacologic substance don't need any pharmacologic substance don't need any pharmacologic substance to spike adrenaline to spike adrenaline to spike adrenaline unless that's something that you already unless that's something that you already unless that's something that you already are doing or that you can do safely or are doing or that you can do safely or are doing or that you can do safely or that you know that you can do safely. that you know that you can do safely. that you know that you can do safely. So, if you're somebody who's not used to So, if you're somebody who's not used to So, if you're somebody who's not used to drinking caffeine and you suddenly drink drinking caffeine and you suddenly drink drinking caffeine and you suddenly drink four espresso after trying to learn four espresso after trying to learn four espresso after trying to learn something, you are going to have a something, you are going to have a something, you are going to have a severe increase in alertness and severe increase in alertness and severe increase in alertness and probably even anxiety. If you're panic probably even anxiety. If you're panic probably even anxiety. If you're panic attack prone, please don't start taking attack prone, please don't start taking attack prone, please don't start taking stimulants in order to learn things stimulants in order to learn things stimulants in order to learn things better. You could take a cold shower. better. You could take a cold shower. better. You could take a cold shower. You could do an ice bath or get into a You could do an ice bath or get into a You could do an ice bath or get into a cold circulating bath in order to evoke cold circulating bath in order to evoke cold circulating bath in order to evoke epinephrine and dopamine release. You epinephrine and dopamine release. You epinephrine and dopamine release. You could go out for a hard run. You could go out for a hard run. You could go out for a hard run. You could do any number of things that would do any number of things that would do any number of things that would increase adrenaline in your body. increase adrenaline in your body. increase adrenaline in your body. Which things you choose is up to you, Which things you choose is up to you, Which things you choose is up to you, but the overall takeaway is that but the overall takeaway is that but the overall takeaway is that anything that increases adrenaline will anything that increases adrenaline will anything that increases adrenaline will increase learning and memory and will increase learning and memory and will increase learning and memory and will reduce the number of repetitions reduce the number of repetitions reduce the number of repetitions required to learn something. And as a required to learn something. And as a required to learn something. And as a cautionary note, don't think that you cautionary note, don't think that you cautionary note, don't think that you can push this entire system to the can push this entire system to the can push this entire system to the extreme over and over again or extreme over and over again or extreme over and over again or chronically, as we say, and get away chronically, as we say, and get away chronically, as we say, and get away with it. In other words, with it. In other words, with it. In other words, you're not going to be able to take a you're not going to be able to take a you're not going to be able to take a alpha GPC and a double espresso, do your alpha GPC and a double espresso, do your alpha GPC and a double espresso, do your focus bout of work, cognitive or focus bout of work, cognitive or focus bout of work, cognitive or physical work, and then spike adrenaline physical work, and then spike adrenaline physical work, and then spike adrenaline again afterwards and remember that stuff again afterwards and remember that stuff again afterwards and remember that stuff even better, right? I'm not encouraging even better, right? I'm not encouraging even better, right? I'm not encouraging you, in fact, I'm discouraging you from you, in fact, I'm discouraging you from you, in fact, I'm discouraging you from chronically increasing adrenaline both chronically increasing adrenaline both chronically increasing adrenaline both during and after a given bout of work if the and after a given bout of work if the and after a given bout of work if the goal is to learn. Why do I say that? goal is to learn. Why do I say that? goal is to learn. Why do I say that? Well, work from McGaugh and Cahill and others work from McGaugh and Cahill and others work from McGaugh and Cahill and others has shown that it's not the absolute has shown that it's not the absolute has shown that it's not the absolute amount of adrenaline that you release in amount of adrenaline that you release in amount of adrenaline that you release in your brain and body that matters for your brain and body that matters for your brain and body that matters for enhancing memory. It's the amount of enhancing memory. It's the amount of enhancing memory. It's the amount of adrenaline that you release relative to adrenaline that you release relative to adrenaline that you release relative to the amount of adrenaline that was in the amount of adrenaline that was in the amount of adrenaline that was in your system just prior, in particular in your system just prior, in particular in your system just prior, in particular in the hour or two prior. So again, it's the hour or two prior. So again, it's the hour or two prior. So again, it's the delta as we say, it's the delta as we say, it's the delta as we say, it's the difference. So if you're going to difference. So if you're going to difference. So if you're going to chronically increase adrenaline, you're chronically increase adrenaline, you're chronically increase adrenaline, you're not going to learn as well. not going to learn as well. not going to learn as well. The real key is to have adrenaline The real key is to have adrenaline The real key is to have adrenaline modestly low, perhaps even just as much modestly low, perhaps even just as much modestly low, perhaps even just as much as you need in order to be able to focus as you need in order to be able to focus as you need in order to be able to focus on something, pay attention to it, and on something, pay attention to it, and on something, pay attention to it, and then spike it afterwards. then spike it afterwards. then spike it afterwards. This is immensely important because This is immensely important because This is immensely important because well, much of what we're talking about well, much of what we're talking about well, much of what we're talking about is actually a form of inducing a is actually a form of inducing a is actually a form of inducing a neurochemical acute stress, meaning a neurochemical acute stress, meaning a neurochemical acute stress, meaning a brief and rapid onset of stress, well, chronic and rapid onset of stress, well, chronic and rapid onset of stress, well, chronic stress, the chronic elevation of stress, the chronic elevation of stress, the chronic elevation of epinephrine and cortisol is actually epinephrine and cortisol is actually epinephrine and cortisol is actually detrimental to learning. And there's an detrimental to learning. And there's an detrimental to learning. And there's an entire category of literature, mainly entire category of literature, mainly entire category of literature, mainly from the work of the great and sadly the from the work of the great and sadly the from the work of the great and sadly the late Bruce McEwen from the Rockefeller late Bruce McEwen from the Rockefeller late Bruce McEwen from the Rockefeller University and some of his scientific University and some of his scientific University and some of his scientific offspring like the great Robert offspring like the great Robert offspring like the great Robert Sapolsky, showing that chronic stress, Sapolsky, showing that chronic stress, Sapolsky, showing that chronic stress, chronic elevation of epinephrine chronic elevation of epinephrine chronic elevation of epinephrine actually inhibits learning and memory, actually inhibits learning and memory, actually inhibits learning and memory, and also can inhibit immune system and also can inhibit immune system and also can inhibit immune system function, whereas acute, sharp increases function, whereas acute, sharp increases function, whereas acute, sharp increases in adrenaline and cortisol actually can in adrenaline and cortisol actually can in adrenaline and cortisol actually can enhance learning and indeed can enhance learning and indeed can enhance learning and indeed can enhance the immune system. So if you really want the immune system. So if you really want the immune system. So if you really want to leverage this information, to leverage this information, to leverage this information, you might consider you might consider you might consider getting your brain and body into a very getting your brain and body into a very getting your brain and body into a very calm and yet alert state, so a high calm and yet alert state, so a high calm and yet alert state, so a high attentional state that will allow you to attentional state that will allow you to attentional state that will allow you to focus on what it is that you're trying focus on what it is that you're trying focus on what it is that you're trying to learn. We know focus is vital for to learn. We know focus is vital for to learn. We know focus is vital for encoding information and for triggering encoding information and for triggering encoding information and for triggering neuroplasticity, but remaining calm neuroplasticity, but remaining calm neuroplasticity, but remaining calm throughout that time and then afterwards throughout that time and then afterwards throughout that time and then afterwards spiking adrenaline and allowing spiking adrenaline and allowing spiking adrenaline and allowing adrenaline to have these incredible adrenaline to have these incredible adrenaline to have these incredible effects on reducing the number of effects on reducing the number of effects on reducing the number of repetitions required to learn. So, if repetitions required to learn. So, if repetitions required to learn. So, if you're like me, you're learning about you're like me, you're learning about you're like me, you're learning about this information, this beautiful work of this information, this beautiful work of this information, this beautiful work of McGaugh and Cahill and others, and McGaugh and Cahill and others, and McGaugh and Cahill and others, and thinking, "Wow, thinking, "Wow, thinking, "Wow, I should perhaps consider spiking my I should perhaps consider spiking my I should perhaps consider spiking my adrenaline in one form or another adrenaline in one form or another adrenaline in one form or another at the tail end or immediately following at the tail end or immediately following at the tail end or immediately following an attempt to learn something." an attempt to learn something." an attempt to learn something." And yet, we are not the first to have And yet, we are not the first to have And yet, we are not the first to have this conversation, nor were McGaugh and this conversation, nor were McGaugh and this conversation, nor were McGaugh and Cahill or any other researchers that Cahill or any other researchers that Cahill or any other researchers that I've discussed today I've discussed today I've discussed today the first to start using this technique. the first to start using this technique. the first to start using this technique. In fact, In fact, In fact, there is a beautiful review that was there is a beautiful review that was there is a beautiful review that was published in the journal Neuron, Cell published in the journal Neuron, Cell published in the journal Neuron, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, called Press journal, excellent journal, called Press journal, excellent journal, called Mechanisms of Memory Under Stress. Mechanisms of Memory Under Stress. Mechanisms of Memory Under Stress. And I just want to read to you the first And I just want to read to you the first And I just want to read to you the first opening paragraph of this review. So, opening paragraph of this review. So, opening paragraph of this review. So, here I'm reading, and I quote, "In here I'm reading, and I quote, "In here I'm reading, and I quote, "In medieval times, communities threw young medieval times, communities threw young medieval times, communities threw young children in the river when they wanted children in the river when they wanted children in the river when they wanted them to remember important events. They them to remember important events. They them to remember important events. They believed that throwing a child in the believed that throwing a child in the believed that throwing a child in the water after witnessing historic water after witnessing historic water after witnessing historic proceedings would leave a lifelong proceedings would leave a lifelong proceedings would leave a lifelong memory for the events in the child." memory for the events in the child." memory for the events in the child." Believe it or not, this is true. This is Believe it or not, this is true. This is Believe it or not, this is true. This is a practice that somehow people arrived a practice that somehow people arrived a practice that somehow people arrived at. I don't know if they were aware of what I don't know if they were aware of what I don't know if they were aware of what adrenaline was, probably not, but adrenaline was, probably not, but adrenaline was, probably not, but somehow in medieval times, somehow in medieval times, somehow in medieval times, it was understood that spiking it was understood that spiking it was understood that spiking adrenaline or creating a robust adrenaline or creating a robust adrenaline or creating a robust emotional experience after an experience emotional experience after an experience emotional experience after an experience that one hoped a child would learn would that one hoped a child would learn would that one hoped a child would learn would encourage the child's nervous system, encourage the child's nervous system, encourage the child's nervous system, and they may not know what a nervous and they may not know what a nervous and they may not know what a nervous system was, but would encourage the system was, but would encourage the system was, but would encourage the brain and body of that child to remember brain and body of that child to remember brain and body of that child to remember those particular events. those particular events. those particular events. Very counterintuitive, if you ask me. I Very counterintuitive, if you ask me. I Very counterintuitive, if you ask me. I would have thought that the kid would have thought that the kid would have thought that the kid would remember only being thrown into the remember only being thrown into the remember only being thrown into the river. My guess is that they remember river. My guess is that they remember river. My guess is that they remember that, but that they The idea here anyway that, but that they The idea here anyway that, but that they The idea here anyway is that they also remember the things is that they also remember the things is that they also remember the things that preceded being thrown into the that preceded being thrown into the that preceded being thrown into the river. So, both So, both So, both interesting and amusing, and somewhat um interesting and amusing, and somewhat um interesting and amusing, and somewhat um I should say thought-stimulating, I should say thought-stimulating, I should say thought-stimulating, really, that this is a practice that has really, that this is a practice that has really, that this is a practice that has been going on for many hundreds of been going on for many hundreds of been going on for many hundreds of years, and we are not the first to start years, and we are not the first to start years, and we are not the first to start thinking about using cold water as an thinking about using cold water as an thinking about using cold water as an adrenaline stimulus, nor are we the adrenaline stimulus, nor are we the adrenaline stimulus, nor are we the first to start thinking about using cold first to start thinking about using cold first to start thinking about using cold water induced adrenaline as a way to water induced adrenaline as a way to water induced adrenaline as a way to enhance learning and memory. This has enhance learning and memory. This has enhance learning and memory. This has been happening since medieval times. So been happening since medieval times. So been happening since medieval times. So now I'd like to talk about other tools now I'd like to talk about other tools now I'd like to talk about other tools that you can leverage that have been that you can leverage that have been that you can leverage that have been shown in quality peer-reviewed studies shown in quality peer-reviewed studies shown in quality peer-reviewed studies to enhance learning and memory. And to enhance learning and memory. And to enhance learning and memory. And perhaps one of the most potent of those perhaps one of the most potent of those perhaps one of the most potent of those tools is exercise. There are numerous tools is exercise. There are numerous tools is exercise. There are numerous studies on this in both animal models studies on this in both animal models studies on this in both animal models and fortunately now also in humans, and fortunately now also in humans, and fortunately now also in humans, thanks to the beautiful work of people thanks to the beautiful work of people thanks to the beautiful work of people like Wendy Suzuki from New York like Wendy Suzuki from New York like Wendy Suzuki from New York University. If you recall earlier, I University. If you recall earlier, I University. If you recall earlier, I mentioned that learning and memory mentioned that learning and memory mentioned that learning and memory almost always involves the strengthening almost always involves the strengthening almost always involves the strengthening of particular synapses and neural of particular synapses and neural of particular synapses and neural circuits in the brain. There is one circuits in the brain. There is one circuits in the brain. There is one exception, however, and we now have both exception, however, and we now have both exception, however, and we now have both animal data and some human data to animal data and some human data to animal data and some human data to support the fact that cardiovascular support the fact that cardiovascular support the fact that cardiovascular exercise seems to increase what we call exercise seems to increase what we call exercise seems to increase what we call dentate gyrus neurogenesis. Neurogenesis dentate gyrus neurogenesis. Neurogenesis dentate gyrus neurogenesis. Neurogenesis is the creation of new neurons. The is the creation of new neurons. The is the creation of new neurons. The dentate gyrus is a subregion of the dentate gyrus is a subregion of the dentate gyrus is a subregion of the hippocampus that's involved in learning hippocampus that's involved in learning hippocampus that's involved in learning and memory of particular kinds. It's and memory of particular kinds. It's and memory of particular kinds. It's very clear that getting a minimum of 180 very clear that getting a minimum of 180 very clear that getting a minimum of 180 to 200 minutes of so-called zone two to 200 minutes of so-called zone two to 200 minutes of so-called zone two cardiovascular exercise, so this is cardiovascular exercise, so this is cardiovascular exercise, so this is cardiovascular exercise that can be cardiovascular exercise that can be cardiovascular exercise that can be performed at a pretty steady state. We performed at a pretty steady state. We performed at a pretty steady state. We believe that it is indirectly, I should believe that it is indirectly, I should believe that it is indirectly, I should say indirectly through enhancements in say indirectly through enhancements in say indirectly through enhancements in cardiovascular fitness that there are cardiovascular fitness that there are cardiovascular fitness that there are improvements in hippocampal dentate improvements in hippocampal dentate improvements in hippocampal dentate gyrus neurogenesis. What does that mean? gyrus neurogenesis. What does that mean? gyrus neurogenesis. What does that mean? The improvements in cardiovascular The improvements in cardiovascular The improvements in cardiovascular function are indirectly impacting the function are indirectly impacting the function are indirectly impacting the ability of the dentate gyrus to create ability of the dentate gyrus to create ability of the dentate gyrus to create these new neurons. To my knowledge, these new neurons. To my knowledge, these new neurons. To my knowledge, there's no direct relationship between there's no direct relationship between there's no direct relationship between exercise and stimulating the production exercise and stimulating the production exercise and stimulating the production of new neurons in the brain. of new neurons in the brain. of new neurons in the brain. It seems that it's the improvements in It seems that it's the improvements in It seems that it's the improvements in blood flow that also relate to blood flow that also relate to blood flow that also relate to improvements in things like glymphatic improvements in things like glymphatic improvements in things like glymphatic flow, the circulation of lymph fluid flow, the circulation of lymph fluid flow, the circulation of lymph fluid within the brain, that are enhancing within the brain, that are enhancing within the brain, that are enhancing neurogenesis, and that neurogenesis is neurogenesis, and that neurogenesis is neurogenesis, and that neurogenesis is it appears is important. Now, in it appears is important. Now, in it appears is important. Now, in fairness to the landscape of fairness to the landscape of fairness to the landscape of neuroscience and my colleagues neuroscience and my colleagues neuroscience and my colleagues at Stanford and elsewhere, there is a at Stanford and elsewhere, there is a at Stanford and elsewhere, there is a lot of debate as to whether or not there lot of debate as to whether or not there lot of debate as to whether or not there is much if any neurogenesis in the adult is much if any neurogenesis in the adult is much if any neurogenesis in the adult human brain. human brain. human brain. But regardless, I think the data are But regardless, I think the data are But regardless, I think the data are quite clear that the 180 to 200 minutes quite clear that the 180 to 200 minutes quite clear that the 180 to 200 minutes minimum of cardiovascular exercise is minimum of cardiovascular exercise is minimum of cardiovascular exercise is going to be important for other health going to be important for other health going to be important for other health metrics. Now, it is clear that exercise metrics. Now, it is clear that exercise metrics. Now, it is clear that exercise can impact learning and memory through can impact learning and memory through can impact learning and memory through other non-neurogenesis, non-new neuron other non-neurogenesis, non-new neuron other non-neurogenesis, non-new neuron type mechanisms. And one of the more type mechanisms. And one of the more type mechanisms. And one of the more exciting ones that has been studied over exciting ones that has been studied over exciting ones that has been studied over the years the years the years is this notion of hormones from bone is this notion of hormones from bone is this notion of hormones from bone traveling in the bloodstream to the traveling in the bloodstream to the traveling in the bloodstream to the brain and enhancing the function of the brain and enhancing the function of the brain and enhancing the function of the hippocampus. Yes, indeed, your bones hippocampus. Yes, indeed, your bones hippocampus. Yes, indeed, your bones make hormones. make hormones. make hormones. We call these endocrine effects, so We call these endocrine effects, so We call these endocrine effects, so they're effectively acting as hormones. they're effectively acting as hormones. they're effectively acting as hormones. And one such chemical is something And one such chemical is something And one such chemical is something called osteocalcin. called osteocalcin. called osteocalcin. Now, these findings arrive to us through Now, these findings arrive to us through Now, these findings arrive to us through various labs, but one of the more various labs, but one of the more various labs, but one of the more important labs for sake of this important labs for sake of this important labs for sake of this discussion today is the laboratory of discussion today is the laboratory of discussion today is the laboratory of Eric Kandel at Columbia Medical School. Eric Kandel at Columbia Medical School. Eric Kandel at Columbia Medical School. His laboratory has studied the effects His laboratory has studied the effects His laboratory has studied the effects of exercise on hippocampal function and of exercise on hippocampal function and of exercise on hippocampal function and memory, and other laboratories have done memory, and other laboratories have done memory, and other laboratories have done that as well. And what they found is that as well. And what they found is that as well. And what they found is that cardiovascular exercise, and that cardiovascular exercise, and that cardiovascular exercise, and perhaps other forms of exercise too, but perhaps other forms of exercise too, but perhaps other forms of exercise too, but mainly cardiovascular exercise, mainly cardiovascular exercise, mainly cardiovascular exercise, creates the release of osteocalcin from creates the release of osteocalcin from creates the release of osteocalcin from the bones that travels to the brain and the bones that travels to the brain and the bones that travels to the brain and to subregions of the hippocampus and to subregions of the hippocampus and to subregions of the hippocampus and encourages the electrical activity and encourages the electrical activity and encourages the electrical activity and the formation and maintenance of the formation and maintenance of the formation and maintenance of connections within the hippocampus and connections within the hippocampus and connections within the hippocampus and keeps the hippocampus functioning well keeps the hippocampus functioning well keeps the hippocampus functioning well in order to lay down new memories. So in order to lay down new memories. So in order to lay down new memories. So much of our brain real estate is devoted much of our brain real estate is devoted much of our brain real estate is devoted to movement that it's been hypothesized to movement that it's been hypothesized to movement that it's been hypothesized for more than a half century, but especially more than a half century, but especially more than a half century, but especially in recent years as we've learned more in recent years as we've learned more in recent years as we've learned more about the function of the brain at a about the function of the brain at a about the function of the brain at a really detailed circuit level, that really detailed circuit level, that really detailed circuit level, that the relationship between the brain and the relationship between the brain and the relationship between the brain and body and the maintenance and perhaps body and the maintenance and perhaps body and the maintenance and perhaps even the improvement of neural circuitry even the improvement of neural circuitry even the improvement of neural circuitry in the brain depends on our body in the brain depends on our body in the brain depends on our body movements and the signal from the body movements and the signal from the body movements and the signal from the body that our brain is still moving. The fact that our brain is still moving. The fact that our brain is still moving. The fact that osteocalcin that osteocalcin that osteocalcin is released from bone and in particular is released from bone and in particular is released from bone and in particular can be released in response to can be released in response to can be released in response to load-bearing exercise. So, this would be load-bearing exercise. So, this would be load-bearing exercise. So, this would be running, again, weight lifting hasn't running, again, weight lifting hasn't running, again, weight lifting hasn't been tested directly, but one would been tested directly, but one would been tested directly, but one would imagine anything that involves jumping imagine anything that involves jumping imagine anything that involves jumping and landing or weight lifting or body and landing or weight lifting or body and landing or weight lifting or body weight movements and things of that body weight movements and things of that body weight movements and things of that sort. That's a signal to release osteocalcin That's a signal to release osteocalcin That's a signal to release osteocalcin and we know that signal occurs and we know that signal occurs and we know that signal occurs that is directly reflective of the fact that is directly reflective of the fact that is directly reflective of the fact that the body was moving and moving in that the body was moving and moving in that the body was moving and moving in particular ways. In fact, you could particular ways. In fact, you could particular ways. In fact, you could imagine that big bones, like your femur, imagine that big bones, like your femur, imagine that big bones, like your femur, are going to release more osteocalcin or are going to release more osteocalcin or are going to release more osteocalcin or be in a position to release more be in a position to release more be in a position to release more osteocalcin than fine movements, osteocalcin than fine movements, osteocalcin than fine movements, like the movements of the digits. like the movements of the digits. like the movements of the digits. And this idea that the body is And this idea that the body is And this idea that the body is constantly signaling to the brain about constantly signaling to the brain about constantly signaling to the brain about the status of the body and the varying the status of the body and the varying the status of the body and the varying needs of the brain to update its brain needs of the brain to update its brain needs of the brain to update its brain circuitry is a really attractive idea that fits a really attractive idea that fits a really attractive idea that fits entirely with the biology of exercise, entirely with the biology of exercise, entirely with the biology of exercise, osteocalcin, and hippocampal function. osteocalcin, and hippocampal function. osteocalcin, and hippocampal function. Now, I certainly don't want to give the Now, I certainly don't want to give the Now, I certainly don't want to give the message that just moving, just exercise message that just moving, just exercise message that just moving, just exercise is sufficient to keep the neural is sufficient to keep the neural is sufficient to keep the neural architecture of your brain healthy, architecture of your brain healthy, architecture of your brain healthy, young, and able to learn. young, and able to learn. young, and able to learn. While that might be true, While that might be true, While that might be true, it's also important to actually engage it's also important to actually engage it's also important to actually engage in attempts to learn new material, in attempts to learn new material, in attempts to learn new material, either physical material, some new types either physical material, some new types either physical material, some new types of movements, of movements, of movements, and skills, and or new types of and skills, and or new types of and skills, and or new types of cognitive information, languages, cognitive information, languages, cognitive information, languages, mathematics, history, current events, mathematics, history, current events, mathematics, history, current events, all sorts of things all sorts of things all sorts of things that involve your brain. Nonetheless, that involve your brain. Nonetheless, that involve your brain. Nonetheless, it's clear that physical movement and it's clear that physical movement and it's clear that physical movement and cognitive ability and the potential to cognitive ability and the potential to cognitive ability and the potential to enhance cognitive ability and the enhance cognitive ability and the enhance cognitive ability and the ability to learn new physical skills are ability to learn new physical skills are ability to learn new physical skills are intimately connected. And osteocalcin intimately connected. And osteocalcin intimately connected. And osteocalcin appears there's be at least one way in appears there's be at least one way in appears there's be at least one way in which that brain-body relationship is which that brain-body relationship is which that brain-body relationship is established and maintained. Next, I'm established and maintained. Next, I'm established and maintained. Next, I'm going to tell you about a study which going to tell you about a study which going to tell you about a study which points out the immense value of points out the immense value of points out the immense value of visual images for laying down memories. visual images for laying down memories. visual images for laying down memories. And you can leverage this information, And you can leverage this information, And you can leverage this information, and this involves both the taking of and this involves both the taking of and this involves both the taking of photographs, something that's actually photographs, something that's actually photographs, something that's actually quite easily done these days with your quite easily done these days with your quite easily done these days with your phone, as well as your ability to take phone, as well as your ability to take phone, as well as your ability to take mental photographs by literally snapping mental photographs by literally snapping mental photographs by literally snapping your eyelids shut. So, I just briefly your eyelids shut. So, I just briefly your eyelids shut. So, I just briefly want to describe this paper because it want to describe this paper because it want to describe this paper because it provides a tool that you can leverage in provides a tool that you can leverage in provides a tool that you can leverage in your attempt to learn and remember your attempt to learn and remember your attempt to learn and remember things better. The title of this paper things better. The title of this paper things better. The title of this paper is photographic memory, the effects of is photographic memory, the effects of is photographic memory, the effects of our volitional photo taking on memory our volitional photo taking on memory our volitional photo taking on memory for visual and auditory aspects of an for visual and auditory aspects of an for visual and auditory aspects of an experience. It refers to photographic experience. It refers to photographic experience. It refers to photographic memory not in the context of memory not in the context of memory not in the context of photographic memory that we normally photographic memory that we normally photographic memory that we normally hear about where people are truly hear about where people are truly hear about where people are truly photographic, look at a page and photographic, look at a page and photographic, look at a page and somehow absorb all that information and somehow absorb all that information and somehow absorb all that information and commit it to memory, but rather the use commit it to memory, but rather the use commit it to memory, but rather the use of camera photographs of camera photographs of camera photographs or the use of mental [clears throat] or the use of mental [clears throat] or the use of mental [clears throat] camera photographs, literally looking at camera photographs, literally looking at camera photographs, literally looking at something and deciding, blink, and something and deciding, blink, and something and deciding, blink, and snapping a, so to speak, snapping a snapping a, so to speak, snapping a snapping a, so to speak, snapping a snapshot of whatever it is that you were snapshot of whatever it is that you were snapshot of whatever it is that you were looking at and remembering the content. looking at and remembering the content. looking at and remembering the content. Two years ago, I was in an Uber and I Two years ago, I was in an Uber and I Two years ago, I was in an Uber and I looked out the window and it was a looked out the window and it was a looked out the window and it was a street scene. I was actually in New York street scene. I was actually in New York street scene. I was actually in New York at the time, and I decided for reasons at the time, and I decided for reasons at the time, and I decided for reasons that are still unclear to me, that are still unclear to me, that are still unclear to me, to take a mental snapshot of this city to take a mental snapshot of this city to take a mental snapshot of this city street image even though nothing street image even though nothing street image even though nothing interesting in particular was happening. interesting in particular was happening. interesting in particular was happening. And um I do recall that there was a guy And um I do recall that there was a guy And um I do recall that there was a guy wearing a yellow shirt walking, there wearing a yellow shirt walking, there wearing a yellow shirt walking, there was some construction, etc. I can still was some construction, etc. I can still was some construction, etc. I can still see that image in my mind's eye because see that image in my mind's eye because see that image in my mind's eye because I took this mental snapshot. This paper I took this mental snapshot. This paper I took this mental snapshot. This paper addresses whether or not this mental addresses whether or not this mental addresses whether or not this mental snapshotting thing is real and raised snapshotting thing is real and raised snapshotting thing is real and raised the hypothesis that if people are the hypothesis that if people are the hypothesis that if people are allowed to choose what they take photos allowed to choose what they take photos allowed to choose what they take photos of, that taking photos, again, this is with that taking photos, again, this is with that taking photos, again, this is with a camera, not mental snapshotting, that a camera, not mental snapshotting, that a camera, not mental snapshotting, that taking those photos would actually taking those photos would actually taking those photos would actually enhance their memory for those objects, enhance their memory for those objects, enhance their memory for those objects, those places, those people, and in fact those places, those people, and in fact those places, those people, and in fact details of those object, places, and details of those object, places, and details of those object, places, and people. And indeed, that's what they people. And indeed, that's what they people. And indeed, that's what they found. What does this mean? It means found. What does this mean? It means found. What does this mean? It means that if you really want to remember that if you really want to remember that if you really want to remember something or somebody, take a photo of something or somebody, take a photo of something or somebody, take a photo of that thing or person, that thing or person, that thing or person, pay attention while you take the photo, pay attention while you take the photo, pay attention while you take the photo, but it doesn't really matter if you look but it doesn't really matter if you look but it doesn't really matter if you look at the photo again. That framing up of at the photo again. That framing up of at the photo again. That framing up of the photograph stamps down a visual the photograph stamps down a visual the photograph stamps down a visual image in your mind that is more robust image in your mind that is more robust image in your mind that is more robust at serving a memory than had you just at serving a memory than had you just at serving a memory than had you just looked at that thing with your own eyes. looked at that thing with your own eyes. looked at that thing with your own eyes. Very interesting and raises all sorts of Very interesting and raises all sorts of Very interesting and raises all sorts of questions for me about whether or not questions for me about whether or not questions for me about whether or not it's because you're framing up a small it's because you're framing up a small it's because you're framing up a small aperture, a small portion of the visual aperture, a small portion of the visual aperture, a small portion of the visual scene. That's logical interpretation, scene. That's logical interpretation, scene. That's logical interpretation, although they didn't test that. The although they didn't test that. The although they didn't test that. The reason I find this so interesting is reason I find this so interesting is reason I find this so interesting is that a lot of what we try and learn is that a lot of what we try and learn is that a lot of what we try and learn is visual. And for a lot of people, the visual. And for a lot of people, the visual. And for a lot of people, the ability to learn visual information ability to learn visual information ability to learn visual information feels challenging. And we'll look at feels challenging. And we'll look at feels challenging. And we'll look at something and we'll try and create some something and we'll try and create some something and we'll try and create some detailed understanding of it. We'll try detailed understanding of it. We'll try detailed understanding of it. We'll try and understand the relationships between and understand the relationships between and understand the relationships between things in that scene. things in that scene. things in that scene. It does appear based on the study that It does appear based on the study that It does appear based on the study that the mere decision the mere decision the mere decision to take a mental snapshot, like, "Okay, to take a mental snapshot, like, "Okay, to take a mental snapshot, like, "Okay, I'm going to blink my eyelids and I'm going to blink my eyelids and I'm going to blink my eyelids and I'm going to take a snapshot of whatever it going to take a snapshot of whatever it going to take a snapshot of whatever it is I see." can actually stamp down a is I see." can actually stamp down a is I see." can actually stamp down a visual memory much in the same way that visual memory much in the same way that visual memory much in the same way that a camera can stamp down a visual memory, a camera can stamp down a visual memory, a camera can stamp down a visual memory, of course, through vastly distinct of course, through vastly distinct of course, through vastly distinct mechanisms. No discussion of memory mechanisms. No discussion of memory mechanisms. No discussion of memory would be complete without a discussion would be complete without a discussion would be complete without a discussion of the ever intriguing phenomena known of the ever intriguing phenomena known of the ever intriguing phenomena known as déjà vu. The way this works has been as déjà vu. The way this works has been as déjà vu. The way this works has been defined largely by the wonderful work of defined largely by the wonderful work of defined largely by the wonderful work of Susumu Tonegawa at Massachusetts Susumu Tonegawa at Massachusetts Susumu Tonegawa at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT. I should Institute of Technology, MIT. I should Institute of Technology, MIT. I should also mention the beautiful work of Mark also mention the beautiful work of Mark also mention the beautiful work of Mark Mayford at the Scripps Institute and UC Mayford at the Scripps Institute and UC Mayford at the Scripps Institute and UC San Diego. Here's what they discovered. San Diego. Here's what they discovered. San Diego. Here's what they discovered. They evaluated the patterns of neural They evaluated the patterns of neural They evaluated the patterns of neural firing in the hippocampus firing in the hippocampus firing in the hippocampus as subjects learn new things. Neuron A as subjects learn new things. Neuron A as subjects learn new things. Neuron A fires, then neuron B fires, then neuron fires, then neuron B fires, then neuron fires, then neuron B fires, then neuron C fires in a particular sequence. Again, C fires in a particular sequence. Again, C fires in a particular sequence. Again, the firing of neurons in a particular the firing of neurons in a particular the firing of neurons in a particular sequence, like the playing of keys on a sequence, like the playing of keys on a sequence, like the playing of keys on a piano in a particular sequence, leads to piano in a particular sequence, leads to piano in a particular sequence, leads to a particular song on the piano and leads a particular song on the piano and leads a particular song on the piano and leads to a particular memory to a particular memory to a particular memory of an experience within the brain. of an experience within the brain. of an experience within the brain. They then used some molecular tools and They then used some molecular tools and They then used some molecular tools and tricks to label and capture those neurons such to label and capture those neurons such to label and capture those neurons such that they could go back later and that they could go back later and that they could go back later and activate those neurons in either the activate those neurons in either the activate those neurons in either the same sequence or in a different sequence same sequence or in a different sequence same sequence or in a different sequence to the one that occurred during the to the one that occurred during the to the one that occurred during the formation of the memory. formation of the memory. formation of the memory. And to make a long story short and to And to make a long story short and to And to make a long story short and to summarize multiple papers published in summarize multiple papers published in summarize multiple papers published in incredibly high-tier journals incredibly high-tier journals incredibly high-tier journals like Nature and Science, which journals like Nature and Science, which journals like Nature and Science, which are extremely stringent found are extremely stringent found are extremely stringent found that whether or not those particular neurons whether or not those particular neurons whether or not those particular neurons were played in the precise sequence that were played in the precise sequence that were played in the precise sequence that happened when they encoded the memory happened when they encoded the memory happened when they encoded the memory or whether or not those neurons were or whether or not those neurons were or whether or not those neurons were played in a different sequence or even played in a different sequence or even played in a different sequence or even if those neurons were played if those neurons were played if those neurons were played activated that is all at once activated that is all at once activated that is all at once with no temporal sequence with no temporal sequence with no temporal sequence all firing in concert all at once all firing in concert all at once all firing in concert all at once evoked the same behavior evoked the same behavior evoked the same behavior and in some sense the same memory. So at and in some sense the same memory. So at and in some sense the same memory. So at a neural circuit level, this is déjà vu. a neural circuit level, this is déjà vu. a neural circuit level, this is déjà vu. Whether or not the same sort of Whether or not the same sort of Whether or not the same sort of phenomenon occurs when you're walking phenomenon occurs when you're walking phenomenon occurs when you're walking down the street and suddenly you feel as down the street and suddenly you feel as down the street and suddenly you feel as if wow, I feel like I've been here if wow, I feel like I've been here if wow, I feel like I've been here before. You meet someone and you feel before. You meet someone and you feel before. You meet someone and you feel like gosh, I feel like I know you. I like gosh, I feel like I know you. I like gosh, I feel like I know you. I feel like there's some familiarity here feel like there's some familiarity here feel like there's some familiarity here that I can't quite put my finger on. We that I can't quite put my finger on. We that I can't quite put my finger on. We don't know for sure that that's what's don't know for sure that that's what's don't know for sure that that's what's happening but this is the most happening but this is the most happening but this is the most mechanistic and logical explanation for mechanistic and logical explanation for mechanistic and logical explanation for what has for many decades if not what has for many decades if not what has for many decades if not hundreds of years has been described as hundreds of years has been described as hundreds of years has been described as déjà vu. I'd like to cover one déjà vu. I'd like to cover one déjà vu. I'd like to cover one additional tool that you can use to additional tool that you can use to additional tool that you can use to improve learning and memory. This is improve learning and memory. This is improve learning and memory. This is based on a paper from none other than based on a paper from none other than based on a paper from none other than Wendy Suzuki at New York University. The Wendy Suzuki at New York University. The Wendy Suzuki at New York University. The title of this paper will tell you a lot title of this paper will tell you a lot title of this paper will tell you a lot about where we're going. The title is a about where we're going. The title is a about where we're going. The title is a brief daily meditation enhances brief daily meditation enhances brief daily meditation enhances attention, memory, mood, and emotional attention, memory, mood, and emotional attention, memory, mood, and emotional regulation in non-experienced regulation in non-experienced regulation in non-experienced meditators. This is a study that meditators. This is a study that meditators. This is a study that involves subjects aged 18 to 45, none of involves subjects aged 18 to 45, none of involves subjects aged 18 to 45, none of whom were experienced meditators prior whom were experienced meditators prior whom were experienced meditators prior to this study. to this study. to this study. There were two general groups in this There were two general groups in this There were two general groups in this study. One group One group One group did a 13-minute long meditation, and did a 13-minute long meditation, and did a 13-minute long meditation, and this meditation was a fairly this meditation was a fairly this meditation was a fairly conventional meditation. They would sit conventional meditation. They would sit conventional meditation. They would sit or lie down. They would do somewhat of a or lie down. They would do somewhat of a or lie down. They would do somewhat of a body scan, evaluating, for instance, how body scan, evaluating, for instance, how body scan, evaluating, for instance, how tense or relaxed they felt throughout tense or relaxed they felt throughout tense or relaxed they felt throughout their body, and they would focus on their body, and they would focus on their body, and they would focus on their breathing, their breathing, their breathing, trying to bring their attention back to trying to bring their attention back to trying to bring their attention back to their breathing and to the state of their breathing and to the state of their breathing and to the state of their body their body their body as the meditation progressed. The other as the meditation progressed. The other as the meditation progressed. The other group, which we can call the control group, which we can call the control group, which we can call the control group, listened to, of all things, a group, listened to, of all things, a group, listened to, of all things, a podcast for an equivalent amount of podcast for an equivalent amount of podcast for an equivalent amount of time, but they were not instructed to do time, but they were not instructed to do time, but they were not instructed to do any kind of body scan or pay attention any kind of body scan or pay attention any kind of body scan or pay attention to their breathing. Every subject in the to their breathing. Every subject in the to their breathing. Every subject in the study either meditated daily or listened to a either meditated daily or listened to a either meditated daily or listened to a equivalent duration podcast daily for a equivalent duration podcast daily for a equivalent duration podcast daily for a period of 8 weeks. So, the takeaways period of 8 weeks. So, the takeaways period of 8 weeks. So, the takeaways from the study are severalfold. First of from the study are severalfold. First of from the study are severalfold. First of all, that daily meditation of 13 minutes all, that daily meditation of 13 minutes all, that daily meditation of 13 minutes can enhance your ability to pay can enhance your ability to pay can enhance your ability to pay attention and to learn. It can attention and to learn. It can attention and to learn. It can truly enhance memory. truly enhance memory. truly enhance memory. However, you need to do that for at However, you need to do that for at However, you need to do that for at least 8 weeks in order to start to see least 8 weeks in order to start to see least 8 weeks in order to start to see the effects to occur, and we have to the effects to occur, and we have to the effects to occur, and we have to presume that you have to continue those presume that you have to continue those presume that you have to continue those uh meditation training sessions. In uh meditation training sessions. In uh meditation training sessions. In fact, they found that if people only did fact, they found that if people only did fact, they found that if people only did 4 weeks of meditation, these effects 4 weeks of meditation, these effects 4 weeks of meditation, these effects didn't show up. Now, 8 weeks might seem didn't show up. Now, 8 weeks might seem didn't show up. Now, 8 weeks might seem like a long time, but I think that 13 like a long time, but I think that 13 like a long time, but I think that 13 minutes a day is not actually minutes a day is not actually minutes a day is not actually that big of a time commitment. And the that big of a time commitment. And the that big of a time commitment. And the results of this study certainly results of this study certainly results of this study certainly incentivize me to start adopting a I'm incentivize me to start adopting a I'm incentivize me to start adopting a I'm going for 15 minutes a day now. I've going for 15 minutes a day now. I've going for 15 minutes a day now. I've been a on-and-off meditator for a number been a on-and-off meditator for a number been a on-and-off meditator for a number of years. I've been pretty good about it of years. I've been pretty good about it of years. I've been pretty good about it lately, but I confess I've been doing lately, but I confess I've been doing lately, but I confess I've been doing far shorter meditations of anywhere from far shorter meditations of anywhere from far shorter meditations of anywhere from 3 to 5 or maybe 10 minutes. I'm going to 3 to 5 or maybe 10 minutes. I'm going to 3 to 5 or maybe 10 minutes. I'm going to ramp that up to 15 minutes a day, ramp that up to 15 minutes a day, ramp that up to 15 minutes a day, and I'm doing that specifically to try and I'm doing that specifically to try and I'm doing that specifically to try and access these improvements in and access these improvements in and access these improvements in cognitive ability and our abilities to cognitive ability and our abilities to cognitive ability and our abilities to learn. Today, we covered a lot of aspects of Today, we covered a lot of aspects of Today, we covered a lot of aspects of memory and how to improve your memory. memory and how to improve your memory. memory and how to improve your memory. However, for sake of what was discussed However, for sake of what was discussed However, for sake of what was discussed today, please understand that any number today, please understand that any number today, please understand that any number of different neurochemicals can evoke or of different neurochemicals can evoke or of different neurochemicals can evoke or can increase the amount of adrenaline can increase the amount of adrenaline can increase the amount of adrenaline that's circulating in your brain and that's circulating in your brain and that's circulating in your brain and body. It really doesn't matter how you body. It really doesn't matter how you body. It really doesn't matter how you evoke the adrenaline release because evoke the adrenaline release because evoke the adrenaline release because remember, adrenaline is the final common remember, adrenaline is the final common remember, adrenaline is the final common pathway by which particular experiences, pathway by which particular experiences, pathway by which particular experiences, particular perceptions are stamped into particular perceptions are stamped into particular perceptions are stamped into memory, which answers our very first memory, which answers our very first memory, which answers our very first question raised at the beginning of the question raised at the beginning of the question raised at the beginning of the episode, which is why do we remember episode, which is why do we remember episode, which is why do we remember anything at all? Right? That was the anything at all? Right? That was the anything at all? Right? That was the question that we raised. Why is it that question that we raised. Why is it that question that we raised. Why is it that from morning till night and throughout from morning till night and throughout from morning till night and throughout your entire life, you have tons of your entire life, you have tons of your entire life, you have tons of sensory experience, tons of perceptions? sensory experience, tons of perceptions? sensory experience, tons of perceptions? Why is it that some are remembered and Why is it that some are remembered and Why is it that some are remembered and others are not? While I would never want others are not? While I would never want others are not? While I would never want to distill an important question such as to distill an important question such as to distill an important question such as that down to a one molecule type of that down to a one molecule type of that down to a one molecule type of answer, I think we can confidently say answer, I think we can confidently say answer, I think we can confidently say based on the vast amount of animal and based on the vast amount of animal and based on the vast amount of animal and human research data that epinephrine, human research data that epinephrine, human research data that epinephrine, adrenaline, and some of the other adrenaline, and some of the other adrenaline, and some of the other chemicals that it acts with in concert chemicals that it acts with in concert chemicals that it acts with in concert is in fact the way that is in fact the way that is in fact the way that we remember particular events and not we remember particular events and not we remember particular events and not all events. Once again, thank you for all events. Once again, thank you for all events. Once again, thank you for joining me today to discuss the joining me today to discuss the joining me today to discuss the neurobiology of learning and memory and neurobiology of learning and memory and neurobiology of learning and memory and how to improve your memory using how to improve your memory using how to improve your memory using science-based tools. And last, but science-based tools. And last, but science-based tools. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. interest in science. interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]