Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Mark Berman. Dr. Mark today is Dr. Mark Berman. Dr. Mark today is Dr. Mark Berman. Dr. Mark Burman is a professor of psychology at Burman is a professor of psychology at Burman is a professor of psychology at the University of Chicago where he the University of Chicago where he the University of Chicago where he directs the environmental neuroscience directs the environmental neuroscience directs the environmental neuroscience laboratory. His research focuses on how laboratory. His research focuses on how laboratory. His research focuses on how our physical environments, particularly our physical environments, particularly our physical environments, particularly natural environments, impact our brain natural environments, impact our brain natural environments, impact our brain function, mental health, and cognitive function, mental health, and cognitive function, mental health, and cognitive performance. During today's episode, we performance. During today's episode, we performance. During today's episode, we discussed the fascinating and actionable discussed the fascinating and actionable discussed the fascinating and actionable science of how your physical science of how your physical science of how your physical surroundings indoors and in particular surroundings indoors and in particular surroundings indoors and in particular your relationship and interactions with your relationship and interactions with your relationship and interactions with nature can shape your biology and your nature can shape your biology and your nature can shape your biology and your cognitive abilities. Dr. Burman explains cognitive abilities. Dr. Burman explains cognitive abilities. Dr. Burman explains how exposure to very common features in how exposure to very common features in how exposure to very common features in nature such as fractal patterns, nature such as fractal patterns, nature such as fractal patterns, increase your ability to focus, reduce increase your ability to focus, reduce increase your ability to focus, reduce your stress, and improve your mental and your stress, and improve your mental and your stress, and improve your mental and physical health metrics. and not just physical health metrics. and not just physical health metrics. and not just while you're in nature, but after you while you're in nature, but after you while you're in nature, but after you return indoors for many hours and even return indoors for many hours and even return indoors for many hours and even days afterwards. During today's episode, days afterwards. During today's episode, days afterwards. During today's episode, you'll learn about something called you'll learn about something called you'll learn about something called attention restoration theory, which attention restoration theory, which attention restoration theory, which turns out to be very important for turns out to be very important for turns out to be very important for understanding how different types of understanding how different types of understanding how different types of indoor and outdoor environments either indoor and outdoor environments either indoor and outdoor environments either deplete or restore your cognitive deplete or restore your cognitive deplete or restore your cognitive resources. We also discuss practical resources. We also discuss practical resources. We also discuss practical science-based strategies that anyone can science-based strategies that anyone can science-based strategies that anyone can implement regardless of where you live. implement regardless of where you live. implement regardless of where you live. So, if you're in an apartment or a So, if you're in an apartment or a So, if you're in an apartment or a house, if you have ready access to house, if you have ready access to house, if you have ready access to nature or if you don't, today's episode nature or if you don't, today's episode nature or if you don't, today's episode explains how to design your indoor explains how to design your indoor explains how to design your indoor space, the optimal duration and timing space, the optimal duration and timing space, the optimal duration and timing of nature exposure, and the specific of nature exposure, and the specific of nature exposure, and the specific visual and auditory elements that will visual and auditory elements that will visual and auditory elements that will provide you with the greatest cognitive provide you with the greatest cognitive provide you with the greatest cognitive and health benefits. So whether you're a and health benefits. So whether you're a and health benefits. So whether you're a student or a professional looking to student or a professional looking to student or a professional looking to enhance your learning capacity, focus, enhance your learning capacity, focus, enhance your learning capacity, focus, and reduce your burnout, or you're and reduce your burnout, or you're and reduce your burnout, or you're simply interested in optimizing your simply interested in optimizing your simply interested in optimizing your mental and physical health through mental and physical health through mental and physical health through exposure to different elements of exposure to different elements of exposure to different elements of nature, today's episode provides clear, nature, today's episode provides clear, nature, today's episode provides clear, actionable protocols based on rigorous actionable protocols based on rigorous actionable protocols based on rigorous scientific research. By the end of scientific research. By the end of scientific research. By the end of today's episode, you'll have a toolkit today's episode, you'll have a toolkit today's episode, you'll have a toolkit of evidence-based strategies that will of evidence-based strategies that will of evidence-based strategies that will transform your relationship with your transform your relationship with your transform your relationship with your indoor environment and outdoor indoor environment and outdoor indoor environment and outdoor environments, and you'll learn to environments, and you'll learn to environments, and you'll learn to harness those to improve your brain and harness those to improve your brain and harness those to improve your brain and body. Before we begin, I'd like to body. Before we begin, I'd like to body. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science related tools to the general science related tools to the general science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Mark And now for my discussion with Dr. Mark And now for my discussion with Dr. Mark Berman. Dr. Mark Berman, welcome. Berman. Dr. Mark Berman, welcome. Berman. Dr. Mark Berman, welcome. &gt;&gt; Great to be here, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Great to be here, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Great to be here, Andrew. I love being out in nature. So, I'm I love being out in nature. So, I'm I love being out in nature. So, I'm excited about today's conversation, excited about today's conversation, excited about today's conversation, which is taking place indoors. But we're which is taking place indoors. But we're which is taking place indoors. But we're going to talk about the relationship going to talk about the relationship going to talk about the relationship between the mind, the brain, nature, between the mind, the brain, nature, between the mind, the brain, nature, stress, rumination, and this incredible stress, rumination, and this incredible stress, rumination, and this incredible power that interactions with the natural power that interactions with the natural power that interactions with the natural world can have on our brain. As we wait world can have on our brain. As we wait world can have on our brain. As we wait into this, I'd like to start with this into this, I'd like to start with this into this, I'd like to start with this issue of recapturing our attentional issue of recapturing our attentional issue of recapturing our attentional abilities because I think nowadays abilities because I think nowadays abilities because I think nowadays everybody, whether they're clinically everybody, whether they're clinically everybody, whether they're clinically diagnosed with ADHD or they are just a diagnosed with ADHD or they are just a diagnosed with ADHD or they are just a human being on the planet, feels as if human being on the planet, feels as if human being on the planet, feels as if their attention is being pulled in their attention is being pulled in their attention is being pulled in different directions. Sometimes without different directions. Sometimes without different directions. Sometimes without our awareness, sometimes with our awareness, sometimes with our awareness, sometimes with our awareness. What is this notion of awareness. What is this notion of awareness. What is this notion of recapturing attention? recapturing attention? recapturing attention? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's a really fundamental &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's a really fundamental &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's a really fundamental concept. Um, and we think that concept. Um, and we think that concept. Um, and we think that attention, you know, maybe on the attention, you know, maybe on the attention, you know, maybe on the surface of it, people just kind of think surface of it, people just kind of think surface of it, people just kind of think about, oh, it's kids trying to pay about, oh, it's kids trying to pay about, oh, it's kids trying to pay attention to school or, oh, it's trying attention to school or, oh, it's trying attention to school or, oh, it's trying to pay attention at work. But it's to pay attention at work. But it's to pay attention at work. But it's actually deeper than that. We kind of actually deeper than that. We kind of actually deeper than that. We kind of think that, uh, elements of attention think that, uh, elements of attention think that, uh, elements of attention are sort of involved in controlling all are sort of involved in controlling all are sort of involved in controlling all of our behaviors. Um, and when our of our behaviors. Um, and when our of our behaviors. Um, and when our attention is depleted, um, we don't have attention is depleted, um, we don't have attention is depleted, um, we don't have as much impulse control. We might behave as much impulse control. We might behave as much impulse control. We might behave more aggressively. Um, you know, we may more aggressively. Um, you know, we may more aggressively. Um, you know, we may not be able to achieve our goals. Um, not be able to achieve our goals. Um, not be able to achieve our goals. Um, and with a lot of things in the modern and with a lot of things in the modern and with a lot of things in the modern world, our attention is just being world, our attention is just being world, our attention is just being fatigued and we're depleted. And it's fatigued and we're depleted. And it's fatigued and we're depleted. And it's really hard to recharge the battery or really hard to recharge the battery or really hard to recharge the battery or know what to do to recharge the battery. know what to do to recharge the battery. know what to do to recharge the battery. And I think that's kind of the entry And I think that's kind of the entry And I think that's kind of the entry point why I sort of got into interested point why I sort of got into interested point why I sort of got into interested in this. And one of my mentors, Steve in this. And one of my mentors, Steve in this. And one of my mentors, Steve Kaplan, would talk about this directed Kaplan, would talk about this directed Kaplan, would talk about this directed attention fatigue problem uh that a lot attention fatigue problem uh that a lot attention fatigue problem uh that a lot of us are facing. You know, our of us are facing. You know, our of us are facing. You know, our ancestors, you know, thousands of ancestors, you know, thousands of ancestors, you know, thousands of thousands of years ago, we're not thousands of years ago, we're not thousands of years ago, we're not bombarded with so much information like bombarded with so much information like bombarded with so much information like we are now. Now, the modern human has to we are now. Now, the modern human has to we are now. Now, the modern human has to sort of pick and choose what to pay sort of pick and choose what to pay sort of pick and choose what to pay attention to, and it's kind of attention to, and it's kind of attention to, and it's kind of overwhelming. And Steve uh Kaplan had this idea that And Steve uh Kaplan had this idea that And Steve uh Kaplan had this idea that humans kind of have two different kinds humans kind of have two different kinds humans kind of have two different kinds of attention. So uh one kind of attention. So uh one kind of attention. So uh one kind of attention is called directed attention. attention is called directed attention. attention is called directed attention. And that's kind of the attention that And that's kind of the attention that And that's kind of the attention that I've been talking about uh just recently I've been talking about uh just recently I've been talking about uh just recently here. And that's the kind of attention here. And that's the kind of attention here. And that's the kind of attention where you as an individual person are where you as an individual person are where you as an individual person are deciding what to pay attention to. So deciding what to pay attention to. So deciding what to pay attention to. So presumably Andrew, you're deciding to presumably Andrew, you're deciding to presumably Andrew, you're deciding to pay attention to what I'm saying. uh pay attention to what I'm saying. uh pay attention to what I'm saying. uh even though there's many other things even though there's many other things even though there's many other things you could find that might be more you could find that might be more you could find that might be more inherently interesting than what I'm inherently interesting than what I'm inherently interesting than what I'm saying. And this is kind of a very, you saying. And this is kind of a very, you saying. And this is kind of a very, you know, unique human capability. There know, unique human capability. There know, unique human capability. There might be other species that can kind of might be other species that can kind of might be other species that can kind of decide what to pay attention to, but decide what to pay attention to, but decide what to pay attention to, but we're really good at it. Humans are we're really good at it. Humans are we're really good at it. Humans are really, really good at being able to really, really good at being able to really, really good at being able to like focus on this lecture or focus on like focus on this lecture or focus on like focus on this lecture or focus on reading this paper, focus on trying to reading this paper, focus on trying to reading this paper, focus on trying to uh finish this math problem, but we uh finish this math problem, but we uh finish this math problem, but we can't do it forever. Yeah. And I think can't do it forever. Yeah. And I think can't do it forever. Yeah. And I think everybody kind of has had that sensation everybody kind of has had that sensation everybody kind of has had that sensation where uh at the end of a long workday, where uh at the end of a long workday, where uh at the end of a long workday, maybe three or four o'clock, you might maybe three or four o'clock, you might maybe three or four o'clock, you might be just staring at the computer screen be just staring at the computer screen be just staring at the computer screen and you can't focus anymore. And we call and you can't focus anymore. And we call and you can't focus anymore. And we call that a directed attention fatigue state that a directed attention fatigue state that a directed attention fatigue state where you can't really control your where you can't really control your where you can't really control your attentional focus anymore. And I see attentional focus anymore. And I see attentional focus anymore. And I see this all the time when I'm lecturing at this all the time when I'm lecturing at this all the time when I'm lecturing at the University of Chicago and I and I the University of Chicago and I and I the University of Chicago and I and I think I'm a decent lecturer. First five think I'm a decent lecturer. First five think I'm a decent lecturer. First five minutes of class, all the students eyes minutes of class, all the students eyes minutes of class, all the students eyes are on me. They're engaged. Did you know are on me. They're engaged. Did you know are on me. They're engaged. Did you know I see they're nodding along with me and I see they're nodding along with me and I see they're nodding along with me and you know 45 minutes into my lecture I you know 45 minutes into my lecture I you know 45 minutes into my lecture I kind of see people nodding back like kind of see people nodding back like kind of see people nodding back like this. They're getting tired. It's just this. They're getting tired. It's just this. They're getting tired. It's just hard for people to direct their hard for people to direct their hard for people to direct their attention for long periods of time. So attention for long periods of time. So attention for long periods of time. So that's kind of the special that's kind of the special that's kind of the special attention, directed attention. We think attention, directed attention. We think attention, directed attention. We think there's this other kind of attention there's this other kind of attention there's this other kind of attention that we call involuntary attention and that we call involuntary attention and that we call involuntary attention and that's the kind of attention that's the kind of attention that's the kind of attention that's automatically captured by interesting automatically captured by interesting automatically captured by interesting stimulation in the environment. So stimulation in the environment. So stimulation in the environment. So bright lights, loud noises, those things bright lights, loud noises, those things bright lights, loud noises, those things automatically capture our attention and automatically capture our attention and automatically capture our attention and we don't really have much control over we don't really have much control over we don't really have much control over it. And we think that kind of attention, it. And we think that kind of attention, it. And we think that kind of attention, this involuntary attention is less this involuntary attention is less this involuntary attention is less susceptible to fatigue or depletion. So susceptible to fatigue or depletion. So susceptible to fatigue or depletion. So you don't often hear people say, "Oh, I you don't often hear people say, "Oh, I you don't often hear people say, "Oh, I can't look at that beautiful waterfall can't look at that beautiful waterfall can't look at that beautiful waterfall anymore. It's just too interesting. I anymore. It's just too interesting. I anymore. It's just too interesting. I got to step away." Or, "Oh, I have to got to step away." Or, "Oh, I have to got to step away." Or, "Oh, I have to stop watching this movie. It's just too stop watching this movie. It's just too stop watching this movie. It's just too interesting. I'm too tired out." interesting. I'm too tired out." interesting. I'm too tired out." So that's a different kind of uh kind of So that's a different kind of uh kind of So that's a different kind of uh kind of attention and we think what's attention and we think what's attention and we think what's happening um in modern times is that our directed um in modern times is that our directed um in modern times is that our directed attention is being fatigued. attention is being fatigued. attention is being fatigued. Um but uh maybe we can restore directed Um but uh maybe we can restore directed Um but uh maybe we can restore directed attention uh by going into environments attention uh by going into environments attention uh by going into environments that can softly capture our involuntary that can softly capture our involuntary that can softly capture our involuntary attention. &gt;&gt; Do we know the basis of attentional &gt;&gt; Do we know the basis of attentional &gt;&gt; Do we know the basis of attentional fatigue? I mean, uh, I could imagine fatigue? I mean, uh, I could imagine fatigue? I mean, uh, I could imagine it's something in the noradinurgic, uh, it's something in the noradinurgic, uh, it's something in the noradinurgic, uh, dopamine, catakolamine world. Listeners dopamine, catakolamine world. Listeners dopamine, catakolamine world. Listeners to this podcast will recognize those to this podcast will recognize those to this podcast will recognize those terms, at least crudely. Uh, I could terms, at least crudely. Uh, I could terms, at least crudely. Uh, I could also imagine that it's literally a also imagine that it's literally a also imagine that it's literally a fatigue of the visual system andor the fatigue of the visual system andor the fatigue of the visual system andor the auditory system. You know, it's hard to auditory system. You know, it's hard to auditory system. You know, it's hard to maintain fixation, as we say, as visual maintain fixation, as we say, as visual maintain fixation, as we say, as visual neuroscientists to focus on a target. neuroscientists to focus on a target. neuroscientists to focus on a target. &gt;&gt; It's challenging. you know, um, if we &gt;&gt; It's challenging. you know, um, if we &gt;&gt; It's challenging. you know, um, if we allow our eyes to rest, it actually gets allow our eyes to rest, it actually gets allow our eyes to rest, it actually gets easier to look back at it and fixate on easier to look back at it and fixate on easier to look back at it and fixate on a target. So, what is the basis of the a target. So, what is the basis of the a target. So, what is the basis of the attentional fatigue for this focused attentional fatigue for this focused attentional fatigue for this focused attention or what you call directed attention or what you call directed attention or what you call directed attention? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a really great question. I'm &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a really great question. I'm &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a really great question. I'm not sure I have a great answer yet. U, not sure I have a great answer yet. U, not sure I have a great answer yet. U, maybe you'd have some ideas, Andrew. You maybe you'd have some ideas, Andrew. You maybe you'd have some ideas, Andrew. You know, one thing that sort of to me know, one thing that sort of to me know, one thing that sort of to me puzzles me a little bit about the brain puzzles me a little bit about the brain puzzles me a little bit about the brain is that from my understanding, it's kind is that from my understanding, it's kind is that from my understanding, it's kind of like brain metabolism is 20% of like brain metabolism is 20% of like brain metabolism is 20% of overall metabolism. No matter what overall metabolism. No matter what overall metabolism. No matter what people are doing, except for really people are doing, except for really people are doing, except for really extreme exercise where brain metabolism extreme exercise where brain metabolism extreme exercise where brain metabolism goes down a little bit, but if you're goes down a little bit, but if you're goes down a little bit, but if you're asleep or if you're doing a hard asleep or if you're doing a hard asleep or if you're doing a hard calculus problem, I think the brain is calculus problem, I think the brain is calculus problem, I think the brain is still using 20% of metabolism. So, it's still using 20% of metabolism. So, it's still using 20% of metabolism. So, it's sort of this puzzle. Why do we get this sort of this puzzle. Why do we get this sort of this puzzle. Why do we get this mental fatigue state? I I'm It's got to mental fatigue state? I I'm It's got to mental fatigue state? I I'm It's got to have some kind of neurological have some kind of neurological have some kind of neurological component. At this point, I can't point component. At this point, I can't point component. At this point, I can't point to it. So, I'm going to talk about it to it. So, I'm going to talk about it to it. So, I'm going to talk about it more at this psychological level. It's more at this psychological level. It's more at this psychological level. It's the sensation that we have that we can't the sensation that we have that we can't the sensation that we have that we can't focus anymore. If I was to talk about focus anymore. If I was to talk about focus anymore. If I was to talk about brain areas, I would say probably this brain areas, I would say probably this brain areas, I would say probably this ability to direct attention is most ability to direct attention is most ability to direct attention is most likely in frontal cortex. Um whereas likely in frontal cortex. Um whereas likely in frontal cortex. Um whereas this involuntary tension, sometimes we this involuntary tension, sometimes we this involuntary tension, sometimes we call it more bottom up attention or call it more bottom up attention or call it more bottom up attention or exogenous attention where it's activated exogenous attention where it's activated exogenous attention where it's activated by external stimulation. I would say by external stimulation. I would say by external stimulation. I would say that's probably more activated by things that's probably more activated by things that's probably more activated by things in the parietal cortex or even occipital in the parietal cortex or even occipital in the parietal cortex or even occipital cortex or auditory cortex depending on cortex or auditory cortex depending on cortex or auditory cortex depending on what that external stimulation is. I'm what that external stimulation is. I'm what that external stimulation is. I'm not going to lean everything on the not going to lean everything on the not going to lean everything on the visual system, but I've been listening visual system, but I've been listening visual system, but I've been listening to this book uh that unfortunately is to this book uh that unfortunately is to this book uh that unfortunately is only available as an audio book called only available as an audio book called only available as an audio book called Daily Rituals, which it's got two-minute Daily Rituals, which it's got two-minute Daily Rituals, which it's got two-minute chapters, and it describes the daily chapters, and it describes the daily chapters, and it describes the daily rituals of writers and artists and rituals of writers and artists and rituals of writers and artists and creatives. And um it's very interesting creatives. And um it's very interesting creatives. And um it's very interesting that across many of those chapters you that across many of those chapters you that across many of those chapters you find the same thing which is that almost find the same thing which is that almost find the same thing which is that almost all of these people had a ritual of all of these people had a ritual of all of these people had a ritual of taking some stimulant typically caffeine taking some stimulant typically caffeine taking some stimulant typically caffeine sometimes more aggressive stimulants but sometimes more aggressive stimulants but sometimes more aggressive stimulants but caffeine and then something to restrict caffeine and then something to restrict caffeine and then something to restrict their uh visual world make it more their uh visual world make it more their uh visual world make it more tunnel vision. In fact, there were tunnel vision. In fact, there were tunnel vision. In fact, there were certain um painters I forget the certain um painters I forget the certain um painters I forget the particular painter that they described particular painter that they described particular painter that they described who literally built uh cardboard who literally built uh cardboard who literally built uh cardboard blinders onto his glasses when things blinders onto his glasses when things blinders onto his glasses when things weren't going so well. Um now, the weren't going so well. Um now, the weren't going so well. Um now, the reason I bring this up is not as a reason I bring this up is not as a reason I bring this up is not as a suggestion, although I suppose it could. suggestion, although I suppose it could. suggestion, although I suppose it could. Um I actually used to read papers. Maybe Um I actually used to read papers. Maybe Um I actually used to read papers. Maybe I need to go back to this. I put a like I need to go back to this. I put a like I need to go back to this. I put a like a baseball cap on, put a hoodie on, and a baseball cap on, put a hoodie on, and a baseball cap on, put a hoodie on, and you restrict your visual world. And it you restrict your visual world. And it you restrict your visual world. And it makes perfect sense if in fact makes perfect sense if in fact makes perfect sense if in fact involuntary attention which presumably involuntary attention which presumably involuntary attention which presumably comes from the periphery comes from the periphery comes from the periphery &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; is inexhaustible &gt;&gt; is inexhaustible &gt;&gt; is inexhaustible &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; so you know I think what's interesting &gt;&gt; so you know I think what's interesting &gt;&gt; so you know I think what's interesting about the digital interface that we about the digital interface that we about the digital interface that we exist in now is that the whole world is exist in now is that the whole world is exist in now is that the whole world is brought right in front of us brought right in front of us brought right in front of us &gt;&gt; so presumably we evolved to move through &gt;&gt; so presumably we evolved to move through &gt;&gt; so presumably we evolved to move through space and direct our attention to space and direct our attention to space and direct our attention to particular locations and let the rest of particular locations and let the rest of particular locations and let the rest of the world fall away the world fall away the world fall away &gt;&gt; and then involuntary attention could &gt;&gt; and then involuntary attention could &gt;&gt; and then involuntary attention could grab us to alert us to people showing up grab us to alert us to people showing up grab us to alert us to people showing up or danger or the smell of something or danger or the smell of something or danger or the smell of something wafting by calling us for dinner. wafting by calling us for dinner. wafting by calling us for dinner. &gt;&gt; But now &gt;&gt; But now &gt;&gt; But now &gt;&gt; it's all placed right in our central &gt;&gt; it's all placed right in our central &gt;&gt; it's all placed right in our central visual field. visual field. visual field. &gt;&gt; So it makes sense that we would all be &gt;&gt; So it makes sense that we would all be &gt;&gt; So it makes sense that we would all be very challenged with um maintaining very challenged with um maintaining very challenged with um maintaining directed attention within that small directed attention within that small directed attention within that small tunnel vision. tunnel vision. tunnel vision. &gt;&gt; Yes. And I would say something else too. &gt;&gt; Yes. And I would say something else too. &gt;&gt; Yes. And I would say something else too. I guess if you felt like you had to I guess if you felt like you had to I guess if you felt like you had to create an isolation kind of chamber sort create an isolation kind of chamber sort create an isolation kind of chamber sort of thing to focus your directed of thing to focus your directed of thing to focus your directed attention that's where we would say it's attention that's where we would say it's attention that's where we would say it's probably time to take a break that probably time to take a break that probably time to take a break that that's when you know we might recommend that's when you know we might recommend that's when you know we might recommend that you go for a walk in nature to that you go for a walk in nature to that you go for a walk in nature to recharge this kind of precious directed recharge this kind of precious directed recharge this kind of precious directed attention resource. So that might be a attention resource. So that might be a attention resource. So that might be a signal if you're just having a really signal if you're just having a really signal if you're just having a really hard time focusing. Yeah, you can try to hard time focusing. Yeah, you can try to hard time focusing. Yeah, you can try to power through, but I think that might power through, but I think that might power through, but I think that might not be the most productive. That might not be the most productive. That might not be the most productive. That might be a signal to you to say, "Hey, maybe I be a signal to you to say, "Hey, maybe I be a signal to you to say, "Hey, maybe I got to go take a break." And the break got to go take a break." And the break got to go take a break." And the break better not be scrolling on social media. better not be scrolling on social media. better not be scrolling on social media. We're saying a really good break is We're saying a really good break is We're saying a really good break is actually a walk in nature or some kind actually a walk in nature or some kind actually a walk in nature or some kind of interaction with nature. of interaction with nature. of interaction with nature. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on this and other podcasts about before on this and other podcasts about before on this and other podcasts about the fact that getting a great night's the fact that getting a great night's the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of mental sleep is the foundation of mental sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the on makes a huge difference in the on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft it is or how firm it is night. How soft it is or how firm it is night. How soft it is or how firm it is all play into your comfort and need to all play into your comfort and need to all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you can If you go to the Helix website, you can If you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep on your back, your side, or your on your back, your side, or your on your back, your side, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night?" Things of that sort. during the night?" Things of that sort. during the night?" Things of that sort. Maybe you know the answers to those Maybe you know the answers to those Maybe you know the answers to those questions. Maybe you don't. Either way, questions. Maybe you don't. Either way, questions. Maybe you don't. Either way, Helix will match you to the ideal Helix will match you to the ideal Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned mattress for you. For me, that turned mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress. I started out to be the Dusk mattress. I started out to be the Dusk mattress. I started sleeping on a Dusk mattress about 3 and sleeping on a Dusk mattress about 3 and sleeping on a Dusk mattress about 3 and 1/2 years ago, and it's been far and 1/2 years ago, and it's been far and 1/2 years ago, and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. away the best sleep that I've ever had. away the best sleep that I've ever had. If you'd like to try Helixleep, you can If you'd like to try Helixleep, you can If you'd like to try Helixleep, you can go to helixleep.com/huberman. go to helixleep.com/huberman. go to helixleep.com/huberman. Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's customized to you. Right now, Helix is customized to you. Right now, Helix is customized to you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 27% off all mattress giving up to 27% off all mattress giving up to 27% off all mattress orders. Again, that's orders. Again, that's orders. Again, that's helixleep.com/huberman to get up to 27% off. Today's episode is to get up to 27% off. Today's episode is to get up to 27% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. also brought to us by BetterHelp. also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I've been doing weekly entirely online. I've been doing weekly entirely online. I've been doing weekly therapy for over 30 years. Initially, I therapy for over 30 years. Initially, I therapy for over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition didn't have a choice. It was a condition didn't have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay in school. But of being allowed to stay in school. But of being allowed to stay in school. But pretty soon, I realized that therapy is pretty soon, I realized that therapy is pretty soon, I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to an extremely important component to an extremely important component to overall health. In fact, I consider overall health. In fact, I consider overall health. In fact, I consider doing regular weekly therapy just as doing regular weekly therapy just as doing regular weekly therapy just as important as getting regular exercise, important as getting regular exercise, important as getting regular exercise, which of course I also do every week. which of course I also do every week. which of course I also do every week. There are essentially three things that There are essentially three things that There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, great therapy provides. First of all, great therapy provides. First of all, great therapy provides a great rapport great therapy provides a great rapport great therapy provides a great rapport with somebody that you can trust and with somebody that you can trust and with somebody that you can trust and talk to about any and all issues with. talk to about any and all issues with. talk to about any and all issues with. Second of all, great therapy provides Second of all, great therapy provides Second of all, great therapy provides support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support or directed guidance. And third, expert or directed guidance. And third, expert or directed guidance. And third, expert therapy can provide useful insights. therapy can provide useful insights. therapy can provide useful insights. Those insights can allow you to make Those insights can allow you to make Those insights can allow you to make changes to improve your life in changes to improve your life in changes to improve your life in immeasurable ways. Not just your immeasurable ways. Not just your immeasurable ways. Not just your emotional life and your relationship emotional life and your relationship emotional life and your relationship life, but also your professional life. life, but also your professional life. life, but also your professional life. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy With BetterHelp, they make it very easy With BetterHelp, they make it very easy to find an expert therapist you resonate to find an expert therapist you resonate to find an expert therapist you resonate with and that can provide you these with and that can provide you these with and that can provide you these benefits that come through effective benefits that come through effective benefits that come through effective therapy. Also, because BetterHel allows therapy. Also, because BetterHel allows therapy. Also, because BetterHel allows for therapy to be done entirely online, for therapy to be done entirely online, for therapy to be done entirely online, it's extremely timeefficient and easy to it's extremely timeefficient and easy to it's extremely timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. If you'd like fit into a busy schedule. If you'd like fit into a busy schedule. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. &gt;&gt; I want to talk about interaction with &gt;&gt; I want to talk about interaction with &gt;&gt; I want to talk about interaction with nature. I just wanted to it's not a push nature. I just wanted to it's not a push nature. I just wanted to it's not a push back on what you just said but maybe back on what you just said but maybe back on what you just said but maybe just a probe a little bit deeper. I just a probe a little bit deeper. I just a probe a little bit deeper. I think a lot of people struggle with think a lot of people struggle with think a lot of people struggle with getting into a focused state at the getting into a focused state at the getting into a focused state at the outset. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I myself am familiar with &gt;&gt; And I myself am familiar with &gt;&gt; And I myself am familiar with &gt;&gt; uh the sitting down to do some work and &gt;&gt; uh the sitting down to do some work and &gt;&gt; uh the sitting down to do some work and it taking some time to kind of warm up it taking some time to kind of warm up it taking some time to kind of warm up and that agitation. I always think about and that agitation. I always think about and that agitation. I always think about it as literally um climbing over or it as literally um climbing over or it as literally um climbing over or through barbed wire. Sometimes it through barbed wire. Sometimes it through barbed wire. Sometimes it actually feels like that, right? Yes. actually feels like that, right? Yes. actually feels like that, right? Yes. &gt;&gt; And then at either side of the barbwire &gt;&gt; And then at either side of the barbwire &gt;&gt; And then at either side of the barbwire is a steep slope. On one side is a steep slope. On one side is a steep slope. On one side is distraction that can come from surfing distraction that can come from surfing distraction that can come from surfing the web or social media. And then on the web or social media. And then on the web or social media. And then on the other side is any sort of drama. other side is any sort of drama. other side is any sort of drama. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; And then of course our mind starts &gt;&gt; And then of course our mind starts &gt;&gt; And then of course our mind starts creating all these things that we think creating all these things that we think creating all these things that we think we need to do. And the idea is to get we need to do. And the idea is to get we need to do. And the idea is to get through the barbed wire. And then on the through the barbed wire. And then on the through the barbed wire. And then on the other side of it is that focused state. other side of it is that focused state. other side of it is that focused state. &gt;&gt; For most people, &gt;&gt; For most people, &gt;&gt; For most people, &gt;&gt; I think what I described is not terribly &gt;&gt; I think what I described is not terribly &gt;&gt; I think what I described is not terribly different from that. Yeah, I'm making a different from that. Yeah, I'm making a different from that. Yeah, I'm making a lot of assumptions here, but I don't lot of assumptions here, but I don't lot of assumptions here, but I don't know many people that can just sit down know many people that can just sit down know many people that can just sit down to work that and just drop in like like, to work that and just drop in like like, to work that and just drop in like like, you know, like a trench. you know, like a trench. you know, like a trench. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; Um, can you do that? &gt;&gt; Um, can you do that? &gt;&gt; Um, can you do that? &gt;&gt; No. But I can do it better after a walk &gt;&gt; No. But I can do it better after a walk &gt;&gt; No. But I can do it better after a walk in nature. in nature. in nature. &gt;&gt; So, I think almost like the walk in &gt;&gt; So, I think almost like the walk in &gt;&gt; So, I think almost like the walk in nature is sort of like a preparatory nature is sort of like a preparatory nature is sort of like a preparatory kind of process. Um, just like, you kind of process. Um, just like, you kind of process. Um, just like, you know, think about like lifting weights know, think about like lifting weights know, think about like lifting weights or something like that. You wouldn't or something like that. You wouldn't or something like that. You wouldn't start off a workout and say, "Oh, let's start off a workout and say, "Oh, let's start off a workout and say, "Oh, let's put 250 on the bench and start going." put 250 on the bench and start going." put 250 on the bench and start going." You warm up. you got to wake up your You warm up. you got to wake up your You warm up. you got to wake up your nervous system a little bit. And I your nervous system a little bit. And I your nervous system a little bit. And I think um think um think um that's kind of a little bit what we that's kind of a little bit what we that's kind of a little bit what we think interacting with nature is kind of think interacting with nature is kind of think interacting with nature is kind of doing. I mean, it's not a passive doing. I mean, it's not a passive doing. I mean, it's not a passive process. We're not saying go and sit in process. We're not saying go and sit in process. We're not saying go and sit in a dark room for 30 minutes and then a dark room for 30 minutes and then a dark room for 30 minutes and then start to go to work. No, we're saying we start to go to work. No, we're saying we start to go to work. No, we're saying we want you to be interacting with nature. want you to be interacting with nature. want you to be interacting with nature. We want you to notice nature. We want We want you to notice nature. We want We want you to notice nature. We want your involuntary attention to be your involuntary attention to be your involuntary attention to be automatically captured by the automatically captured by the automatically captured by the stimulation in nature. And then after stimulation in nature. And then after stimulation in nature. And then after you've kind of been sufficiently you've kind of been sufficiently you've kind of been sufficiently recharged, then we think you're going to recharged, then we think you're going to recharged, then we think you're going to be able to go back to your desk and be able to go back to your desk and be able to go back to your desk and be able to direct attention and be able to able to direct attention and be able to able to direct attention and be able to focus. &gt;&gt; So, let's talk about some of the data &gt;&gt; So, let's talk about some of the data &gt;&gt; So, let's talk about some of the data around what walks in nature and around what walks in nature and around what walks in nature and interactions with other components of interactions with other components of interactions with other components of nature can do for our cognition and our nature can do for our cognition and our nature can do for our cognition and our level of focus. Um, I think intuitively level of focus. Um, I think intuitively level of focus. Um, I think intuitively people will appreciate, okay, a nice people will appreciate, okay, a nice people will appreciate, okay, a nice walk in nature, not looking at one's walk in nature, not looking at one's walk in nature, not looking at one's phone. It's very pleasant. It's phone. It's very pleasant. It's phone. It's very pleasant. It's relaxing. And then you get back to your relaxing. And then you get back to your relaxing. And then you get back to your desk and you can really focus. desk and you can really focus. desk and you can really focus. &gt;&gt; What about the laboratory data that &gt;&gt; What about the laboratory data that &gt;&gt; What about the laboratory data that support this or out of laboratory data support this or out of laboratory data support this or out of laboratory data that support this? Maybe you could that support this? Maybe you could that support this? Maybe you could describe a few of the incredible studies describe a few of the incredible studies describe a few of the incredible studies that you've done because they are really that you've done because they are really that you've done because they are really incredible and they're very pioneering incredible and they're very pioneering incredible and they're very pioneering in the way that you've brought in the way that you've brought in the way that you've brought &gt;&gt; real laboratory technology into nature &gt;&gt; real laboratory technology into nature &gt;&gt; real laboratory technology into nature as well. So pick your favorite study as well. So pick your favorite study as well. So pick your favorite study about this and then I'll ask you about a about this and then I'll ask you about a about this and then I'll ask you about a few others as well. Well, I think the few others as well. Well, I think the few others as well. Well, I think the kind of the seinal uh experiment the kind of the seinal uh experiment the kind of the seinal uh experiment that we did um was back in, you know, that we did um was back in, you know, that we did um was back in, you know, 2008. And at that time um when people did And at that time um when people did And at that time um when people did these sort of nature walk studies, they these sort of nature walk studies, they these sort of nature walk studies, they would ask people, "How do you feel after would ask people, "How do you feel after would ask people, "How do you feel after the walk?" And it was very subjective. the walk?" And it was very subjective. the walk?" And it was very subjective. And I I'm not against uh subjective And I I'm not against uh subjective And I I'm not against uh subjective accounts. And people reported, "Yeah, I accounts. And people reported, "Yeah, I accounts. And people reported, "Yeah, I feel much more refreshed after the walk feel much more refreshed after the walk feel much more refreshed after the walk in nature." Um, but I always felt a in nature." Um, but I always felt a in nature." Um, but I always felt a little bit dissatisfied by that. I little bit dissatisfied by that. I little bit dissatisfied by that. I wanted to see, well, does objective wanted to see, well, does objective wanted to see, well, does objective performance change? Just like we would performance change? Just like we would performance change? Just like we would probably be dissatisfied if I gave you a probably be dissatisfied if I gave you a probably be dissatisfied if I gave you a pill and I said, "This pill is going to pill and I said, "This pill is going to pill and I said, "This pill is going to uh get you stronger. You're going to be uh get you stronger. You're going to be uh get you stronger. You're going to be able to lift more weight." And if we able to lift more weight." And if we able to lift more weight." And if we just had people say, "Yeah, I feel like just had people say, "Yeah, I feel like just had people say, "Yeah, I feel like I can lift more weight." I don't think I can lift more weight." I don't think I can lift more weight." I don't think that'd be satisfying. We'd actually want that'd be satisfying. We'd actually want that'd be satisfying. We'd actually want to see, can people actually lift more to see, can people actually lift more to see, can people actually lift more weight? And so what we did is we weight? And so what we did is we weight? And so what we did is we designed a study designed a study designed a study um that was experimentally controlled um that was experimentally controlled um that was experimentally controlled that would have objective measures uh that would have objective measures uh that would have objective measures uh how did people perform cognitively how did people perform cognitively how did people perform cognitively before and after going on a walk in before and after going on a walk in before and after going on a walk in nature. So what we did is we brought nature. So what we did is we brought nature. So what we did is we brought people into the laboratory uh and then people into the laboratory uh and then people into the laboratory uh and then we gave them some challenging working we gave them some challenging working we gave them some challenging working memory and attention tasks. So one of memory and attention tasks. So one of memory and attention tasks. So one of the task tasks was called the backwards the task tasks was called the backwards the task tasks was called the backwards digit span task where you would hear digit span task where you would hear digit span task where you would hear digits um out loud at a pace of about digits um out loud at a pace of about digits um out loud at a pace of about one digit per second and then the one digit per second and then the one digit per second and then the participant would need to repeat them participant would need to repeat them participant would need to repeat them back in backwards order. So if I said uh back in backwards order. So if I said uh back in backwards order. So if I said uh 567 the participant would have to repeat 567 the participant would have to repeat 567 the participant would have to repeat back 765 back 765 back 765 pretty easy task at three digits but we pretty easy task at three digits but we pretty easy task at three digits but we keep increasing the number of digits all keep increasing the number of digits all keep increasing the number of digits all the way till about nine digits. at about the way till about nine digits. at about the way till about nine digits. at about five digits you're ready to pull your five digits you're ready to pull your five digits you're ready to pull your hair out is a challenging task. So we hair out is a challenging task. So we hair out is a challenging task. So we gave participants uh this backwards gave participants uh this backwards gave participants uh this backwards digitis span task digitis span task digitis span task and then uh we gave them a map of a and then uh we gave them a map of a and then uh we gave them a map of a walk. Uh it could be the first studies walk. Uh it could be the first studies walk. Uh it could be the first studies were through uh the Ann Arbor Arboritum were through uh the Ann Arbor Arboritum were through uh the Ann Arbor Arboritum which was a nature walk uh kind of by which was a nature walk uh kind of by which was a nature walk uh kind of by the psychology building at the psychology building at the psychology building at the University of Michigan or participants University of Michigan or participants University of Michigan or participants went for a walk uh on busy Washington went for a walk uh on busy Washington went for a walk uh on busy Washington uh street in downtown Ann Arbor. Uh the uh street in downtown Ann Arbor. Uh the uh street in downtown Ann Arbor. Uh the walks were both uh about 2.6 miles. So, walks were both uh about 2.6 miles. So, walks were both uh about 2.6 miles. So, it took people about 50 minutes to do it took people about 50 minutes to do it took people about 50 minutes to do the walk. Uh, we also took participants the walk. Uh, we also took participants the walk. Uh, we also took participants cell phones because we didn't want them cell phones because we didn't want them cell phones because we didn't want them texting or chitchatting on the walk. We texting or chitchatting on the walk. We texting or chitchatting on the walk. We wanted their attention to be fully wanted their attention to be fully wanted their attention to be fully focused on the environment. And we also focused on the environment. And we also focused on the environment. And we also did one other thing. We also gave them a did one other thing. We also gave them a did one other thing. We also gave them a GPS watch. Uh, why did we give them a GPS watch. Uh, why did we give them a GPS watch. Uh, why did we give them a GPS watch? Well, we did it for two GPS watch? Well, we did it for two GPS watch? Well, we did it for two reasons. One, we wanted to make sure reasons. One, we wanted to make sure reasons. One, we wanted to make sure they went on the walk. They didn't just they went on the walk. They didn't just they went on the walk. They didn't just go to Starbucks. And two, um, we wanted go to Starbucks. And two, um, we wanted go to Starbucks. And two, um, we wanted to see, did people get lost? Because if to see, did people get lost? Because if to see, did people get lost? Because if people got lost on the walk, maybe that people got lost on the walk, maybe that people got lost on the walk, maybe that wouldn't be restorative. Okay, so people wouldn't be restorative. Okay, so people wouldn't be restorative. Okay, so people do the backwards digit span task. We do the backwards digit span task. We do the backwards digit span task. We send them on a walk in nature or we send them on a walk in nature or we send them on a walk in nature or we send them on a walk uh through an urban them on a walk uh through an urban them on a walk uh through an urban environment. They go on this 50-minute environment. They go on this 50-minute environment. They go on this 50-minute walk. They come back to the lab. We give walk. They come back to the lab. We give walk. They come back to the lab. We give them that same backwards digit span task them that same backwards digit span task them that same backwards digit span task again to see if there's any performance again to see if there's any performance again to see if there's any performance change or not, measure that. Then we change or not, measure that. Then we change or not, measure that. Then we have people repeat the whole procedure have people repeat the whole procedure have people repeat the whole procedure again. They come back to the lab a week again. They come back to the lab a week again. They come back to the lab a week later. So they walked in nature the later. So they walked in nature the later. So they walked in nature the first week, uh they walked in the urban first week, uh they walked in the urban first week, uh they walked in the urban environment the second week or vice environment the second week or vice environment the second week or vice versa. So it was all within subject very versa. So it was all within subject very versa. So it was all within subject very uh tight experimental control and what uh tight experimental control and what uh tight experimental control and what we found was pretty incredible that we found was pretty incredible that we found was pretty incredible that people's working memory capacity and people's working memory capacity and people's working memory capacity and their ability to direct attention their ability to direct attention their ability to direct attention improved by about 20% improved by about 20% improved by about 20% uh after the walk in nature versus the uh after the walk in nature versus the uh after the walk in nature versus the walk uh in the urban environment. And walk uh in the urban environment. And walk uh in the urban environment. And people might be thinking well maybe it's people might be thinking well maybe it's people might be thinking well maybe it's just because uh the nature walk was just because uh the nature walk was just because uh the nature walk was just more pleasant. They just like the nature more pleasant. They just like the nature more pleasant. They just like the nature walk more. people did tend to like the walk more. people did tend to like the walk more. people did tend to like the nature walk more. Um, and we did measure nature walk more. Um, and we did measure nature walk more. Um, and we did measure improvements in mood. How much did mood improvements in mood. How much did mood improvements in mood. How much did mood improve on the walk? We didn't find very improve on the walk? We didn't find very improve on the walk? We didn't find very strong correlation between improvements strong correlation between improvements strong correlation between improvements in mood and improvements in the working in mood and improvements in the working in mood and improvements in the working memory and directed attention memory and directed attention memory and directed attention performance, suggesting that people performance, suggesting that people performance, suggesting that people weren't just getting better because they weren't just getting better because they weren't just getting better because they were getting into good moods. But the were getting into good moods. But the were getting into good moods. But the even stronger demonstration that this even stronger demonstration that this even stronger demonstration that this wasn't mood driven is that we had people wasn't mood driven is that we had people wasn't mood driven is that we had people walk at different times of the year. So, walk at different times of the year. So, walk at different times of the year. So, some of our participants walked in June some of our participants walked in June some of our participants walked in June when it was like 80 degrees Fahrenheit. when it was like 80 degrees Fahrenheit. when it was like 80 degrees Fahrenheit. People said, "Mark, I can't believe People said, "Mark, I can't believe People said, "Mark, I can't believe you're paying me to go for a walk in you're paying me to go for a walk in you're paying me to go for a walk in nature." Really healthy mood benefits, nature." Really healthy mood benefits, nature." Really healthy mood benefits, really healthy working memory and really healthy working memory and really healthy working memory and attention benefits. We also had attention benefits. We also had attention benefits. We also had participants walk in January, 25 degrees participants walk in January, 25 degrees participants walk in January, 25 degrees Fahrenheit. People said, "Mark, I was Fahrenheit. People said, "Mark, I was Fahrenheit. People said, "Mark, I was freezing my butt off out there. I did freezing my butt off out there. I did freezing my butt off out there. I did not enjoy that walk." But incredibly, not enjoy that walk." But incredibly, not enjoy that walk." But incredibly, the people that walked in January when the people that walked in January when the people that walked in January when it was freezing cold and they didn't it was freezing cold and they didn't it was freezing cold and they didn't enjoy the walk obtained the same working enjoy the walk obtained the same working enjoy the walk obtained the same working memory and attention benefits as the memory and attention benefits as the memory and attention benefits as the people that walked in June. So you people that walked in June. So you people that walked in June. So you didn't even have to like the nature didn't even have to like the nature didn't even have to like the nature interaction to get this directed interaction to get this directed interaction to get this directed attention benefit. So that I thought was attention benefit. So that I thought was attention benefit. So that I thought was pretty interesting and counterintuitive pretty interesting and counterintuitive pretty interesting and counterintuitive that this isn't just about liking or that this isn't just about liking or that this isn't just about liking or pleasantness. There's something deep pleasantness. There's something deep pleasantness. There's something deep about processing about processing about processing auditory, visual, maybe even tactile auditory, visual, maybe even tactile auditory, visual, maybe even tactile stimulation of nature that somehow is stimulation of nature that somehow is stimulation of nature that somehow is good for our brains and restores our good for our brains and restores our good for our brains and restores our ability to direct attention. ability to direct attention. ability to direct attention. &gt;&gt; Super interesting findings and it leads &gt;&gt; Super interesting findings and it leads &gt;&gt; Super interesting findings and it leads me back to this um uh finite resource of me back to this um uh finite resource of me back to this um uh finite resource of directed attention whatever the directed attention whatever the directed attention whatever the underlying networks and chemicals happen underlying networks and chemicals happen underlying networks and chemicals happen to be. Could we speculate what might be to be. Could we speculate what might be to be. Could we speculate what might be occurring in the nature walks that is um occurring in the nature walks that is um occurring in the nature walks that is um enhancing or allowing restoration of enhancing or allowing restoration of enhancing or allowing restoration of directed attention? And I guess the directed attention? And I guess the directed attention? And I guess the neurobiologist in me wants to say, okay, neurobiologist in me wants to say, okay, neurobiologist in me wants to say, okay, I'm walking in nature. That probably I'm walking in nature. That probably I'm walking in nature. That probably means some greenery, um some dirt, uh means some greenery, um some dirt, uh means some greenery, um some dirt, uh maybe some water. Um, and maybe some water. Um, and maybe some water. Um, and I could imagine one hypothesis that it's I could imagine one hypothesis that it's I could imagine one hypothesis that it's the uh kind of irregularity of nature the uh kind of irregularity of nature the uh kind of irregularity of nature environments, right? I mean, maybe trees environments, right? I mean, maybe trees environments, right? I mean, maybe trees are spaced out, you know, in perfect are spaced out, you know, in perfect are spaced out, you know, in perfect spacing like on Palm Drive at Stanford. spacing like on Palm Drive at Stanford. spacing like on Palm Drive at Stanford. It's like it looks like a it speaks It's like it looks like a it speaks It's like it looks like a it speaks to the engineering department that to the engineering department that to the engineering department that there's it's set at such even intervals, there's it's set at such even intervals, there's it's set at such even intervals, right? But, um, typically when you're in right? But, um, typically when you're in right? But, um, typically when you're in the forest um or nature, there there's the forest um or nature, there there's the forest um or nature, there there's also things to break up that regularity. also things to break up that regularity. also things to break up that regularity. Um whereas indoor environments and city Um whereas indoor environments and city Um whereas indoor environments and city environments tend to have a lot of right environments tend to have a lot of right environments tend to have a lot of right angles, buildings can be different angles, buildings can be different angles, buildings can be different sizes, but city blocks are pretty fixed sizes, but city blocks are pretty fixed sizes, but city blocks are pretty fixed for a given neighborhood in terms of for a given neighborhood in terms of for a given neighborhood in terms of their size. their size. their size. &gt;&gt; So that's just one hypothesis. I'm &gt;&gt; So that's just one hypothesis. I'm &gt;&gt; So that's just one hypothesis. I'm coming up with this off the top of my coming up with this off the top of my coming up with this off the top of my head. Do we have any data or do you um head. Do we have any data or do you um head. Do we have any data or do you um have any preferential speculation as to have any preferential speculation as to have any preferential speculation as to what it is about nature in terms of its what it is about nature in terms of its what it is about nature in terms of its physical structure? And as a correlary physical structure? And as a correlary physical structure? And as a correlary to that, to that, to that, is it that nature is relaxing people and is it that nature is relaxing people and is it that nature is relaxing people and therefore they're not having to use therefore they're not having to use therefore they're not having to use their directed attention and therefore their directed attention and therefore their directed attention and therefore directed attention capability comes back directed attention capability comes back directed attention capability comes back or is set at a higher level? Um I or is set at a higher level? Um I or is set at a higher level? Um I realize this is two questions kind of uh realize this is two questions kind of uh realize this is two questions kind of uh braided together, but that's what I'm braided together, but that's what I'm braided together, but that's what I'm curious about. curious about. curious about. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think um I think both &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think um I think both &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think um I think both elements are played. So maybe I'll start elements are played. So maybe I'll start elements are played. So maybe I'll start first with kind of the resting first with kind of the resting first with kind of the resting directed attention element. So, let's directed attention element. So, let's directed attention element. So, let's pretend we're on these walks in let's pretend we're on these walks in let's pretend we're on these walks in nature or the walk on the urban nature or the walk on the urban nature or the walk on the urban environment. And I'll start with the environment. And I'll start with the environment. And I'll start with the walk on the urban environment. The walk on the urban environment. The walk on the urban environment. The walk in the urban environment um required in the urban environment um required in the urban environment um required people to cross a lot of streets. So, people to cross a lot of streets. So, people to cross a lot of streets. So, you had to be vigilant. So, you still you had to be vigilant. So, you still you had to be vigilant. So, you still had to use directed attention. Also had to use directed attention. Also had to use directed attention. Also had a lot of car traffic. So, you're hearing a lot of car traffic. So, you're hearing a lot of car traffic. So, you're hearing the noise of cars whizzing by at the noise of cars whizzing by at the noise of cars whizzing by at probably, you know, 40 45 miles per probably, you know, 40 45 miles per probably, you know, 40 45 miles per hour. There's also advertising. you're hour. There's also advertising. you're hour. There's also advertising. you're going by shops and billboards that going by shops and billboards that going by shops and billboards that kind of require some directed attention. kind of require some directed attention. kind of require some directed attention. So, you can't really just mind wander So, you can't really just mind wander So, you can't really just mind wander and let your mind kind of go in and let your mind kind of go in and let your mind kind of go in those environments. You still have to be those environments. You still have to be those environments. You still have to be vigilant. You still have to use directed vigilant. You still have to use directed vigilant. You still have to use directed attention. The walk through the Ann attention. The walk through the Ann attention. The walk through the Ann Arbor Arboritum, you didn't have a lot Arbor Arboritum, you didn't have a lot Arbor Arboritum, you didn't have a lot of those distractions. So, I think you of those distractions. So, I think you of those distractions. So, I think you only had to cross one or two streets and only had to cross one or two streets and only had to cross one or two streets and then you're kind of uh getting towards then you're kind of uh getting towards then you're kind of uh getting towards the arboritum. You don't have to cross the arboritum. You don't have to cross the arboritum. You don't have to cross any more streets. any more streets. any more streets. Um there's no advertising there. And Um there's no advertising there. And Um there's no advertising there. And then and this is the thing I want to then and this is the thing I want to then and this is the thing I want to talk about too. This idea of soft talk about too. This idea of soft talk about too. This idea of soft fascination. There's all the colors, fascination. There's all the colors, fascination. There's all the colors, fractalness, curved edges of nature that fractalness, curved edges of nature that fractalness, curved edges of nature that we think um sort of captures our we think um sort of captures our we think um sort of captures our involuntary attention in what we say is involuntary attention in what we say is involuntary attention in what we say is softly fascinating ways. And we think softly fascinating ways. And we think softly fascinating ways. And we think that in combination with not placing a lot of in combination with not placing a lot of in combination with not placing a lot of demand on directed attention is why demand on directed attention is why demand on directed attention is why nature is able to restore directed nature is able to restore directed nature is able to restore directed attention. So what do I mean by softly attention. So what do I mean by softly attention. So what do I mean by softly fascinating stimulation? So let's fascinating stimulation? So let's fascinating stimulation? So let's pretend we're looking at a waterfall and pretend we're looking at a waterfall and pretend we're looking at a waterfall and the waterfall is really beautiful. You the waterfall is really beautiful. You the waterfall is really beautiful. You can hear the rush of the water going can hear the rush of the water going can hear the rush of the water going down. You can see all the like the down. You can see all the like the down. You can see all the like the bubbles and maybe some of the froth of bubbles and maybe some of the froth of bubbles and maybe some of the froth of the water going down. It captures our the water going down. It captures our the water going down. It captures our attention, but we can still kind of mind attention, but we can still kind of mind attention, but we can still kind of mind wander and think about other things at wander and think about other things at wander and think about other things at the same time. So, it doesn't really the same time. So, it doesn't really the same time. So, it doesn't really harshly capture all of our attention and harshly capture all of our attention and harshly capture all of our attention and resources. If we're in Time Square, also resources. If we're in Time Square, also resources. If we're in Time Square, also super interesting. Lots of interesting super interesting. Lots of interesting super interesting. Lots of interesting stimulation to look at, but it kind of stimulation to look at, but it kind of stimulation to look at, but it kind of captures all of our attention resources captures all of our attention resources captures all of our attention resources in an in an all-consuming way that in an in an all-consuming way that in an in an all-consuming way that doesn't allow for any reflection or mind doesn't allow for any reflection or mind doesn't allow for any reflection or mind wandering or anything like that. So, wandering or anything like that. So, wandering or anything like that. So, while Time Square does capture our while Time Square does capture our while Time Square does capture our involuntary attention, we say it does. involuntary attention, we say it does. involuntary attention, we say it does. So, in a very harshly fascinating way, So, in a very harshly fascinating way, So, in a very harshly fascinating way, whereas the waterfall captures our uh whereas the waterfall captures our uh whereas the waterfall captures our uh involuntary attention in a softly involuntary attention in a softly involuntary attention in a softly fascinating way. And we think that's the fascinating way. And we think that's the fascinating way. And we think that's the way that's going to be restful way that's going to be restful way that's going to be restful eventually of directed attention. So, we eventually of directed attention. So, we eventually of directed attention. So, we think two elements uh created why the think two elements uh created why the think two elements uh created why the nature walk was restorative. one, it nature walk was restorative. one, it nature walk was restorative. one, it didn't place as many demands on directed didn't place as many demands on directed didn't place as many demands on directed attention, and two, it had this softly attention, and two, it had this softly attention, and two, it had this softly fascinating stimulation that activated fascinating stimulation that activated fascinating stimulation that activated this involuntary attention, but not in this involuntary attention, but not in this involuntary attention, but not in an all-consuming way. So, we think those an all-consuming way. So, we think those an all-consuming way. So, we think those two things are critical. The other point two things are critical. The other point two things are critical. The other point that you bring up about, okay, well, that you bring up about, okay, well, that you bring up about, okay, well, what causes soft fascination to be what causes soft fascination to be what causes soft fascination to be captured or why does something captured or why does something captured or why does something capture involuntary attention in a capture involuntary attention in a capture involuntary attention in a softly fascinating way? And that gets softly fascinating way? And that gets softly fascinating way? And that gets really interesting where we think it really interesting where we think it really interesting where we think it could be elements of the structure of could be elements of the structure of could be elements of the structure of nature. So, it's interesting, Andrew, nature. So, it's interesting, Andrew, nature. So, it's interesting, Andrew, that we can get these effects of um that we can get these effects of um that we can get these effects of um nature improving cognitive performance. nature improving cognitive performance. nature improving cognitive performance. People just looking at pictures of People just looking at pictures of People just looking at pictures of nature versus looking at pictures of nature versus looking at pictures of nature versus looking at pictures of urban uh scenes, listening to nature urban uh scenes, listening to nature urban uh scenes, listening to nature sounds versus listening to urban sounds, sounds versus listening to urban sounds, sounds versus listening to urban sounds, watching nature videos versus watching nature videos versus watching nature videos versus watching urban videos. So, there you don't have urban videos. So, there you don't have urban videos. So, there you don't have to worry about getting hit by a car. to worry about getting hit by a car. to worry about getting hit by a car. There's something about the There's something about the There's something about the visual aesthetic visual aesthetic visual aesthetic of nature that we think is producing of nature that we think is producing of nature that we think is producing some of those benefits that somehow our some of those benefits that somehow our some of those benefits that somehow our brain maybe processes that fractal brain maybe processes that fractal brain maybe processes that fractal stimulation in more efficient or easier stimulation in more efficient or easier stimulation in more efficient or easier ways than kind of what you were talking ways than kind of what you were talking ways than kind of what you were talking about the 90° angled built environment about the 90° angled built environment about the 90° angled built environment that we've uh constructed. I have to ask that we've uh constructed. I have to ask that we've uh constructed. I have to ask if you are exposing people to nature if you are exposing people to nature if you are exposing people to nature images versus um urban environment images versus um urban environment images versus um urban environment images in the laboratory and seeing some images in the laboratory and seeing some images in the laboratory and seeing some of these same effects, of these same effects, of these same effects, are you presenting that on a typical, are you presenting that on a typical, are you presenting that on a typical, you know, small screen right in front of you know, small screen right in front of you know, small screen right in front of somebody or is it in panorama? I'm somebody or is it in panorama? I'm somebody or is it in panorama? I'm headed in a particular direction with headed in a particular direction with headed in a particular direction with this question. Um because I have a pet this question. Um because I have a pet this question. Um because I have a pet hypothesis as to what nature could be hypothesis as to what nature could be hypothesis as to what nature could be doing um to not deplete directed doing um to not deplete directed doing um to not deplete directed attention. Uh, but before I ask you attention. Uh, but before I ask you attention. Uh, but before I ask you about that, I'm just curious what the about that, I'm just curious what the about that, I'm just curious what the experimental setup is. I'm also asking experimental setup is. I'm also asking experimental setup is. I'm also asking because I'm a little concerned that because I'm a little concerned that because I'm a little concerned that people are going to hear, "Oh, great. I people are going to hear, "Oh, great. I people are going to hear, "Oh, great. I can just look at a picture of a forest. can just look at a picture of a forest. can just look at a picture of a forest. I don't have to get outside." And as you I don't have to get outside." And as you I don't have to get outside." And as you mentioned, there are so many things in a mentioned, there are so many things in a mentioned, there are so many things in a in an actual nature environment that, in an actual nature environment that, in an actual nature environment that, uh, provide a rich experience of uh, provide a rich experience of uh, provide a rich experience of soundsscape, etc. But, uh, what's the soundsscape, etc. But, uh, what's the soundsscape, etc. But, uh, what's the format? &gt;&gt; Yeah, so it's, uh, basically the same &gt;&gt; Yeah, so it's, uh, basically the same &gt;&gt; Yeah, so it's, uh, basically the same format as the walk, uh, the walking format as the walk, uh, the walking format as the walk, uh, the walking study that I described. So people come study that I described. So people come study that I described. So people come into the lab, we give them uh the into the lab, we give them uh the into the lab, we give them uh the backwards digit span task, but then we backwards digit span task, but then we backwards digit span task, but then we take them into a room in the lab where take them into a room in the lab where take them into a room in the lab where they just have a computer screen that's they just have a computer screen that's they just have a computer screen that's flipping through uh nature scenes or flipping through uh nature scenes or flipping through uh nature scenes or urban scenes. They look at the scene for urban scenes. They look at the scene for urban scenes. They look at the scene for a couple seconds. We also have them rate a couple seconds. We also have them rate a couple seconds. We also have them rate the scene on a scale of 1 to three for the scene on a scale of 1 to three for the scene on a scale of 1 to three for how much they like it just to make sure how much they like it just to make sure how much they like it just to make sure that they're awake and they're engaged that they're awake and they're engaged that they're awake and they're engaged with the environment. Uh that whole with the environment. Uh that whole with the environment. Uh that whole procedure takes about 10 minutes. procedure takes about 10 minutes. procedure takes about 10 minutes. uh they come out of the laboratory room uh they come out of the laboratory room uh they come out of the laboratory room that had the pictures and then they take that had the pictures and then they take that had the pictures and then they take the backwards digit span task again the backwards digit span task again the backwards digit span task again um to see if there are changes in uh um to see if there are changes in uh um to see if there are changes in uh performance and then we'd have them come performance and then we'd have them come performance and then we'd have them come back to the lab a week later repeat the back to the lab a week later repeat the back to the lab a week later repeat the whole procedure again. If they saw the whole procedure again. If they saw the whole procedure again. If they saw the nature pictures the first week, they see nature pictures the first week, they see nature pictures the first week, they see the urban pictures the second week or the urban pictures the second week or the urban pictures the second week or vice versa and they're even just seeing vice versa and they're even just seeing vice versa and they're even just seeing the pictures of nature we see um the pictures of nature we see um the pictures of nature we see um improvements in working memory and improvements in working memory and improvements in working memory and directed attention. However, I would directed attention. However, I would directed attention. However, I would caution that the effects are not as caution that the effects are not as caution that the effects are not as large as they are for the actual walk. large as they are for the actual walk. large as they are for the actual walk. Um, so it's harder uh Um, so it's harder uh Um, so it's harder uh or I would say I guess the or I would say I guess the or I would say I guess the intervention is not as strong as intervention is not as strong as intervention is not as strong as actually walking in nature, right? Just actually walking in nature, right? Just actually walking in nature, right? Just seeing 10 minutes of nature pictures, seeing 10 minutes of nature pictures, seeing 10 minutes of nature pictures, it's incredible that it works. You can it's incredible that it works. You can it's incredible that it works. You can get some of these benefits, but the get some of these benefits, but the get some of these benefits, but the benefits are not as strong as they are benefits are not as strong as they are benefits are not as strong as they are for the real thing. And the same for the real thing. And the same for the real thing. And the same procedure happens when we test um sounds procedure happens when we test um sounds procedure happens when we test um sounds of nature versus urban sounds. We test of nature versus urban sounds. We test of nature versus urban sounds. We test people uh with the backwards digispan people uh with the backwards digispan people uh with the backwards digispan task. Then we put headphones on them, task. Then we put headphones on them, task. Then we put headphones on them, play a series of nature sounds or play a play a series of nature sounds or play a play a series of nature sounds or play a series of urban sounds. Then they do the series of urban sounds. Then they do the series of urban sounds. Then they do the backwards digispan task again. Um and we backwards digispan task again. Um and we backwards digispan task again. Um and we find that when people listen to nature find that when people listen to nature find that when people listen to nature sounds, they also show improvements on sounds, they also show improvements on sounds, they also show improvements on um on working memory performance and um on working memory performance and um on working memory performance and directed attention. We don't do anything directed attention. We don't do anything directed attention. We don't do anything uh special in terms of having it being a uh special in terms of having it being a uh special in terms of having it being a panoramic view. It's basically just panoramic view. It's basically just panoramic view. It's basically just looking at a slideshow of nature looking at a slideshow of nature looking at a slideshow of nature pictures or urban pictures on a computer pictures or urban pictures on a computer pictures or urban pictures on a computer screen. As I'm hearing this, I'm screen. As I'm hearing this, I'm screen. As I'm hearing this, I'm starting to wonder whether we have brain starting to wonder whether we have brain starting to wonder whether we have brain areas andor circuits that are devoted to areas andor circuits that are devoted to areas andor circuits that are devoted to nature. Uh which you know first pass nature. Uh which you know first pass nature. Uh which you know first pass seems like kind of a crazy idea because seems like kind of a crazy idea because seems like kind of a crazy idea because visual perceptions and auditory visual perceptions and auditory visual perceptions and auditory perceptions are built up from their sort perceptions are built up from their sort perceptions are built up from their sort of elementary units which is just nerd of elementary units which is just nerd of elementary units which is just nerd speak for speak for speak for &gt;&gt; you know your eye and low-level visual &gt;&gt; you know your eye and low-level visual &gt;&gt; you know your eye and low-level visual system cares about system cares about system cares about &gt;&gt; uh circles and angles and then your &gt;&gt; uh circles and angles and then your &gt;&gt; uh circles and angles and then your higher level cortex puts it into the higher level cortex puts it into the higher level cortex puts it into the recognition of a person or a building recognition of a person or a building recognition of a person or a building etc is literally built up from etc is literally built up from etc is literally built up from &gt;&gt; from elementary units you know in the &gt;&gt; from elementary units you know in the &gt;&gt; from elementary units you know in the sound domain it's built up from sound domain it's built up from sound domain it's built up from different frequencies, etc. different frequencies, etc. different frequencies, etc. &gt;&gt; But, you know, there's something about &gt;&gt; But, you know, there's something about &gt;&gt; But, you know, there's something about this problem. Uh, here here's what's on this problem. Uh, here here's what's on this problem. Uh, here here's what's on my mind here. my mind here. my mind here. &gt;&gt; If I walk through a neighborhood, an &gt;&gt; If I walk through a neighborhood, an &gt;&gt; If I walk through a neighborhood, an urban neighborhood urban neighborhood urban neighborhood &gt;&gt; where it's a bunch of warehouses, &gt;&gt; where it's a bunch of warehouses, &gt;&gt; where it's a bunch of warehouses, &gt;&gt; um, with some cyclone fence &gt;&gt; um, with some cyclone fence &gt;&gt; um, with some cyclone fence &gt;&gt; and some signs and &gt;&gt; and some signs and &gt;&gt; and some signs and &gt;&gt; it's a weekend, maybe it's a Sunday and &gt;&gt; it's a weekend, maybe it's a Sunday and &gt;&gt; it's a weekend, maybe it's a Sunday and they're all closed. There aren't trucks they're all closed. There aren't trucks they're all closed. There aren't trucks coming in and out and not a whole coming in and out and not a whole coming in and out and not a whole lot's happening. Yep. This is It reminds lot's happening. Yep. This is It reminds lot's happening. Yep. This is It reminds me of uh like West Oakland near the me of uh like West Oakland near the me of uh like West Oakland near the shipyard on a Sunday. shipyard on a Sunday. shipyard on a Sunday. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Right. Not a place I recommend people go &gt;&gt; Right. Not a place I recommend people go &gt;&gt; Right. Not a place I recommend people go unless you really like kind of bland unless you really like kind of bland unless you really like kind of bland urban environments on a Sunday cuz not urban environments on a Sunday cuz not urban environments on a Sunday cuz not much is happening. It's a shipyard much is happening. It's a shipyard much is happening. It's a shipyard Sunday. It's closed Sunday. It's closed Sunday. It's closed &gt;&gt; versus a trail in Yusede. I used to work &gt;&gt; versus a trail in Yusede. I used to work &gt;&gt; versus a trail in Yusede. I used to work up in Yusede in the summers, but it's up in Yusede in the summers, but it's up in Yusede in the summers, but it's not one of the most magnificent trails. not one of the most magnificent trails. not one of the most magnificent trails. Uh meaning it's not Yusede Falls, Uh meaning it's not Yusede Falls, Uh meaning it's not Yusede Falls, Halfdme or Clouds Rest. My favorite Halfdme or Clouds Rest. My favorite Halfdme or Clouds Rest. My favorite trail. It's a kind of barren environment, but It's a kind of barren environment, but It's a kind of barren environment, but there might be a meadow and there might there might be a meadow and there might there might be a meadow and there might be a mountain. You would never say, you be a mountain. You would never say, you be a mountain. You would never say, you know, this trail up in Towalami that I'm know, this trail up in Towalami that I'm know, this trail up in Towalami that I'm on right now is it's kind of boring. on right now is it's kind of boring. on right now is it's kind of boring. &gt;&gt; It's not as interesting as the peak of &gt;&gt; It's not as interesting as the peak of &gt;&gt; It's not as interesting as the peak of Clouds Rest. And arguably, it's not. I Clouds Rest. And arguably, it's not. I Clouds Rest. And arguably, it's not. I mean, when you get to the top of Cloud's mean, when you get to the top of Cloud's mean, when you get to the top of Cloud's Rest, it's like, Rest, it's like, Rest, it's like, &gt;&gt; whoa. Yeah. &gt;&gt; whoa. Yeah. &gt;&gt; whoa. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like it I mean, it's a spiritual &gt;&gt; Like it I mean, it's a spiritual &gt;&gt; Like it I mean, it's a spiritual experience. &gt;&gt; Okay. But &gt;&gt; Okay. But &gt;&gt; Okay. But &gt;&gt; when we are in nature, we don't tend to &gt;&gt; when we are in nature, we don't tend to &gt;&gt; when we are in nature, we don't tend to think, oh, this is boring. think, oh, this is boring. think, oh, this is boring. There's nothing here. There's nothing here. There's nothing here. &gt;&gt; Even if it's fairly sparse visually. So &gt;&gt; Even if it's fairly sparse visually. So &gt;&gt; Even if it's fairly sparse visually. So &gt;&gt; So as we dissect this, it can't just be &gt;&gt; So as we dissect this, it can't just be &gt;&gt; So as we dissect this, it can't just be density of visual stuff. density of visual stuff. density of visual stuff. &gt;&gt; No, &gt;&gt; No, &gt;&gt; No, &gt;&gt; there must be something additional. Even &gt;&gt; there must be something additional. Even &gt;&gt; there must be something additional. Even and we could say, well, maybe it's the and we could say, well, maybe it's the and we could say, well, maybe it's the greenery. &gt;&gt; But you know, I was out in the Utah &gt;&gt; But you know, I was out in the Utah &gt;&gt; But you know, I was out in the Utah desert not that long ago. And it wasn't desert not that long ago. And it wasn't desert not that long ago. And it wasn't arches or you know, the beautiful uh you arches or you know, the beautiful uh you arches or you know, the beautiful uh you know, landscapes that definitely exist know, landscapes that definitely exist know, landscapes that definitely exist out there. out there. out there. &gt;&gt; It was just kind of like horizon sky, &gt;&gt; It was just kind of like horizon sky, &gt;&gt; It was just kind of like horizon sky, some sand, some sand, some sand, &gt;&gt; maybe a cactus or two, some rocks. But &gt;&gt; maybe a cactus or two, some rocks. But &gt;&gt; maybe a cactus or two, some rocks. But it's beautiful. it's beautiful. it's beautiful. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; And you would never say, "Oh, this is &gt;&gt; And you would never say, "Oh, this is &gt;&gt; And you would never say, "Oh, this is boring because it doesn't have arches." boring because it doesn't have arches." boring because it doesn't have arches." When you get to arches, you're like, When you get to arches, you're like, When you get to arches, you're like, "It's that much better." Right. You get "It's that much better." Right. You get "It's that much better." Right. You get the point here. So, it can't be density the point here. So, it can't be density the point here. So, it can't be density of visual objects, of visual objects, of visual objects, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um, and it's pretty quiet out there in &gt;&gt; Um, and it's pretty quiet out there in &gt;&gt; Um, and it's pretty quiet out there in the desert, except at night when it's the desert, except at night when it's the desert, except at night when it's really quite noisy in a desert actually really quite noisy in a desert actually really quite noisy in a desert actually with animals and stuff, uh, if with animals and stuff, uh, if with animals and stuff, uh, if you're lucky. So, what's the you're lucky. So, what's the you're lucky. So, what's the deal? &gt;&gt; Part of it could be evolution to some &gt;&gt; Part of it could be evolution to some &gt;&gt; Part of it could be evolution to some extent. I mean, our brains evolved in extent. I mean, our brains evolved in extent. I mean, our brains evolved in nature, right? So it is it possible that nature, right? So it is it possible that nature, right? So it is it possible that our neural machinery is just more tuned our neural machinery is just more tuned our neural machinery is just more tuned to that kind of stimulation? I mean to that kind of stimulation? I mean to that kind of stimulation? I mean there's no natural right angles in there's no natural right angles in there's no natural right angles in nature. We created right angles. I mean nature. We created right angles. I mean nature. We created right angles. I mean that's pretty speculative, right? And that's pretty speculative, right? And that's pretty speculative, right? And I'd want to dig in a little more about I'd want to dig in a little more about I'd want to dig in a little more about that. But I can't ignore it that that. But I can't ignore it that that. But I can't ignore it that there's just something maybe fundamental there's just something maybe fundamental there's just something maybe fundamental with how our brains evolved with how our brains evolved with how our brains evolved um and we evolved in nature that there's um and we evolved in nature that there's um and we evolved in nature that there's just something maybe about we just maybe just something maybe about we just maybe just something maybe about we just maybe more fluently process natural more fluently process natural more fluently process natural stimulation and we and maybe we like stimulation and we and maybe we like stimulation and we and maybe we like that. But we started to have some ideas, you But we started to have some ideas, you But we started to have some ideas, you know, soft fascination. I love it um know, soft fascination. I love it um know, soft fascination. I love it um as a concept, but it still is a little as a concept, but it still is a little as a concept, but it still is a little bit squishy. I kind of wanted to get bit squishy. I kind of wanted to get bit squishy. I kind of wanted to get some kind of quantitative parameters some kind of quantitative parameters some kind of quantitative parameters around it. So, one idea that we were around it. So, one idea that we were around it. So, one idea that we were thinking about was that thinking about was that thinking about was that maybe nature scenes are actually more maybe nature scenes are actually more maybe nature scenes are actually more compressible than urban scenes. Now, compressible than urban scenes. Now, compressible than urban scenes. Now, what do I mean by that? So, what I mean what do I mean by that? So, what I mean what do I mean by that? So, what I mean by that is that maybe they just there's by that is that maybe they just there's by that is that maybe they just there's because there's repeated patterns in because there's repeated patterns in because there's repeated patterns in nature, I don't need to store all of the nature, I don't need to store all of the nature, I don't need to store all of the information. I can kind of smush it down information. I can kind of smush it down information. I can kind of smush it down into fewer bits. into fewer bits. into fewer bits. &gt;&gt; Um, and that might be easier for my &gt;&gt; Um, and that might be easier for my &gt;&gt; Um, and that might be easier for my brain to process. Whereas in a lot of brain to process. Whereas in a lot of brain to process. Whereas in a lot of urban scenes, it's not very fractal and urban scenes, it's not very fractal and urban scenes, it's not very fractal and maybe I have to store all of that maybe I have to store all of that maybe I have to store all of that information. So we actually, this is one information. So we actually, this is one information. So we actually, this is one of my students, Nwan, of my students, Nwan, of my students, Nwan, we actually did, we ran a JPEG we actually did, we ran a JPEG we actually did, we ran a JPEG compression algorithm on thousands of compression algorithm on thousands of compression algorithm on thousands of nature and urban scenes. And it turns nature and urban scenes. And it turns nature and urban scenes. And it turns out nature scenes get compressed down out nature scenes get compressed down out nature scenes get compressed down into fewer bits. into fewer bits. into fewer bits. &gt;&gt; Um, so we should, no pun intended, &gt;&gt; Um, so we should, no pun intended, &gt;&gt; Um, so we should, no pun intended, unpack a little bit of what you just unpack a little bit of what you just unpack a little bit of what you just said because I think, um, for people said because I think, um, for people said because I think, um, for people that are that are that are &gt;&gt; not familiar with thinking about neural &gt;&gt; not familiar with thinking about neural &gt;&gt; not familiar with thinking about neural processing, and JPEGs versus TIFF files. processing, and JPEGs versus TIFF files. processing, and JPEGs versus TIFF files. Uh if I may, I'm just going to give Uh if I may, I'm just going to give Uh if I may, I'm just going to give my crude rendition of this because I my crude rendition of this because I my crude rendition of this because I was very interested in this and did was very interested in this and did was very interested in this and did some work related to this years ago. But some work related to this years ago. But some work related to this years ago. But just to keep it brief, um people are just to keep it brief, um people are just to keep it brief, um people are probably familiar with the idea that probably familiar with the idea that probably familiar with the idea that some electronic files are larger than some electronic files are larger than some electronic files are larger than others. &gt;&gt; So if you have a picture that you take &gt;&gt; So if you have a picture that you take &gt;&gt; So if you have a picture that you take on a camera or your phone and you want on a camera or your phone and you want on a camera or your phone and you want to email it to somebody, nowadays you to email it to somebody, nowadays you to email it to somebody, nowadays you would just text it, but would just text it, but would just text it, but &gt;&gt; you might want to email it to somebody. &gt;&gt; you might want to email it to somebody. &gt;&gt; you might want to email it to somebody. You can send them the TIFF version or You can send them the TIFF version or You can send them the TIFF version or the Photoshop version and it's going to the Photoshop version and it's going to the Photoshop version and it's going to be a very big image or a big movie for be a very big image or a big movie for be a very big image or a big movie for that matter, that matter, that matter, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; There's another way to send it which is &gt;&gt; There's another way to send it which is &gt;&gt; There's another way to send it which is at a lower file resolution, at a lower file resolution, at a lower file resolution, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; But um therefore takes up less memory, &gt;&gt; But um therefore takes up less memory, &gt;&gt; But um therefore takes up less memory, doesn't come through as this massive doesn't come through as this massive doesn't come through as this massive file that you need to go to a second file that you need to go to a second file that you need to go to a second party site to download or something. And party site to download or something. And party site to download or something. And that's a JPEG, that's a JPEG, that's a JPEG, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; The whole basis of JPEG is to take the &gt;&gt; The whole basis of JPEG is to take the &gt;&gt; The whole basis of JPEG is to take the average of pixels near one another average of pixels near one another average of pixels near one another &gt;&gt; and compress them. kind of take a best &gt;&gt; and compress them. kind of take a best &gt;&gt; and compress them. kind of take a best guess as to what a black pixel is guess as to what a black pixel is guess as to what a black pixel is probably next to another black pixel or probably next to another black pixel or probably next to another black pixel or probably a gray pixel but probably not a probably a gray pixel but probably not a probably a gray pixel but probably not a white pixel. It could, white pixel. It could, white pixel. It could, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; But it what it does it takes a local &gt;&gt; But it what it does it takes a local &gt;&gt; But it what it does it takes a local averaging. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; And then it compresses it into a JPEG &gt;&gt; And then it compresses it into a JPEG &gt;&gt; And then it compresses it into a JPEG and you send it to the other side. and you send it to the other side. and you send it to the other side. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; But on the other side you can also &gt;&gt; But on the other side you can also &gt;&gt; But on the other side you can also unpack that image to its original unpack that image to its original unpack that image to its original highresolution value. The brain does a similar thing. value. The brain does a similar thing. value. The brain does a similar thing. And the best example that I have from And the best example that I have from And the best example that I have from the brain is the alactory system where the brain is the alactory system where the brain is the alactory system where in the alactory system you're breathing in the alactory system you're breathing in the alactory system you're breathing in tons of volatile chemicals. Meaning in tons of volatile chemicals. Meaning in tons of volatile chemicals. Meaning volatile makes it sound like they're volatile makes it sound like they're volatile makes it sound like they're about to throw a tantrum, but um they're about to throw a tantrum, but um they're about to throw a tantrum, but um they're moving through the air. You they're moving through the air. You they're moving through the air. You inhale them and they're activating inhale them and they're activating inhale them and they're activating millions probably of different odorant millions probably of different odorant millions probably of different odorant receptors, but your brain compresses receptors, but your brain compresses receptors, but your brain compresses those down into coffee. This is coffee. those down into coffee. This is coffee. those down into coffee. This is coffee. And then you unpack it as coffee. Now, And then you unpack it as coffee. Now, And then you unpack it as coffee. Now, if you're a coffee connoisseur or in the if you're a coffee connoisseur or in the if you're a coffee connoisseur or in the case of wine or a food connoisseur, you case of wine or a food connoisseur, you case of wine or a food connoisseur, you can get into the subtle nuance and say, can get into the subtle nuance and say, can get into the subtle nuance and say, "Oh, you know, there's a li little bit "Oh, you know, there's a li little bit "Oh, you know, there's a li little bit more of this and a little bit more of more of this and a little bit more of more of this and a little bit more of that, but you're not thinking about the that, but you're not thinking about the that, but you're not thinking about the individual chemical molecules." You'd individual chemical molecules." You'd individual chemical molecules." You'd say, "Oh, it's a little bit of a cherry say, "Oh, it's a little bit of a cherry say, "Oh, it's a little bit of a cherry flavor or this chocolate has a little flavor or this chocolate has a little flavor or this chocolate has a little bit of a citrus." You know, this is the bit of a citrus." You know, this is the bit of a citrus." You know, this is the sorts of thing. So, that's essentially sorts of thing. So, that's essentially sorts of thing. So, that's essentially what the brain does with visual images what the brain does with visual images what the brain does with visual images as well. Yes. as well. Yes. as well. Yes. &gt;&gt; Okay. So that's my um very crude and um &gt;&gt; Okay. So that's my um very crude and um &gt;&gt; Okay. So that's my um very crude and um certainly not complete um description of certainly not complete um description of certainly not complete um description of how bits of information are compressed how bits of information are compressed how bits of information are compressed as they go into the brain and then as they go into the brain and then as they go into the brain and then unpack into what you call a perception. unpack into what you call a perception. unpack into what you call a perception. That's right. Or an experience. And the That's right. Or an experience. And the That's right. Or an experience. And the same thing is true of a TIFF or same thing is true of a TIFF or same thing is true of a TIFF or Photoshop file compressed to a JPEG. Um Photoshop file compressed to a JPEG. Um Photoshop file compressed to a JPEG. Um and then you can literally uncompress and then you can literally uncompress and then you can literally uncompress that file uh if you have the cap the that file uh if you have the cap the that file uh if you have the cap the sort of computational capability. So, sort of computational capability. So, sort of computational capability. So, one thing I just want to add to it, the one thing I just want to add to it, the one thing I just want to add to it, the kind of compression that we were the kind of compression that we were the kind of compression that we were doing with the JPEG compression was doing with the JPEG compression was doing with the JPEG compression was lossy, meaning that the information was lossy, meaning that the information was lossy, meaning that the information was thrown away. You couldn't recover it, thrown away. You couldn't recover it, thrown away. You couldn't recover it, but that didn't really matter. So, if but that didn't really matter. So, if but that didn't really matter. So, if you showed people the image at its high you showed people the image at its high you showed people the image at its high resolution versus the image at its resolution versus the image at its resolution versus the image at its compressed or lower resolution, the compressed or lower resolution, the compressed or lower resolution, the human eye can't really tell the human eye can't really tell the human eye can't really tell the difference. And I think um but for the difference. And I think um but for the difference. And I think um but for the urban images, you couldn't get away with urban images, you couldn't get away with urban images, you couldn't get away with that trick. you needed to keep all of that trick. you needed to keep all of that trick. you needed to keep all of the original pixel values. So that's the original pixel values. So that's the original pixel values. So that's kind of that's what computers and our kind of that's what computers and our kind of that's what computers and our iPhones are actually doing iPhones are actually doing iPhones are actually doing &gt;&gt; there. Um and the reason why we think &gt;&gt; there. Um and the reason why we think &gt;&gt; there. Um and the reason why we think they can get away with that is because they can get away with that is because they can get away with that is because nature has a lot of this repeated nature has a lot of this repeated nature has a lot of this repeated structure like you were talking about structure like you were talking about structure like you were talking about before about predicting the pixel's before about predicting the pixel's before about predicting the pixel's value and you can use that you can value and you can use that you can value and you can use that you can capitalize that means there's a lot capitalize that means there's a lot capitalize that means there's a lot of redundancy so you don't need all of redundancy so you don't need all of redundancy so you don't need all of that information. Natural images also that information. Natural images also that information. Natural images also tend to have, maybe this is gonna get a tend to have, maybe this is gonna get a tend to have, maybe this is gonna get a little bit technical too, a lot of high little bit technical too, a lot of high little bit technical too, a lot of high frequency spatial content. There a lot frequency spatial content. There a lot frequency spatial content. There a lot of little of little of little changes or little contrast changes that changes or little contrast changes that changes or little contrast changes that we don't really need. Whereas in the we don't really need. Whereas in the we don't really need. Whereas in the urban environment, there's more of these urban environment, there's more of these urban environment, there's more of these big contrast changes that we do need. big contrast changes that we do need. big contrast changes that we do need. So we think maybe the brain is like So we think maybe the brain is like So we think maybe the brain is like you're saying there's all this evidence you're saying there's all this evidence you're saying there's all this evidence that the brain is basically doing that the brain is basically doing that the brain is basically doing that and in nature because you can sm you and in nature because you can sm you and in nature because you can sm you know you're walking through the nature know you're walking through the nature know you're walking through the nature you can kind of throw away a lot of the you can kind of throw away a lot of the you can kind of throw away a lot of the information &gt;&gt; and so we think that actually might be &gt;&gt; and so we think that actually might be &gt;&gt; and so we think that actually might be why it's sort of more softly fascinating why it's sort of more softly fascinating why it's sort of more softly fascinating and easier to process versus the urban and easier to process versus the urban and easier to process versus the urban environment. There's another element here too which There's another element here too which There's another element here too which we haven't got it completely yet but we haven't got it completely yet but we haven't got it completely yet but which I'm very interested in. So that which I'm very interested in. So that which I'm very interested in. So that that's looking at sort of like that's looking at sort of like that's looking at sort of like complexity of the images at the very complexity of the images at the very complexity of the images at the very low level. But you could also think very low level. But you could also think very low level. But you could also think about semantics like the language that about semantics like the language that about semantics like the language that we use to describe a scene. And when I we use to describe a scene. And when I we use to describe a scene. And when I see a nature scene you know I don't have see a nature scene you know I don't have see a nature scene you know I don't have a huge language repertoire. I can say a huge language repertoire. I can say a huge language repertoire. I can say lake, tree, river, shrub, sand, desert. lake, tree, river, shrub, sand, desert. lake, tree, river, shrub, sand, desert. But when I'm in the urban environment, I But when I'm in the urban environment, I But when I'm in the urban environment, I can say Volkswagen Beetle, you know, can say Volkswagen Beetle, you know, can say Volkswagen Beetle, you know, BMW, M3, BMW, M3, BMW, M3, uh, Gothic architecture. Like my uh, Gothic architecture. Like my uh, Gothic architecture. Like my vocabulary is so much more complex vocabulary is so much more complex vocabulary is so much more complex for an urban scene. So, so one thing for an urban scene. So, so one thing for an urban scene. So, so one thing that we're also thinking about is like that we're also thinking about is like that we're also thinking about is like maybe nature might also be more maybe nature might also be more maybe nature might also be more semantically simple like from a semantically simple like from a semantically simple like from a linguistic level that I can just label linguistic level that I can just label linguistic level that I can just label it really easily and then it allows my it really easily and then it allows my it really easily and then it allows my brain to just not have to store as much brain to just not have to store as much brain to just not have to store as much information. Whereas in the urban information. Whereas in the urban information. Whereas in the urban environment maybe I'm forced to sort of environment maybe I'm forced to sort of environment maybe I'm forced to sort of label all these objects and it just label all these objects and it just label all these objects and it just takes up more room in our brain. So, we takes up more room in our brain. So, we takes up more room in our brain. So, we also do these studies where we show also do these studies where we show also do these studies where we show people a bunch of nature scenes and people a bunch of nature scenes and people a bunch of nature scenes and urban scenes and then test their memory urban scenes and then test their memory urban scenes and then test their memory for the scenes. And it turns out that for the scenes. And it turns out that for the scenes. And it turns out that people's memory for the nature scenes is people's memory for the nature scenes is people's memory for the nature scenes is worse than the urban scene. So, people worse than the urban scene. So, people worse than the urban scene. So, people remember exactly it fits. remember exactly it fits. remember exactly it fits. &gt;&gt; It fits. And you might think, oh, well, &gt;&gt; It fits. And you might think, oh, well, &gt;&gt; It fits. And you might think, oh, well, you want to remember stuff, but you want to remember stuff, but you want to remember stuff, but actually, you know, in some sense, it's actually, you know, in some sense, it's actually, you know, in some sense, it's measuring how just difficult it it's measuring how just difficult it it's measuring how just difficult it is to process. and we're if it's so is to process. and we're if it's so is to process. and we're if it's so easy to process nature, you're just not easy to process nature, you're just not easy to process nature, you're just not going to remember it. And that in this going to remember it. And that in this going to remember it. And that in this case is a good thing. So we think that's case is a good thing. So we think that's case is a good thing. So we think that's also part of it that it's that that's also part of it that it's that that's also part of it that it's that that's also saying to us that yeah, it's just also saying to us that yeah, it's just also saying to us that yeah, it's just it's just easier to process this natural it's just easier to process this natural it's just easier to process this natural stimulation versus this urban stimulation versus this urban stimulation versus this urban stimulation where you just have to stimulation where you just have to stimulation where you just have to attend to more stuff. It's more sticky. attend to more stuff. It's more sticky. attend to more stuff. It's more sticky. &gt;&gt; Do you have any data as to whether or &gt;&gt; Do you have any data as to whether or &gt;&gt; Do you have any data as to whether or not people track time better or worse not people track time better or worse not people track time better or worse when they are in natural versus urban when they are in natural versus urban when they are in natural versus urban environments? So, I don't have direct environments? So, I don't have direct environments? So, I don't have direct evidence to this, but I have a few other evidence to this, but I have a few other evidence to this, but I have a few other little pieces of evidence that I think little pieces of evidence that I think little pieces of evidence that I think will kind of get us there. So, we've will kind of get us there. So, we've will kind of get us there. So, we've done some studies where we send people done some studies where we send people done some studies where we send people uh this one was actually uh sending uh this one was actually uh sending uh this one was actually uh sending people to a nature arboritum, an indoor people to a nature arboritum, an indoor people to a nature arboritum, an indoor nature arboritum, the Garfield nature arboritum, the Garfield nature arboritum, the Garfield Conservatory, a really beautiful Conservatory, a really beautiful Conservatory, a really beautiful conservatory in Chicago versus the conservatory in Chicago versus the conservatory in Chicago versus the Chicago Water Tower Mall, a very fancy Chicago Water Tower Mall, a very fancy Chicago Water Tower Mall, a very fancy indoor mall in Chicago. And uh we indoor mall in Chicago. And uh we indoor mall in Chicago. And uh we actually gave uh participants here actually gave uh participants here actually gave uh participants here uh cell phones that we had in the lab uh cell phones that we had in the lab uh cell phones that we had in the lab that would ping them uh and ask them that would ping them uh and ask them that would ping them uh and ask them questions while they were going on the questions while they were going on the questions while they were going on the walk in the conservatory, the walk in walk in the conservatory, the walk in walk in the conservatory, the walk in the mall. And we asked them, you know, the mall. And we asked them, you know, the mall. And we asked them, you know, what are you thinking about? And it what are you thinking about? And it what are you thinking about? And it turns out when people were walking in uh turns out when people were walking in uh turns out when people were walking in uh nature, they actually think more about nature, they actually think more about nature, they actually think more about the past the past the past uh than walking um in the mall. So that uh than walking um in the mall. So that uh than walking um in the mall. So that was kind of interesting. Mhm. was kind of interesting. Mhm. was kind of interesting. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um, this is also kind of interesting. &gt;&gt; Um, this is also kind of interesting. &gt;&gt; Um, this is also kind of interesting. People also said that they felt more People also said that they felt more People also said that they felt more impulsive in the mall than in the impulsive in the mall than in the impulsive in the mall than in the conservatory, which makes sense that, conservatory, which makes sense that, conservatory, which makes sense that, you know, mall designers want people to you know, mall designers want people to you know, mall designers want people to be buying things. Um, but this idea be buying things. Um, but this idea be buying things. Um, but this idea about thinking about the past to me about thinking about the past to me about thinking about the past to me suggested a little bit that time might suggested a little bit that time might suggested a little bit that time might be going a bit slower. Other people have be going a bit slower. Other people have be going a bit slower. Other people have found in cities that the larger the city found in cities that the larger the city found in cities that the larger the city is, people like walk faster, like the is, people like walk faster, like the is, people like walk faster, like the pace of everything is a little bit pace of everything is a little bit pace of everything is a little bit faster. So my hunch is that based on faster. So my hunch is that based on faster. So my hunch is that based on those two findings that I think time those two findings that I think time those two findings that I think time does probably slow down in nature, but I does probably slow down in nature, but I does probably slow down in nature, but I don't have direct evidence for that. I don't have direct evidence for that. I don't have direct evidence for that. I think that's something that'd be really think that's something that'd be really think that's something that'd be really super interesting to study. But that super interesting to study. But that super interesting to study. But that would be my hypothesis that in nature would be my hypothesis that in nature would be my hypothesis that in nature time does slow down a bit. If you had to time does slow down a bit. If you had to time does slow down a bit. If you had to wager a guess, would you assume that wager a guess, would you assume that wager a guess, would you assume that going into an art gallery is more going into an art gallery is more going into an art gallery is more similar to taking a walk in nature or an similar to taking a walk in nature or an similar to taking a walk in nature or an urban environment? I mean, it's so rich urban environment? I mean, it's so rich urban environment? I mean, it's so rich with information. with information. with information. &gt;&gt; You have options. You have to decline &gt;&gt; You have options. You have to decline &gt;&gt; You have options. You have to decline certain things, certain rooms, certain things, certain rooms, certain things, certain rooms, certain paintings, certain sculptures. There's a paintings, certain sculptures. There's a paintings, certain sculptures. There's a lot of decision making. lot of decision making. lot of decision making. &gt;&gt; And yet most people find &gt;&gt; And yet most people find &gt;&gt; And yet most people find &gt;&gt; galleries, big galleries to be extremely &gt;&gt; galleries, big galleries to be extremely &gt;&gt; galleries, big galleries to be extremely calming. Maybe it's also because calming. Maybe it's also because calming. Maybe it's also because everyone's quite quiet in them. everyone's quite quiet in them. everyone's quite quiet in them. &gt;&gt; I would say the gallery is would &gt;&gt; I would say the gallery is would &gt;&gt; I would say the gallery is would have a similar effect to nature would be have a similar effect to nature would be have a similar effect to nature would be my guess because, you know, Kaplan's my guess because, you know, Kaplan's my guess because, you know, Kaplan's attention restoration theory attention restoration theory attention restoration theory really is not specific to nature. It really is not specific to nature. It really is not specific to nature. It basically just says you got to find an basically just says you got to find an basically just says you got to find an environment that doesn't place a lot of environment that doesn't place a lot of environment that doesn't place a lot of demands on directed attention while demands on directed attention while demands on directed attention while simultaneously having softly fascinating simultaneously having softly fascinating simultaneously having softly fascinating stimulation. And an art gallery might meet those two And an art gallery might meet those two And an art gallery might meet those two criteria. If you don't have to be tested criteria. If you don't have to be tested criteria. If you don't have to be tested on the artwork and you can just kind of on the artwork and you can just kind of on the artwork and you can just kind of go there and you don't have an agenda, I go there and you don't have an agenda, I go there and you don't have an agenda, I think there's going to be a lot of very think there's going to be a lot of very think there's going to be a lot of very softly fascinating stimulation in an art softly fascinating stimulation in an art softly fascinating stimulation in an art gallery. So, my hunch would be that gallery. So, my hunch would be that gallery. So, my hunch would be that yeah, walking through an art gallery yeah, walking through an art gallery yeah, walking through an art gallery might have a similar kind of effect. Um, might have a similar kind of effect. Um, might have a similar kind of effect. Um, I would, this is going to be a little I would, this is going to be a little I would, this is going to be a little bit of a jump. There, there are some bit of a jump. There, there are some bit of a jump. There, there are some studies that we did where we were studies that we did where we were studies that we did where we were looking at the relationship between park looking at the relationship between park looking at the relationship between park visits and crime and going to a museum visits and crime and going to a museum visits and crime and going to a museum versus crime. versus crime. versus crime. Um, so these were there's been a lot of Um, so these were there's been a lot of Um, so these were there's been a lot of actually interesting studies suggesting actually interesting studies suggesting actually interesting studies suggesting that interacting with nature can make that interacting with nature can make that interacting with nature can make people less aggressive and we think it people less aggressive and we think it people less aggressive and we think it has to do with attention. So we uh, you has to do with attention. So we uh, you has to do with attention. So we uh, you know, we had this incredible data set know, we had this incredible data set know, we had this incredible data set um, this cell phone trace data set where um, this cell phone trace data set where um, this cell phone trace data set where from a 100,000 people in Chicago, we from a 100,000 people in Chicago, we from a 100,000 people in Chicago, we knew where they lived um, and we knew where they lived um, and we knew where they lived um, and we knew where they went for an entire month. where they went for an entire month. where they went for an entire month. So what we did is we quantified how many So what we did is we quantified how many So what we did is we quantified how many times did people leave their times did people leave their times did people leave their neighborhood and go and visit a park neighborhood and go and visit a park neighborhood and go and visit a park versus leaving their neighborhood and versus leaving their neighborhood and versus leaving their neighborhood and going to a museum or something like going to a museum or something like going to a museum or something like that. And we wanted to correlate that that. And we wanted to correlate that that. And we wanted to correlate that with crime. And sure enough, we found with crime. And sure enough, we found with crime. And sure enough, we found that neighborhoods where people leave that neighborhoods where people leave that neighborhoods where people leave their neighborhood and go and visit a their neighborhood and go and visit a their neighborhood and go and visit a park, there's actually that predicted park, there's actually that predicted park, there's actually that predicted less crime in those neighborhoods. But less crime in those neighborhoods. But less crime in those neighborhoods. But the museum visits didn't predict the museum visits didn't predict the museum visits didn't predict &gt;&gt; that. And this was controlled for I &gt;&gt; that. And this was controlled for I &gt;&gt; that. And this was controlled for I don't know like uh socioeconomic don't know like uh socioeconomic don't know like uh socioeconomic background. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean more or less I mean again &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean more or less I mean again &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean more or less I mean again it's a correlational study so I can't it's a correlational study so I can't it's a correlational study so I can't claim causality but we also controlled claim causality but we also controlled claim causality but we also controlled for age, education, income, all those for age, education, income, all those for age, education, income, all those demographics. &gt;&gt; Um so there it seemed like there was &gt;&gt; Um so there it seemed like there was &gt;&gt; Um so there it seemed like there was something special about the park visit something special about the park visit something special about the park visit versus the museum visit on at least versus the museum visit on at least versus the museum visit on at least aggression. Um but I do believe that um aggression. Um but I do believe that um aggression. Um but I do believe that um going through a museum might have a going through a museum might have a going through a museum might have a similar effect to nature. I'm not sure similar effect to nature. I'm not sure similar effect to nature. I'm not sure it'll be as strong, but I think it has it'll be as strong, but I think it has it'll be as strong, but I think it has the museum maybe has a lot of the museum maybe has a lot of the museum maybe has a lot of the same elements that uh that a nature walk same elements that uh that a nature walk same elements that uh that a nature walk might have. might have. might have. &gt;&gt; I mean, I think I'm just obsessively &gt;&gt; I mean, I think I'm just obsessively &gt;&gt; I mean, I think I'm just obsessively starting to drop into the trench of, you starting to drop into the trench of, you starting to drop into the trench of, you know, what sorts of things are attention know, what sorts of things are attention know, what sorts of things are attention depleting and what sorts of things are depleting and what sorts of things are depleting and what sorts of things are attentionally restorative. Uh because I attentionally restorative. Uh because I attentionally restorative. Uh because I personally believe that our ability to personally believe that our ability to personally believe that our ability to attend is like the hallmark of building attend is like the hallmark of building attend is like the hallmark of building a great life. a great life. a great life. &gt;&gt; Yes. And I've so much so that you know &gt;&gt; Yes. And I've so much so that you know &gt;&gt; Yes. And I've so much so that you know on hikes and walks I will listen to on hikes and walks I will listen to on hikes and walks I will listen to audiobooks and podcasts. audiobooks and podcasts. audiobooks and podcasts. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; but there are times when for instance I &gt;&gt; but there are times when for instance I &gt;&gt; but there are times when for instance I will exercise with silence. will exercise with silence. will exercise with silence. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; And then I'll use music as something to &gt;&gt; And then I'll use music as something to &gt;&gt; And then I'll use music as something to like push me through some particularly like push me through some particularly like push me through some particularly hard moments in the exercise, but then hard moments in the exercise, but then hard moments in the exercise, but then I'll turn it off and bring it back. I I'll turn it off and bring it back. I I'll turn it off and bring it back. I don't just kind of like head out the don't just kind of like head out the don't just kind of like head out the whole time blasting music. Sometimes whole time blasting music. Sometimes whole time blasting music. Sometimes I'll do that I'll do that I'll do that &gt;&gt; but I'm starting to become kind of a &gt;&gt; but I'm starting to become kind of a &gt;&gt; but I'm starting to become kind of a &gt;&gt; experimentalist with this idea of you &gt;&gt; experimentalist with this idea of you &gt;&gt; experimentalist with this idea of you know attention as this resource that we know attention as this resource that we know attention as this resource that we deplete each day sleep it's restored deplete each day sleep it's restored deplete each day sleep it's restored mostly go back again I mean you know mostly go back again I mean you know mostly go back again I mean you know looming in the backdrop of this looming in the backdrop of this looming in the backdrop of this conversation is conversation about conversation is conversation about conversation is conversation about social media but before we go there social media but before we go there social media but before we go there &gt;&gt; if you were at this point to give a &gt;&gt; if you were at this point to give a &gt;&gt; if you were at this point to give a &gt;&gt; kind of a best recommendation in terms &gt;&gt; kind of a best recommendation in terms &gt;&gt; kind of a best recommendation in terms of how to reset one's attentional of how to reset one's attentional of how to reset one's attentional abilities uh what are the basic abilities uh what are the basic abilities uh what are the basic requirements. &gt;&gt; So, I think there's a lot there, &gt;&gt; So, I think there's a lot there, &gt;&gt; So, I think there's a lot there, too. Um, I think you have to be really too. Um, I think you have to be really too. Um, I think you have to be really mindful about directed attention mindful about directed attention mindful about directed attention fatigue. So, if you're trying to study fatigue. So, if you're trying to study fatigue. So, if you're trying to study or uh you're at work and you're having a or uh you're at work and you're having a or uh you're at work and you're having a really hard time concentrating, really hard time concentrating, really hard time concentrating, I would recommend not just trying to I would recommend not just trying to I would recommend not just trying to power through. If if you have the power through. If if you have the power through. If if you have the ability uh and the time to take a break, ability uh and the time to take a break, ability uh and the time to take a break, I recommend that you stop and you take a I recommend that you stop and you take a I recommend that you stop and you take a break. And what kind of break do I break. And what kind of break do I break. And what kind of break do I recommend you do? I recommend that you recommend you do? I recommend that you recommend you do? I recommend that you go and try to find some nature and walk go and try to find some nature and walk go and try to find some nature and walk in nature. in nature. in nature. &gt;&gt; What if you're having a hard time &gt;&gt; What if you're having a hard time &gt;&gt; What if you're having a hard time getting into a focused state at all. getting into a focused state at all. getting into a focused state at all. It's not that you fatigued it that day. It's not that you fatigued it that day. It's not that you fatigued it that day. you know so many people that I hear you know so many people that I hear you know so many people that I hear from uh who listen to the podcast and from uh who listen to the podcast and from uh who listen to the podcast and elsewhere will say you know they elsewhere will say you know they elsewhere will say you know they &gt;&gt; they get up they did their best to get &gt;&gt; they get up they did their best to get &gt;&gt; they get up they did their best to get their sleep they get their morning their sleep they get their morning their sleep they get their morning sunlight they hydrate they drink their sunlight they hydrate they drink their sunlight they hydrate they drink their caffeine they sit down to their computer caffeine they sit down to their computer caffeine they sit down to their computer and &gt;&gt; they just can't focus and then they &gt;&gt; they just can't focus and then they &gt;&gt; they just can't focus and then they start thinking like do they have start thinking like do they have start thinking like do they have &gt;&gt; brain fog do they have do they need a &gt;&gt; brain fog do they have do they need a &gt;&gt; brain fog do they have do they need a neutropic you know that all these neutropic you know that all these neutropic you know that all these questions start to arise questions start to arise questions start to arise &gt;&gt; what are &gt;&gt; what are &gt;&gt; what are &gt;&gt; I think in some sense even though you &gt;&gt; I think in some sense even though you &gt;&gt; I think in some sense even though you might be very well slept and very might be very well slept and very might be very well slept and very wellfed, you could still be in a directed you could still be in a directed you could still be in a directed attention fatigue state. So, I think attention fatigue state. So, I think attention fatigue state. So, I think yeah, if you can't concentrate right in yeah, if you can't concentrate right in yeah, if you can't concentrate right in the beginning of the morning, then you the beginning of the morning, then you the beginning of the morning, then you should go for a walk, right? That should go for a walk, right? That should go for a walk, right? That should be the first thing you should do. Or if be the first thing you should do. Or if be the first thing you should do. Or if you don't have access to nature, maybe you don't have access to nature, maybe you don't have access to nature, maybe listen to some nature sounds or watch listen to some nature sounds or watch listen to some nature sounds or watch a nature video or something like that. a nature video or something like that. a nature video or something like that. We find that all those things can be We find that all those things can be We find that all those things can be beneficial. Even looking out the window beneficial. Even looking out the window beneficial. Even looking out the window to nature can be beneficial. Looking at to nature can be beneficial. Looking at to nature can be beneficial. Looking at a picture, you've got a picture of a picture, you've got a picture of a picture, you've got a picture of nature here, looking at a picture of nature here, looking at a picture of nature here, looking at a picture of nature can be beneficial. So, I would nature can be beneficial. So, I would nature can be beneficial. So, I would say anytime you're having trouble say anytime you're having trouble say anytime you're having trouble concentrating, it doesn't have to it concentrating, it doesn't have to it concentrating, it doesn't have to it doesn't matter if it's at the beginning doesn't matter if it's at the beginning doesn't matter if it's at the beginning of the day or the end of the day or the of the day or the end of the day or the of the day or the end of the day or the middle of the day, we I would recommend middle of the day, we I would recommend middle of the day, we I would recommend that you take some kind of break with that you take some kind of break with that you take some kind of break with nature. And it could be simulated nature nature. And it could be simulated nature nature. And it could be simulated nature like uh listening to nature sounds, like uh listening to nature sounds, like uh listening to nature sounds, watching a nature video, looking at watching a nature video, looking at watching a nature video, looking at nature pictures or even better is if you nature pictures or even better is if you nature pictures or even better is if you can actually get out and uh interact can actually get out and uh interact can actually get out and uh interact with nature because Steve Kaplan used to with nature because Steve Kaplan used to with nature because Steve Kaplan used to also talk about these other elements also talk about these other elements also talk about these other elements that might be important for a that might be important for a that might be important for a restorative environment. One was that restorative environment. One was that restorative environment. One was that the environment had to have extent the environment had to have extent the environment had to have extent meaning that it had to have enough meaning that it had to have enough meaning that it had to have enough interesting things to look at. Now it interesting things to look at. Now it interesting things to look at. Now it doesn't mean that it has to be Yoseite doesn't mean that it has to be Yoseite doesn't mean that it has to be Yoseite Valley which has incredible spatial Valley which has incredible spatial Valley which has incredible spatial extent. I mean it's huge. It's enormous extent. I mean it's huge. It's enormous extent. I mean it's huge. It's enormous but you know like near my office um at but you know like near my office um at but you know like near my office um at the University of Chicago we have this the University of Chicago we have this the University of Chicago we have this uh Japanese garden the garden of the uh Japanese garden the garden of the uh Japanese garden the garden of the Phoenix. It might be only like a 100 Phoenix. It might be only like a 100 Phoenix. It might be only like a 100 square meters. It's pretty small but man square meters. It's pretty small but man square meters. It's pretty small but man it's still got a lot of extent. You know it's still got a lot of extent. You know it's still got a lot of extent. You know it's got a walking path. It's got a it's got a walking path. It's got a it's got a walking path. It's got a little waterfall. you can see Lake little waterfall. you can see Lake little waterfall. you can see Lake Michigan. Um, so that's one element. Michigan. Um, so that's one element. Michigan. Um, so that's one element. Another thing uh about the nature is Another thing uh about the nature is Another thing uh about the nature is that you want it to be compatible with that you want it to be compatible with that you want it to be compatible with your goals. So, so what do I mean by your goals. So, so what do I mean by your goals. So, so what do I mean by that? If you've got a big exam and you haven't If you've got a big exam and you haven't If you've got a big exam and you haven't studied, I'm not sure going for the walk studied, I'm not sure going for the walk studied, I'm not sure going for the walk in nature is going to work. You better in nature is going to work. You better in nature is going to work. You better use that time to study. But if you use that time to study. But if you use that time to study. But if you can't concentrate, you know, trying to can't concentrate, you know, trying to can't concentrate, you know, trying to power through, I don't think is going to power through, I don't think is going to power through, I don't think is going to be compatible with your goals. I think be compatible with your goals. I think be compatible with your goals. I think going in for the nature walk is going in for the nature walk is going in for the nature walk is compatible with your goals. So that's compatible with your goals. So that's compatible with your goals. So that's another thing that's going to be really another thing that's going to be really another thing that's going to be really important. And the other concept uh that important. And the other concept uh that important. And the other concept uh that Steve used to talk about being important Steve used to talk about being important Steve used to talk about being important is this is that the environment needs to is this is that the environment needs to is this is that the environment needs to give you the sense of being away that give you the sense of being away that give you the sense of being away that you're kind of removed you're kind of removed you're kind of removed um from your current environment almost um from your current environment almost um from your current environment almost like a change of mindset. Um, and again, like a change of mindset. Um, and again, like a change of mindset. Um, and again, that doesn't mean you have to go really, that doesn't mean you have to go really, that doesn't mean you have to go really, really far away, but you might want to really far away, but you might want to really far away, but you might want to go to a location that's not at your go to a location that's not at your go to a location that's not at your desk. So, maybe don't sit at your desk desk. So, maybe don't sit at your desk desk. So, maybe don't sit at your desk and look at the nature pictures. Maybe and look at the nature pictures. Maybe and look at the nature pictures. Maybe you want to go somewhere else and look you want to go somewhere else and look you want to go somewhere else and look at the nature pictures. And this kind of at the nature pictures. And this kind of at the nature pictures. And this kind of distance, I think, could be helpful. I distance, I think, could be helpful. I distance, I think, could be helpful. I don't know if Kale Newport talks about don't know if Kale Newport talks about don't know if Kale Newport talks about this in his deep work, but, you know, this in his deep work, but, you know, this in his deep work, but, you know, I've heard people talking about in an I've heard people talking about in an I've heard people talking about in an office, you might want to have like a office, you might want to have like a office, you might want to have like a separate area of your office for deep separate area of your office for deep separate area of your office for deep work. And I think this kind of sense of work. And I think this kind of sense of work. And I think this kind of sense of being away is related to that. you kind being away is related to that. you kind being away is related to that. you kind of want to get out of your current state of want to get out of your current state of want to get out of your current state and go into this other environment that and go into this other environment that and go into this other environment that might be able to replenish those might be able to replenish those might be able to replenish those resources. &gt;&gt; So, I'm hearing that there are two sides &gt;&gt; So, I'm hearing that there are two sides &gt;&gt; So, I'm hearing that there are two sides of the coin. One is to designate an area of the coin. One is to designate an area of the coin. One is to designate an area for work that's truly for deep work. for work that's truly for deep work. for work that's truly for deep work. &gt;&gt; Yes, &gt;&gt; Yes, &gt;&gt; Yes, &gt;&gt; I followed Cal's recommendation and now &gt;&gt; I followed Cal's recommendation and now &gt;&gt; I followed Cal's recommendation and now I have an area in my basement, believe I have an area in my basement, believe I have an area in my basement, believe it or not, it or not, it or not, &gt;&gt; and there has never been a phone &gt;&gt; and there has never been a phone &gt;&gt; and there has never been a phone &gt;&gt; in that basement. There's no phones &gt;&gt; in that basement. There's no phones &gt;&gt; in that basement. There's no phones allowed in that basement. That's that's allowed in that basement. That's that's allowed in that basement. That's that's not a rule. It's not a protocol. It's a not a rule. It's not a protocol. It's a not a rule. It's not a protocol. It's a policy, &gt;&gt; right? And I remember he talked about in &gt;&gt; right? And I remember he talked about in &gt;&gt; right? And I remember he talked about in his he has this library office that he his he has this library office that he his he has this library office that he goes to and I'm I very much agree with goes to and I'm I very much agree with goes to and I'm I very much agree with that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now I do get internet access down &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now I do get internet access down &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now I do get internet access down there a little bit if I need to look for there a little bit if I need to look for there a little bit if I need to look for papers, but um I've been turning off papers, but um I've been turning off papers, but um I've been turning off Wi-Fi on my computer when I go down Wi-Fi on my computer when I go down Wi-Fi on my computer when I go down there to work. And I get more done in 3 there to work. And I get more done in 3 there to work. And I get more done in 3 hours down there hours down there hours down there &gt;&gt; than I would in 3 weeks above ground. I &gt;&gt; than I would in 3 weeks above ground. I &gt;&gt; than I would in 3 weeks above ground. I swear it's a huge effect. Um, the swear it's a huge effect. Um, the swear it's a huge effect. Um, the other side of the coin is this business other side of the coin is this business other side of the coin is this business of getting out into a different of getting out into a different of getting out into a different environment and it sounds like these environment and it sounds like these environment and it sounds like these walks or these ventures into nature walks or these ventures into nature walks or these ventures into nature don't take terribly long. H how long don't take terribly long. H how long don't take terribly long. H how long does one need to do this in order to get does one need to do this in order to get does one need to do this in order to get the enhancement in focus and working the enhancement in focus and working the enhancement in focus and working memory? Like what do the data say? memory? Like what do the data say? memory? Like what do the data say? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean when we did the our walking &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean when we did the our walking &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean when we did the our walking study was 50 minutes but I've seen other study was 50 minutes but I've seen other study was 50 minutes but I've seen other studies with as little as 20 minutes you studies with as little as 20 minutes you studies with as little as 20 minutes you can get the effect cognitive enhancement can get the effect cognitive enhancement can get the effect cognitive enhancement &gt;&gt; for cognitive enhancement. Um, and &gt;&gt; for cognitive enhancement. Um, and &gt;&gt; for cognitive enhancement. Um, and there's actually been some interesting there's actually been some interesting there's actually been some interesting studies with kids with ADHD, and they studies with kids with ADHD, and they studies with kids with ADHD, and they find attention benefits uh for these find attention benefits uh for these find attention benefits uh for these kids with ADHD after just a 20-minute kids with ADHD after just a 20-minute kids with ADHD after just a 20-minute walk in nature that actually was similar walk in nature that actually was similar walk in nature that actually was similar um to like a dose of rolin. So, that was um to like a dose of rolin. So, that was um to like a dose of rolin. So, that was pretty incredible. So, it doesn't have pretty incredible. So, it doesn't have pretty incredible. So, it doesn't have to be super long. Uh, and when we were to be super long. Uh, and when we were to be super long. Uh, and when we were doing the slideshow of nature doing the slideshow of nature doing the slideshow of nature pictures, that was only for about 10 pictures, that was only for about 10 pictures, that was only for about 10 minutes. So, it doesn't have to be a minutes. So, it doesn't have to be a minutes. So, it doesn't have to be a really long immersion. There have really long immersion. There have really long immersion. There have been other studies that have suggested been other studies that have suggested been other studies that have suggested like overall like overall like overall uh you might want to get about 2 hours a uh you might want to get about 2 hours a uh you might want to get about 2 hours a week in nature. week in nature. week in nature. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in research science for almost three research science for almost three research science for almost three decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it everyday since. and I've been taking it everyday since. and I've been taking it everyday since. I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune system health as well as to improve system health as well as to improve system health as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just one supplement what that supplement one supplement what that supplement one supplement what that supplement would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to drink1.com/huberman. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status and much more. Again, that's and much more. Again, that's and much more. Again, that's drinkagg.com/huberman to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil, plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil, plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil, plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by ourplace. Ourplace makes my favorite ourplace. Ourplace makes my favorite ourplace. Ourplace makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. pots, pans, and other cookware. pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are still PASES or forever chemicals are still PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've discussed before in this podcast, these discussed before in this podcast, these discussed before in this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's really important to try and avoid them. really important to try and avoid them. really important to try and avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of Hour This is why I'm a huge fan of Hour This is why I'm a huge fan of Hour Place. HourPlace products are made with Place. HourPlace products are made with Place. HourPlace products are made with the highest quality materials and are the highest quality materials and are the highest quality materials and are all completely PAS and toxin-free. I all completely PAS and toxin-free. I all completely PAS and toxin-free. I especially love their titanium Always especially love their titanium Always especially love their titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero made with zero chemicals and zero made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful forever This means it has no harmful forever This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose chemicals and does not degrade or lose chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's its non-stick effect over time. It's its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows for the every morning. The design allows for the every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking eggs to cook perfectly without sticking eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and to the pan. I also cook burgers and to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it, and it puts a really nice steaks in it, and it puts a really nice steaks in it, and it puts a really nice sear on the meat. But again, nothing sear on the meat. But again, nothing sear on the meat. But again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to sticks to it, so it's really easy to sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it, and I basically use it love it, and I basically use it love it, and I basically use it constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full line of Titanium Pro cookware that uses line of Titanium Pro cookware that uses line of Titanium Pro cookware that uses its first-s titanium non-stick its first-s titanium non-stick its first-s titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code hubman at checkout. and use the code hubman at checkout. and use the code hubman at checkout. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can shipping, and free returns, you can shipping, and free returns, you can experience this terrific cookware with experience this terrific cookware with experience this terrific cookware with zero risk. zero risk. zero risk. You know, I've been long obsessed with You know, I've been long obsessed with You know, I've been long obsessed with this um difference between what happens this um difference between what happens this um difference between what happens in our brain stem, you know, the areas in our brain stem, you know, the areas in our brain stem, you know, the areas involved, as you know, um with levels of involved, as you know, um with levels of involved, as you know, um with levels of arousal and stress versus calm. um when arousal and stress versus calm. um when arousal and stress versus calm. um when we look at a fixation point versus a we look at a fixation point versus a we look at a fixation point versus a horizon or when we go into panoramic horizon or when we go into panoramic horizon or when we go into panoramic vision and there are now vision and there are now vision and there are now &gt;&gt; ample data to support the idea that when &gt;&gt; ample data to support the idea that when &gt;&gt; ample data to support the idea that when we fixate on a small box like a phone or we fixate on a small box like a phone or we fixate on a small box like a phone or a computer or we you know we're fixated a computer or we you know we're fixated a computer or we you know we're fixated on something we're reading or paying on something we're reading or paying on something we're reading or paying attention to it that our level of attention to it that our level of attention to it that our level of autonomic arousal creeps up doesn't autonomic arousal creeps up doesn't autonomic arousal creeps up doesn't creep up indefinitely but this makes creep up indefinitely but this makes creep up indefinitely but this makes sense right visual attention matches the sense right visual attention matches the sense right visual attention matches the cognitive attention you need arousal aka cognitive attention you need arousal aka cognitive attention you need arousal aka alertness to get cognitive attention alertness to get cognitive attention alertness to get cognitive attention &gt;&gt; but that when we go into panoram amic &gt;&gt; but that when we go into panoram amic &gt;&gt; but that when we go into panoram amic vision which is you know for the vision which is you know for the vision which is you know for the aicionados you can look at magnosellar aicionados you can look at magnosellar aicionados you can look at magnosellar vision what you're essentially doing is vision what you're essentially doing is vision what you're essentially doing is you're taking bigger pixels of the of you're taking bigger pixels of the of you're taking bigger pixels of the of the visual environment the visual environment the visual environment &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; and when we look at a horizon &gt;&gt; and when we look at a horizon &gt;&gt; and when we look at a horizon &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; we naturally go into panoramic vision &gt;&gt; we naturally go into panoramic vision &gt;&gt; we naturally go into panoramic vision unless we're looking at our phone taking unless we're looking at our phone taking unless we're looking at our phone taking a picture of that horizon so take note a picture of that horizon so take note a picture of that horizon so take note &gt;&gt; it's interesting to me to think about &gt;&gt; it's interesting to me to think about &gt;&gt; it's interesting to me to think about &gt;&gt; visual environments such as nature that &gt;&gt; visual environments such as nature that &gt;&gt; visual environments such as nature that have us taking larger bins pixels that have us taking larger bins pixels that have us taking larger bins pixels if we're talking about visual space but if we're talking about visual space but if we're talking about visual space but that we're also perhaps, this is a that we're also perhaps, this is a that we're also perhaps, this is a question I'm obsessed with, perhaps question I'm obsessed with, perhaps question I'm obsessed with, perhaps taking larger time bins. taking larger time bins. taking larger time bins. &gt;&gt; What do you think about a kind of a &gt;&gt; What do you think about a kind of a &gt;&gt; What do you think about a kind of a general idea that what we need to do in general idea that what we need to do in general idea that what we need to do in order to be focused? order to be focused? order to be focused? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Is to allow our mind to go into these &gt;&gt; Is to allow our mind to go into these &gt;&gt; Is to allow our mind to go into these kind of like timed drift states. kind of like timed drift states. kind of like timed drift states. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I kind of think, you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I kind of think, you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I kind of think, you know, you're talking about it from a visual you're talking about it from a visual you're talking about it from a visual perspective, but I think it's also from perspective, but I think it's also from perspective, but I think it's also from a cognitive mental perspective. So I a cognitive mental perspective. So I a cognitive mental perspective. So I think also too being in nature kind of think also too being in nature kind of think also too being in nature kind of widens your cognitive you know landscape widens your cognitive you know landscape widens your cognitive you know landscape you and that's why I think people you and that's why I think people you and that's why I think people sometimes you know you hear all these sometimes you know you hear all these sometimes you know you hear all these anecdotes where people are struggling to anecdotes where people are struggling to anecdotes where people are struggling to solve a problem they can't figure it out solve a problem they can't figure it out solve a problem they can't figure it out they go for a walk in nature and then they go for a walk in nature and then they go for a walk in nature and then boom they solve the problem because boom they solve the problem because boom they solve the problem because the brain is still churning on that the brain is still churning on that the brain is still churning on that right but maybe being out in nature sort right but maybe being out in nature sort right but maybe being out in nature sort of inspires this widening of attentional of inspires this widening of attentional of inspires this widening of attentional space internally space internally space internally We had a guest on this podcast, Michael We had a guest on this podcast, Michael We had a guest on this podcast, Michael Platt from the University of Platt from the University of Platt from the University of Pennsylvania. He's a neuroscientist, and Pennsylvania. He's a neuroscientist, and Pennsylvania. He's a neuroscientist, and he told us about this experiment. It's he told us about this experiment. It's he told us about this experiment. It's pretty wild. I This still blows me away. pretty wild. I This still blows me away. pretty wild. I This still blows me away. You're probably familiar with it, but I You're probably familiar with it, but I You're probably familiar with it, but I wasn't, which is that if you have sub wasn't, which is that if you have sub wasn't, which is that if you have sub human subjects in a lab, do a connect human subjects in a lab, do a connect human subjects in a lab, do a connect the dots task where the dots are placed the dots task where the dots are placed the dots task where the dots are placed very close together. Yeah. very close together. Yeah. very close together. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Versus a connect the dots task where &gt;&gt; Versus a connect the dots task where &gt;&gt; Versus a connect the dots task where they're uh the dots are placed much they're uh the dots are placed much they're uh the dots are placed much further apart. And then you give them a further apart. And then you give them a further apart. And then you give them a creativity task. the people who do the creativity task. the people who do the creativity task. the people who do the task and it's well controlled for folks. task and it's well controlled for folks. task and it's well controlled for folks. Um connecting dots that are further Um connecting dots that are further Um connecting dots that are further apart in physical space apart in physical space apart in physical space &gt;&gt; show significantly elevated levels of &gt;&gt; show significantly elevated levels of &gt;&gt; show significantly elevated levels of creative insight to solving problems. of creative insight to solving problems. of creative insight to solving problems. &gt;&gt; And so there's something about visual &gt;&gt; And so there's something about visual &gt;&gt; And so there's something about visual space and time and our ability to link space and time and our ability to link space and time and our ability to link um things in cognitive space and time. um things in cognitive space and time. um things in cognitive space and time. This is why uh when you said earlier This is why uh when you said earlier This is why uh when you said earlier that when you're out in nature that when you're out in nature that when you're out in nature &gt;&gt; there aren't as many words to &gt;&gt; there aren't as many words to &gt;&gt; there aren't as many words to describe things. What that means to me describe things. What that means to me describe things. What that means to me if I think about the results that Platt if I think about the results that Platt if I think about the results that Platt was talking about is that perhaps it was talking about is that perhaps it was talking about is that perhaps it isn't just that um there's a der of isn't just that um there's a der of isn't just that um there's a der of language but perhaps then your brain language but perhaps then your brain language but perhaps then your brain starts to drop into other like modes of starts to drop into other like modes of starts to drop into other like modes of cognition. I don't want to sound too cognition. I don't want to sound too cognition. I don't want to sound too nerdy just to sound nerdy here but that nerdy just to sound nerdy here but that nerdy just to sound nerdy here but that you know there are all sorts of things you know there are all sorts of things you know there are all sorts of things in your brain that have that are that in your brain that have that are that in your brain that have that are that are &gt;&gt; that can't have words assigned to them. &gt;&gt; that can't have words assigned to them. &gt;&gt; that can't have words assigned to them. Like for instance, Like for instance, Like for instance, &gt;&gt; your childhood, you could give the whole &gt;&gt; your childhood, you could give the whole &gt;&gt; your childhood, you could give the whole story, but it still wouldn't capture it, story, but it still wouldn't capture it, story, but it still wouldn't capture it, right? But there was your trauma, there right? But there was your trauma, there right? But there was your trauma, there was your winds, there were your um was your winds, there were your um was your winds, there were your um &gt;&gt; falling in love, you know, we have these &gt;&gt; falling in love, you know, we have these &gt;&gt; falling in love, you know, we have these words, but they don't capture the words, but they don't capture the words, but they don't capture the experience. They don't capture like the experience. They don't capture like the experience. They don't capture like the visceral experience, the smells, the visceral experience, the smells, the visceral experience, the smells, the taste. And so um I love the idea that in taste. And so um I love the idea that in taste. And so um I love the idea that in nature &gt;&gt; things are sparse enough yet rich enough &gt;&gt; things are sparse enough yet rich enough &gt;&gt; things are sparse enough yet rich enough &gt;&gt; that maybe these networks get &gt;&gt; that maybe these networks get &gt;&gt; that maybe these networks get triggered, &gt;&gt; right? And I think, you know, this is &gt;&gt; right? And I think, you know, this is &gt;&gt; right? And I think, you know, this is kind of another, if we want to get into kind of another, if we want to get into kind of another, if we want to get into the neuroscience a little bit, we have the neuroscience a little bit, we have the neuroscience a little bit, we have some of these ideas that um for what a some of these ideas that um for what a some of these ideas that um for what a brain looks like when it's kind of at brain looks like when it's kind of at brain looks like when it's kind of at rest. &gt;&gt; And um when we talk about fractalness, &gt;&gt; And um when we talk about fractalness, &gt;&gt; And um when we talk about fractalness, you know, most of us think about like a you know, most of us think about like a you know, most of us think about like a spatial fractal. So if there's a spatial fractal. So if there's a spatial fractal. So if there's a snowflake, it's got a characteristic snowflake, it's got a characteristic snowflake, it's got a characteristic shape. If you put that snowflake under a shape. If you put that snowflake under a shape. If you put that snowflake under a microscope and zoom in, it still kind of microscope and zoom in, it still kind of microscope and zoom in, it still kind of has that same shape. If you zoom in some has that same shape. If you zoom in some has that same shape. If you zoom in some more, it's still got that same shape. more, it's still got that same shape. more, it's still got that same shape. Um, so it doesn't matter at what scale Um, so it doesn't matter at what scale Um, so it doesn't matter at what scale you look at the snowflake, it's got the you look at the snowflake, it's got the you look at the snowflake, it's got the same shape. So that's called that the same shape. So that's called that the same shape. So that's called that the snowflake is sort of scale-free snowflake is sort of scale-free snowflake is sort of scale-free spatially, or another way to say it is spatially, or another way to say it is spatially, or another way to say it is that it's fractal. It's got this that it's fractal. It's got this that it's fractal. It's got this repeated patterning at these different repeated patterning at these different repeated patterning at these different spatial scales, and nature is filled spatial scales, and nature is filled spatial scales, and nature is filled with fractals. with fractals. with fractals. &gt;&gt; Could you tell us more about some of &gt;&gt; Could you tell us more about some of &gt;&gt; Could you tell us more about some of those? I recall hearing about fractals those? I recall hearing about fractals those? I recall hearing about fractals of Mandelro that came that came up with of Mandelro that came that came up with of Mandelro that came that came up with fractals. But despite the fact that I fractals. But despite the fact that I fractals. But despite the fact that I remember Mandelro's name um all that remember Mandelro's name um all that remember Mandelro's name um all that tells you is that my brain is filled tells you is that my brain is filled tells you is that my brain is filled with meaningless information because with meaningless information because with meaningless information because what I want to know is not who came up what I want to know is not who came up what I want to know is not who came up with it, right? This is the problem with it, right? This is the problem with it, right? This is the problem with the hippocampus, right? You can with the hippocampus, right? You can with the hippocampus, right? You can encode perfectly useless information. No encode perfectly useless information. No encode perfectly useless information. No discredit to Mandelro, but where in discredit to Mandelro, but where in discredit to Mandelro, but where in nature aside from snowflakes do fractals nature aside from snowflakes do fractals nature aside from snowflakes do fractals show up? Are they in tree bark? show up? Are they in tree bark? show up? Are they in tree bark? &gt;&gt; Everywhere. I mean a tree is also quite &gt;&gt; Everywhere. I mean a tree is also quite &gt;&gt; Everywhere. I mean a tree is also quite fractal, right? So you have the trunk of fractal, right? So you have the trunk of fractal, right? So you have the trunk of the tree and then it breaks off into the tree and then it breaks off into the tree and then it breaks off into branches which breaks off into smaller branches which breaks off into smaller branches which breaks off into smaller branches which breaks off into leaves branches which breaks off into leaves branches which breaks off into leaves and the leaves have the veins that also and the leaves have the veins that also and the leaves have the veins that also branch off. So it's very fractal. branch off. So it's very fractal. branch off. So it's very fractal. It's got the same branching structure at It's got the same branching structure at It's got the same branching structure at all these different scales. all these different scales. all these different scales. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So when I look at like sand in the &gt;&gt; So when I look at like sand in the &gt;&gt; So when I look at like sand in the desert &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; you're telling me that this &gt;&gt; you're telling me that this &gt;&gt; you're telling me that this regularity exists at every scale. regularity exists at every scale. regularity exists at every scale. &gt;&gt; Yeah, pretty much. I think a desert &gt;&gt; Yeah, pretty much. I think a desert &gt;&gt; Yeah, pretty much. I think a desert would also be fractal in terms of um you would also be fractal in terms of um you would also be fractal in terms of um you know how the wind because the wind is know how the wind because the wind is know how the wind because the wind is also kind of a fractal uh sort of also kind of a fractal uh sort of also kind of a fractal uh sort of process. So the sand will be somewhat process. So the sand will be somewhat process. So the sand will be somewhat fractal. A mountain scape will also be fractal. A mountain scape will also be fractal. A mountain scape will also be quite fractal. A coastline will be quite fractal. A coastline will be quite fractal. A coastline will be fractal. &gt;&gt; Well tell me for a mountain. So where am &gt;&gt; Well tell me for a mountain. So where am &gt;&gt; Well tell me for a mountain. So where am I going to look at a smaller scale? I going to look at a smaller scale? I going to look at a smaller scale? I can see I can imagine a mountain can see I can imagine a mountain can see I can imagine a mountain &gt;&gt; mountain. Now if you zoomed in on a &gt;&gt; mountain. Now if you zoomed in on a &gt;&gt; mountain. Now if you zoomed in on a different portion of the mountain it different portion of the mountain it different portion of the mountain it would have some of the same structural would have some of the same structural would have some of the same structural properties as the zoomed out version. properties as the zoomed out version. properties as the zoomed out version. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Wild. Yeah. So, and again this kind of &gt;&gt; Wild. Yeah. So, and again this kind of &gt;&gt; Wild. Yeah. So, and again this kind of to return back to like compression again to return back to like compression again to return back to like compression again if you have this repeated pattern if you have this repeated pattern if you have this repeated pattern patterning that might be easier for our patterning that might be easier for our patterning that might be easier for our brain to process because really you just brain to process because really you just brain to process because really you just have to only kind of encode one have to only kind of encode one have to only kind of encode one structure because that structure is structure because that structure is structure because that structure is repeated at all these different scales repeated at all these different scales repeated at all these different scales whereas human beings and advertisements whereas human beings and advertisements whereas human beings and advertisements and all that we try you know that and all that we try you know that and all that we try you know that there's this thing in science as you there's this thing in science as you there's this thing in science as you know people are either lumpers or know people are either lumpers or know people are either lumpers or splitters. Yes. splitters. Yes. splitters. Yes. &gt;&gt; Right. And and many a career has been &gt;&gt; Right. And and many a career has been &gt;&gt; Right. And and many a career has been made by uh splitting. Yeah, made by uh splitting. Yeah, made by uh splitting. Yeah, &gt;&gt; when lumping would have been sufficient, &gt;&gt; when lumping would have been sufficient, &gt;&gt; when lumping would have been sufficient, &gt;&gt; human behavior, human advertising, &gt;&gt; human behavior, human advertising, &gt;&gt; human behavior, human advertising, music, I mean, I'm sure there's immense music, I mean, I'm sure there's immense music, I mean, I'm sure there's immense regularity. &gt;&gt; But when we're bombarded with that, now &gt;&gt; But when we're bombarded with that, now &gt;&gt; But when we're bombarded with that, now I'm sort of making the segue to I'm sort of making the segue to I'm sort of making the segue to something like social media. something like social media. something like social media. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Where you're just bombarded with sensory &gt;&gt; Where you're just bombarded with sensory &gt;&gt; Where you're just bombarded with sensory information, like one information, like one information, like one &gt;&gt; movement of my thumb takes me from one &gt;&gt; movement of my thumb takes me from one &gt;&gt; movement of my thumb takes me from one cognitive landscape to a completely cognitive landscape to a completely cognitive landscape to a completely different cognitive landscape. I mean, different cognitive landscape. I mean, different cognitive landscape. I mean, if it were my preference, my entire feed if it were my preference, my entire feed if it were my preference, my entire feed would be dogs. would be dogs. would be dogs. &gt;&gt; Yep. But I'm going from dogs to politics &gt;&gt; Yep. But I'm going from dogs to politics &gt;&gt; Yep. But I'm going from dogs to politics to fitness to and then stuff that the to fitness to and then stuff that the to fitness to and then stuff that the algorithm is testing on me. And I mean algorithm is testing on me. And I mean algorithm is testing on me. And I mean it's amazing that we can do this it's amazing that we can do this it's amazing that we can do this &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; and yet the more we talk about nature &gt;&gt; and yet the more we talk about nature &gt;&gt; and yet the more we talk about nature and how restorative it is and how restorative it is and how restorative it is &gt;&gt; or reading a book and what a kind of a &gt;&gt; or reading a book and what a kind of a &gt;&gt; or reading a book and what a kind of a following a common narrative kind of following a common narrative kind of following a common narrative kind of drilling down into that or watching a drilling down into that or watching a drilling down into that or watching a movie which hopefully has some movie which hopefully has some movie which hopefully has some continuity to the to the plot. the more continuity to the to the plot. the more continuity to the to the plot. the more I realized that social media is, for I realized that social media is, for I realized that social media is, for lack of a better word, is kind of chaos. lack of a better word, is kind of chaos. lack of a better word, is kind of chaos. It's like cognitive chaos or it's It's like cognitive chaos or it's It's like cognitive chaos or it's definitely not fractal. definitely not fractal. definitely not fractal. &gt;&gt; It's definitely not fractal. &gt;&gt; It's definitely not fractal. &gt;&gt; It's definitely not fractal. &gt;&gt; And if we kind of return to fractalist &gt;&gt; And if we kind of return to fractalist &gt;&gt; And if we kind of return to fractalist too. So we think um so we talked about too. So we think um so we talked about too. So we think um so we talked about fractalist in terms of space like uh fractalist in terms of space like uh fractalist in terms of space like uh there's got this shape and you zoom in there's got this shape and you zoom in there's got this shape and you zoom in same shape. Zoom in some more same shape. Zoom in some more same shape. Zoom in some more same shape. You could also talk about shape. You could also talk about shape. You could also talk about fractalness in time. So you can have fractalness in time. So you can have fractalness in time. So you can have like a signal oscillating in time, like a signal oscillating in time, like a signal oscillating in time, fluctuating in time and you could also fluctuating in time and you could also fluctuating in time and you could also quantify how fractal that signal is in quantify how fractal that signal is in quantify how fractal that signal is in time. &gt;&gt; So it's like if you look at the signal &gt;&gt; So it's like if you look at the signal &gt;&gt; So it's like if you look at the signal at 1 millisecond, 10 milliseconds, 50 1 millisecond, 10 milliseconds, 50 1 millisecond, 10 milliseconds, 50 milliseconds, 10 seconds, 10 seconds, 10 seconds, 30 seconds, an hour, does that signal 30 seconds, an hour, does that signal 30 seconds, an hour, does that signal look the same or does it look different? look the same or does it look different? look the same or does it look different? If the signal looks the same at all If the signal looks the same at all If the signal looks the same at all those different temporal windows, we say those different temporal windows, we say those different temporal windows, we say the signal is fractal in time. Can you the signal is fractal in time. Can you the signal is fractal in time. Can you give me an example from a nature give me an example from a nature give me an example from a nature environment and one by comparison from a environment and one by comparison from a environment and one by comparison from a urban environment? I'm thinking a car urban environment? I'm thinking a car urban environment? I'm thinking a car alarm in an urban environment is like alarm in an urban environment is like alarm in an urban environment is like the most alerting. I mean it grabs our the most alerting. I mean it grabs our the most alerting. I mean it grabs our involuntary attention involuntary attention involuntary attention &gt;&gt; and it's not fractal. It's periodic. &gt;&gt; and it's not fractal. It's periodic. &gt;&gt; and it's not fractal. It's periodic. It's just, you know, over and over again. Like a you know, over and over again. Like a you know, over and over again. Like a fractal signal will kind of have low fractal signal will kind of have low fractal signal will kind of have low frequency stuff will be have a lot of frequency stuff will be have a lot of frequency stuff will be have a lot of power, but it also has all of the power, but it also has all of the power, but it also has all of the different frequencies are represented, different frequencies are represented, different frequencies are represented, but their um how their amplitude is, but their um how their amplitude is, but their um how their amplitude is, this is going to get a little nerdy, is this is going to get a little nerdy, is this is going to get a little nerdy, is proportional to their frequency. So low proportional to their frequency. So low proportional to their frequency. So low frequency stuff will have higher frequency stuff will have higher frequency stuff will have higher amplitude or higher power and high amplitude or higher power and high amplitude or higher power and high frequency stuff will have lower frequency stuff will have lower frequency stuff will have lower amplitude or lower power. And a lot of amplitude or lower power. And a lot of amplitude or lower power. And a lot of natural sounds and stuff are also more natural sounds and stuff are also more natural sounds and stuff are also more fractal. But what's interesting is that fractal. But what's interesting is that fractal. But what's interesting is that you can also look at brain signals. Like you can also look at brain signals. Like you can also look at brain signals. Like I can take put a person in an MRI I can take put a person in an MRI I can take put a person in an MRI machine and look at like how are the machine and look at like how are the machine and look at like how are the brain areas fluctuating or I can have an brain areas fluctuating or I can have an brain areas fluctuating or I can have an EEG cap on them and look at how their EEG cap on them and look at how their EEG cap on them and look at how their electrical activity is fluctuating. electrical activity is fluctuating. electrical activity is fluctuating. And it turns out when brains are more And it turns out when brains are more And it turns out when brains are more fractal in time, brains are exerting fractal in time, brains are exerting fractal in time, brains are exerting less effort, less cognitive effort. less effort, less cognitive effort. less effort, less cognitive effort. So, you know, it's kind of depressing, So, you know, it's kind of depressing, So, you know, it's kind of depressing, but as we age, our brains kind of get but as we age, our brains kind of get but as we age, our brains kind of get less fractal. Um, if you're learning uh less fractal. Um, if you're learning uh less fractal. Um, if you're learning uh a new task for a first time, when it's a new task for a first time, when it's a new task for a first time, when it's harder, uh, the brain is less fractile harder, uh, the brain is less fractile harder, uh, the brain is less fractile than when you're well practiced at the than when you're well practiced at the than when you're well practiced at the task. &gt;&gt; If you're doing an easy task, the brain &gt;&gt; If you're doing an easy task, the brain &gt;&gt; If you're doing an easy task, the brain is more fractal than when you're doing a is more fractal than when you're doing a is more fractal than when you're doing a harder task. harder task. harder task. And so we think that maybe nature is And so we think that maybe nature is And so we think that maybe nature is kind of pushing the brain into this like kind of pushing the brain into this like kind of pushing the brain into this like higher fractal state that might be like higher fractal state that might be like higher fractal state that might be like this sort of critical rested state. Um this sort of critical rested state. Um this sort of critical rested state. Um that's kind of a really that's kind of a really that's kind of a really uh that's going to that's going to that's going to that's going to that's going to that's going to that's going to allow you to actually have a going to allow you to actually have a going to allow you to actually have a lot of directed attention lot of directed attention lot of directed attention &gt;&gt; when you need it. when you need it &gt;&gt; when you need it. when you need it &gt;&gt; when you need it. when you need it versus like the social media stuff is versus like the social media stuff is versus like the social media stuff is just pulling grab and it's not just pulling grab and it's not just pulling grab and it's not letting you get into this fractal rested letting you get into this fractal rested letting you get into this fractal rested state. It's state. It's state. It's &gt;&gt; it's driving fractalness down, &gt;&gt; it's driving fractalness down, &gt;&gt; it's driving fractalness down, &gt;&gt; right? Well, the social media platforms, &gt;&gt; right? Well, the social media platforms, &gt;&gt; right? Well, the social media platforms, not to paint them as evil because I not to paint them as evil because I not to paint them as evil because I teach on social media, learn on social teach on social media, learn on social teach on social media, learn on social media, enjoy social media, but media, enjoy social media, but media, enjoy social media, but &gt;&gt; it's a business, right? &gt;&gt; it's a business, right? &gt;&gt; it's a business, right? &gt;&gt; They're not doing it for free. No, &gt;&gt; They're not doing it for free. No, &gt;&gt; They're not doing it for free. No, &gt;&gt; they're not doing it out of the goodness &gt;&gt; they're not doing it out of the goodness &gt;&gt; they're not doing it out of the goodness of their hearts. And um of their hearts. And um of their hearts. And um I basically think of social media as the I basically think of social media as the I basically think of social media as the reality TV show that we've all either reality TV show that we've all either reality TV show that we've all either chosen to be a part of. chosen to be a part of. chosen to be a part of. &gt;&gt; We've cast ourselves in it. &gt;&gt; We've cast ourselves in it. &gt;&gt; We've cast ourselves in it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; The idea here is that &gt;&gt; The idea here is that &gt;&gt; The idea here is that &gt;&gt; it is not designed to be relaxing. It's &gt;&gt; it is not designed to be relaxing. It's &gt;&gt; it is not designed to be relaxing. It's designed to capture your directed designed to capture your directed designed to capture your directed attention. If it just grabbed your attention. If it just grabbed your attention. If it just grabbed your involuntary attention, it wouldn't work. involuntary attention, it wouldn't work. involuntary attention, it wouldn't work. Now, that might seem a little bit Now, that might seem a little bit Now, that might seem a little bit counterintuitive because I and everybody counterintuitive because I and everybody counterintuitive because I and everybody else has the experience of, you know, else has the experience of, you know, else has the experience of, you know, picking up your phone, you're like, picking up your phone, you're like, picking up your phone, you're like, "Okay, I'm only going to spend a minute. "Okay, I'm only going to spend a minute. "Okay, I'm only going to spend a minute. I'm going to just kind of check what's I'm going to just kind of check what's I'm going to just kind of check what's on Instagram and all of a sudden you're on Instagram and all of a sudden you're on Instagram and all of a sudden you're taken down this um this rabbit you're taken down this um this rabbit you're taken down this um this rabbit hole of one thing and then you know it's hole of one thing and then you know it's hole of one thing and then you know it's 30 minutes later and you're like 30 minutes later and you're like 30 minutes later and you're like goodness you know I got to get ready for goodness you know I got to get ready for goodness you know I got to get ready for work or something like this. work or something like this. work or something like this. &gt;&gt; But &gt;&gt; But &gt;&gt; But &gt;&gt; the involuntary attention that you were &gt;&gt; the involuntary attention that you were &gt;&gt; the involuntary attention that you were talking about before is the kind of talking about before is the kind of talking about before is the kind of thing that cues you to something and thing that cues you to something and thing that cues you to something and then you go down that direction. then you go down that direction. then you go down that direction. &gt;&gt; Right. Or I would say that the social &gt;&gt; Right. Or I would say that the social &gt;&gt; Right. Or I would say that the social media it's not softly fascinating it's media it's not softly fascinating it's media it's not softly fascinating it's harshly fascinating. It's it's harshly fascinating. It's it's harshly fascinating. It's it's grabbing you and not letting you grabbing you and not letting you grabbing you and not letting you &gt;&gt; mind wander think about anything else. &gt;&gt; mind wander think about anything else. &gt;&gt; mind wander think about anything else. It's it's grabbing all of your It's it's grabbing all of your It's it's grabbing all of your attentional resources. attentional resources. attentional resources. &gt;&gt; And I would say it does that not by &gt;&gt; And I would say it does that not by &gt;&gt; And I would say it does that not by taking us typically down rabbit holes, taking us typically down rabbit holes, taking us typically down rabbit holes, but it's not like you spend a lot of but it's not like you spend a lot of but it's not like you spend a lot of time on one post, time on one post, time on one post, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; You might go into the comment section if &gt;&gt; You might go into the comment section if &gt;&gt; You might go into the comment section if you're interested in that, but you're interested in that, but you're interested in that, but &gt;&gt; it's the fact that &gt;&gt; it's the fact that &gt;&gt; it's the fact that &gt;&gt; you have a I'm imagining now that &gt;&gt; you have a I'm imagining now that &gt;&gt; you have a I'm imagining now that there's some resource in the brain there's some resource in the brain there's some resource in the brain that's a combination of catacolamines, that's a combination of catacolamines, that's a combination of catacolamines, dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine certainly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Plus a bunch of neural network &gt;&gt; Plus a bunch of neural network &gt;&gt; Plus a bunch of neural network metabolism &gt;&gt; stuff. It will never be one thing, &gt;&gt; stuff. It will never be one thing, &gt;&gt; stuff. It will never be one thing, right? It's not going to be a molecule right? It's not going to be a molecule right? It's not going to be a molecule and that and that and that &gt;&gt; depending on how well rested we are, we &gt;&gt; depending on how well rested we are, we &gt;&gt; depending on how well rested we are, we go into the day with a certain amount of go into the day with a certain amount of go into the day with a certain amount of directed attention units that we can directed attention units that we can directed attention units that we can spend. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And everything you're telling us today &gt;&gt; And everything you're telling us today &gt;&gt; And everything you're telling us today is that going into a fractal aka uh is that going into a fractal aka uh is that going into a fractal aka uh nature environment nature environment nature environment allows us to come off the sort of allows us to come off the sort of allows us to come off the sort of spending &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; of our directed attention. That's right. &gt;&gt; of our directed attention. That's right. &gt;&gt; of our directed attention. That's right. And it also seems to reset the directed And it also seems to reset the directed And it also seems to reset the directed attention account. attention account. attention account. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Are there any data that speak to whether &gt;&gt; Are there any data that speak to whether &gt;&gt; Are there any data that speak to whether or not it just allows us to not spend or not it just allows us to not spend or not it just allows us to not spend or whether or not it actually replenishes whether or not it actually replenishes whether or not it actually replenishes this directed attention capability? this directed attention capability? this directed attention capability? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a good question. Or or does &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a good question. Or or does &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a good question. Or or does it even like extend capabilities? Like it even like extend capabilities? Like it even like extend capabilities? Like does it take you above your baseline, does it take you above your baseline, does it take you above your baseline, &gt;&gt; right? Is it an investment? Lately, I &gt;&gt; right? Is it an investment? Lately, I &gt;&gt; right? Is it an investment? Lately, I think not so much about dopamine per se. think not so much about dopamine per se. think not so much about dopamine per se. think about are you spending your think about are you spending your think about are you spending your dopamine down dopamine down dopamine down &gt;&gt; or are you investing your dopamine, &gt;&gt; or are you investing your dopamine, &gt;&gt; or are you investing your dopamine, &gt;&gt; right? And I would say I mean &gt;&gt; right? And I would say I mean &gt;&gt; right? And I would say I mean unfortunately I don't have a good answer unfortunately I don't have a good answer unfortunately I don't have a good answer for it. I'm not sure. It might for it. I'm not sure. It might for it. I'm not sure. It might actually it it's possible that it might actually it it's possible that it might actually it it's possible that it might expand your store. It might it might you expand your store. It might it might you expand your store. It might it might you might be getting interest. might be getting interest. might be getting interest. &gt;&gt; So one of the things too that we kind &gt;&gt; So one of the things too that we kind &gt;&gt; So one of the things too that we kind of struggle with a little bit is like is of struggle with a little bit is like is of struggle with a little bit is like is nature boosting us a lot or is urban nature boosting us a lot or is urban nature boosting us a lot or is urban fatiguing us, you know, depleting us? fatiguing us, you know, depleting us? fatiguing us, you know, depleting us? And I think both things are kind of at And I think both things are kind of at And I think both things are kind of at play there. play there. play there. &gt;&gt; I have a whole set of questions popping &gt;&gt; I have a whole set of questions popping &gt;&gt; I have a whole set of questions popping to mind about sleep states and deep to mind about sleep states and deep to mind about sleep states and deep sleep being more like fractal sleep being more like fractal sleep being more like fractal environments and rapid eye movement environments and rapid eye movement environments and rapid eye movement sleep being more like reality and sleep being more like reality and sleep being more like reality and therefore more challenging. But um I'm therefore more challenging. But um I'm therefore more challenging. But um I'm going to just shove those and maybe going to just shove those and maybe going to just shove those and maybe we'll get back to them, maybe we won't. we'll get back to them, maybe we won't. we'll get back to them, maybe we won't. &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that I understand &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that I understand &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that I understand correctly what the protocol for lack of correctly what the protocol for lack of correctly what the protocol for lack of a better word would be. Get out into a better word would be. Get out into a better word would be. Get out into nature, ideally move. nature, ideally move. nature, ideally move. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; For about 20 minutes minimum. Yep. &gt;&gt; For about 20 minutes minimum. Yep. &gt;&gt; For about 20 minutes minimum. Yep. &gt;&gt; And ideally, you remove yourself from &gt;&gt; And ideally, you remove yourself from &gt;&gt; And ideally, you remove yourself from phone. What if you have to make a phone phone. What if you have to make a phone phone. What if you have to make a phone call while you're doing it? Is that call while you're doing it? Is that call while you're doing it? Is that &gt;&gt; I mean that's I just you don't want to &gt;&gt; I mean that's I just you don't want to &gt;&gt; I mean that's I just you don't want to do it. And I' I'd even say too, I know do it. And I' I'd even say too, I know do it. And I' I'd even say too, I know you were saying you like to put the you were saying you like to put the you were saying you like to put the earbuds in sometimes. I would say you earbuds in sometimes. I would say you earbuds in sometimes. I would say you don't want the earbuds in. You want all don't want the earbuds in. You want all don't want the earbuds in. You want all of your attentional capacity or of your attentional capacity or of your attentional capacity or involuntary attention to be captured by involuntary attention to be captured by involuntary attention to be captured by that environment. that environment. that environment. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, you know, it's kind of I kind &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, you know, it's kind of I kind &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, you know, it's kind of I kind of joke with my students about this a of joke with my students about this a of joke with my students about this a little bit where I would say, you know, little bit where I would say, you know, little bit where I would say, you know, &gt;&gt; uh, how many of you study with, uh, &gt;&gt; uh, how many of you study with, uh, &gt;&gt; uh, how many of you study with, uh, listening to music? And a lot of listening to music? And a lot of listening to music? And a lot of students raise their hand. Yeah, I study students raise their hand. Yeah, I study students raise their hand. Yeah, I study with listening to music. I say, okay, with listening to music. I say, okay, with listening to music. I say, okay, how many of you want to take the exam how many of you want to take the exam how many of you want to take the exam listening to music? Nobody. Nobody listening to music? Nobody. Nobody listening to music? Nobody. Nobody raises your hand say, well, then that's raises your hand say, well, then that's raises your hand say, well, then that's uh, that's not consistent, you know, and uh, that's not consistent, you know, and uh, that's not consistent, you know, and it's not because, you know, and it's not because, you know, and it's not because, you know, the students are uh not smart. It's it's the students are uh not smart. It's it's the students are uh not smart. It's it's that studying sucks that studying sucks that studying sucks &gt;&gt; and you know listening to music just &gt;&gt; and you know listening to music just &gt;&gt; and you know listening to music just makes it more pleasurable but you're not makes it more pleasurable but you're not makes it more pleasurable but you're not you know you're taking you know you're taking you know you're taking away attentional resources that could be away attentional resources that could be away attentional resources that could be used for the studying by listening to used for the studying by listening to used for the studying by listening to music. And I think you know on the flip music. And I think you know on the flip music. And I think you know on the flip side I want you to be fully engaged with I want you to be fully engaged with I want you to be fully engaged with nature. I want your involuntary nature. I want your involuntary nature. I want your involuntary attention to be just automatically attention to be just automatically attention to be just automatically captured by this nature stimulation. I captured by this nature stimulation. I captured by this nature stimulation. I don't want anything else interfering don't want anything else interfering don't want anything else interfering with that. I think that's how you're with that. I think that's how you're with that. I think that's how you're going to get the most bang for your going to get the most bang for your going to get the most bang for your buck. And in fact, you know, you know, buck. And in fact, you know, you know, buck. And in fact, you know, you know, we did these studies where I wasn't sure we did these studies where I wasn't sure we did these studies where I wasn't sure how it was going to work. So, we did how it was going to work. So, we did how it was going to work. So, we did some studies some studies some studies um where we took participants who were um where we took participants who were um where we took participants who were diagnosed with clinical depression. diagnosed with clinical depression. diagnosed with clinical depression. And this was kind of mean, but I think And this was kind of mean, but I think And this was kind of mean, but I think important. We had them walk in nature, important. We had them walk in nature, important. We had them walk in nature, too. But before these participants went too. But before these participants went too. But before these participants went for a walk in nature, we had them think for a walk in nature, we had them think for a walk in nature, we had them think about a negative thought or memory about a negative thought or memory about a negative thought or memory that's been bothering them to try to that's been bothering them to try to that's been bothering them to try to induce rumination to get them induce rumination to get them induce rumination to get them ruminating. And we thought, you know, ruminating. And we thought, you know, ruminating. And we thought, you know, maybe if you go for a walk alone in maybe if you go for a walk alone in maybe if you go for a walk alone in nature and you're restoring your nature and you're restoring your nature and you're restoring your attention, maybe they're going to attention, maybe they're going to attention, maybe they're going to ruminate even more that it's going to be ruminate even more that it's going to be ruminate even more that it's going to be uh, you know, not good. It's going to uh, you know, not good. It's going to uh, you know, not good. It's going to maybe it's going to hurt maybe it's going to hurt maybe it's going to hurt performance. And we found just the opposite that And we found just the opposite that And we found just the opposite that actually these participants with actually these participants with actually these participants with clinical depression who we had induced clinical depression who we had induced clinical depression who we had induced to ruminate got even stronger benefits to ruminate got even stronger benefits to ruminate got even stronger benefits walking in nature than our non-clinical walking in nature than our non-clinical walking in nature than our non-clinical sample &gt;&gt; on working memory &gt;&gt; on working memory &gt;&gt; on working memory &gt;&gt; on working memory. &gt;&gt; on working memory. &gt;&gt; on working memory. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And uh and you can imagine &gt;&gt; And uh and you can imagine &gt;&gt; And uh and you can imagine participants that are struggling with participants that are struggling with participants that are struggling with depression and rumination, their working depression and rumination, their working depression and rumination, their working memory is not as good because you've got memory is not as good because you've got memory is not as good because you've got cognitive resources devoted to these cognitive resources devoted to these cognitive resources devoted to these negative thoughts that just these negative thoughts that just these negative thoughts that just repeating over and over again. you don't repeating over and over again. you don't repeating over and over again. you don't have your full have your full have your full bank account of attention cuz you you've bank account of attention cuz you you've bank account of attention cuz you you've have you're spending it on the have you're spending it on the have you're spending it on the rumination. And we found that for these rumination. And we found that for these rumination. And we found that for these participants, the effects were participants, the effects were participants, the effects were stronger in improving their attention stronger in improving their attention stronger in improving their attention and working memory. And I think part of and working memory. And I think part of and working memory. And I think part of that might be that it's actually that might be that it's actually that might be that it's actually giving them some of the attentional giving them some of the attentional giving them some of the attentional resources necessary to deal with the resources necessary to deal with the resources necessary to deal with the rumination. &gt;&gt; Super interesting. I know rumination is &gt;&gt; Super interesting. I know rumination is &gt;&gt; Super interesting. I know rumination is something that many people depressed or something that many people depressed or something that many people depressed or not uh struggle with. Um and I've long not uh struggle with. Um and I've long not uh struggle with. Um and I've long thought and I'm certainly coming to this thought and I'm certainly coming to this thought and I'm certainly coming to this conclusion with each successive year of conclusion with each successive year of conclusion with each successive year of my life that uh distraction is the my life that uh distraction is the my life that uh distraction is the enemy. like the ability to drop into enemy. like the ability to drop into enemy. like the ability to drop into work, creative work, or for me prepping work, creative work, or for me prepping work, creative work, or for me prepping a podcast or reading papers or a podcast or reading papers or a podcast or reading papers or &gt;&gt; um taking a walk with somebody, having a &gt;&gt; um taking a walk with somebody, having a &gt;&gt; um taking a walk with somebody, having a conversation with somebody because conversation with somebody because conversation with somebody because relationships are important too, of relationships are important too, of relationships are important too, of course, and just being able to be fully course, and just being able to be fully course, and just being able to be fully present to that, present to that, present to that, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; is &gt;&gt; is &gt;&gt; is the basis of a great life, the basis of a great life, the basis of a great life, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; even if you're dealing with challenge, &gt;&gt; even if you're dealing with challenge, &gt;&gt; even if you're dealing with challenge, right? It uh that when we spread right? It uh that when we spread right? It uh that when we spread ourselves out across all these different ourselves out across all these different ourselves out across all these different modalities that um no good comes of it. modalities that um no good comes of it. modalities that um no good comes of it. That's right. That's right. That's right. &gt;&gt; And um like any destructive force uh &gt;&gt; And um like any destructive force uh &gt;&gt; And um like any destructive force uh that's really bad, it's the fact that we that's really bad, it's the fact that we that's really bad, it's the fact that we don't notice don't notice don't notice that we were absent for large swasts of that we were absent for large swasts of that we were absent for large swasts of it and that it becomes so pervasive it and that it becomes so pervasive it and that it becomes so pervasive in society that it's not also frowned in society that it's not also frowned in society that it's not also frowned on. &gt;&gt; I actually put social media on an old &gt;&gt; I actually put social media on an old &gt;&gt; I actually put social media on an old phone. &gt;&gt; So I have social media accounts um on an &gt;&gt; So I have social media accounts um on an &gt;&gt; So I have social media accounts um on an old phone and that's the only way I can old phone and that's the only way I can old phone and that's the only way I can access social media. somebody sends me access social media. somebody sends me access social media. somebody sends me something by way of social media, I something by way of social media, I something by way of social media, I don't do it because I mean it's the don't do it because I mean it's the don't do it because I mean it's the &gt;&gt; I don't know what the best analogy is. &gt;&gt; I don't know what the best analogy is. &gt;&gt; I don't know what the best analogy is. It's like someone who's trying to eat It's like someone who's trying to eat It's like someone who's trying to eat clean and that you're constantly clean and that you're constantly clean and that you're constantly handing them junk food or um handing them junk food or um handing them junk food or um &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; you know, and I enjoy social media, but &gt;&gt; you know, and I enjoy social media, but &gt;&gt; you know, and I enjoy social media, but I like to make it a designated time. So I like to make it a designated time. So I like to make it a designated time. So getting out for a walk in 20 minutes getting out for a walk in 20 minutes getting out for a walk in 20 minutes &gt;&gt; and put the I would say put the phone &gt;&gt; and put the I would say put the phone &gt;&gt; and put the I would say put the phone in. &gt;&gt; Put the phone away. The whole basis here &gt;&gt; Put the phone away. The whole basis here &gt;&gt; Put the phone away. The whole basis here seems to be allowing your brain to go seems to be allowing your brain to go seems to be allowing your brain to go into kind of if I take it to its logical into kind of if I take it to its logical into kind of if I take it to its logical conclusion to kind of its necessary conclusion to kind of its necessary conclusion to kind of its necessary state to reset state to reset state to reset &gt;&gt; maybe &gt;&gt; maybe &gt;&gt; maybe this state of getting into nature and this state of getting into nature and this state of getting into nature and let's call it uh highfractal let's call it uh highfractal let's call it uh highfractal environments &gt;&gt; is similar or should be similar to the &gt;&gt; is similar or should be similar to the &gt;&gt; is similar or should be similar to the way that we've started to talk about way that we've started to talk about way that we've started to talk about sleep. &gt;&gt; You know prior to 200 &gt;&gt; You know prior to 200 &gt;&gt; You know prior to 200 15, maybe it was 2018. 15, maybe it was 2018. 15, maybe it was 2018. Um, the notion was sleep when you're Um, the notion was sleep when you're Um, the notion was sleep when you're dead. Um, you know, Matt Walker, UC dead. Um, you know, Matt Walker, UC dead. Um, you know, Matt Walker, UC Berkeley with the book Why We Sleep Berkeley with the book Why We Sleep Berkeley with the book Why We Sleep transformed what we now understand and I transformed what we now understand and I transformed what we now understand and I and others have been, you know, arguing and others have been, you know, arguing and others have been, you know, arguing that people need sleep. Now, I think that people need sleep. Now, I think that people need sleep. Now, I think everyone understands if you don't sleep, everyone understands if you don't sleep, everyone understands if you don't sleep, your mental health, your physical your mental health, your physical your mental health, your physical health, yep, health, yep, health, yep, &gt;&gt; your performance, &gt;&gt; your performance, &gt;&gt; your performance, &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; drops dramatically. You need sleep. And &gt;&gt; drops dramatically. You need sleep. And &gt;&gt; drops dramatically. You need sleep. And Matt has educated us that you need Matt has educated us that you need Matt has educated us that you need slowwave sleep, you need rapid eye slowwave sleep, you need rapid eye slowwave sleep, you need rapid eye movement sleep. Maybe we also need these movement sleep. Maybe we also need these movement sleep. Maybe we also need these um highfractal environments. And the um highfractal environments. And the um highfractal environments. And the fact that they come in their best form fact that they come in their best form fact that they come in their best form through walks in nature when we're not through walks in nature when we're not through walks in nature when we're not doing anything else, just like you doing anything else, just like you doing anything else, just like you wouldn't want to I don't know, you don't wouldn't want to I don't know, you don't wouldn't want to I don't know, you don't want to bring the phone into the bedroom want to bring the phone into the bedroom want to bring the phone into the bedroom kind of thing. kind of thing. kind of thing. &gt;&gt; Um late at night because you're not &gt;&gt; Um late at night because you're not &gt;&gt; Um late at night because you're not going to get your deep sleep because going to get your deep sleep because going to get your deep sleep because you're going to go to sleep too late and you're going to go to sleep too late and you're going to go to sleep too late and then you miss out on the opportunity for then you miss out on the opportunity for then you miss out on the opportunity for deep sleep, right? Um deep sleep, right? Um deep sleep, right? Um I love the idea that these waking states I love the idea that these waking states I love the idea that these waking states become uh better understood as and become uh better understood as and become uh better understood as and perhaps even requirements. I feel like perhaps even requirements. I feel like perhaps even requirements. I feel like we understand so much about sleep. Slow we understand so much about sleep. Slow we understand so much about sleep. Slow wave sleep, growth hormone, REM sleep, wave sleep, growth hormone, REM sleep, wave sleep, growth hormone, REM sleep, emotional repair, and everyone now it's emotional repair, and everyone now it's emotional repair, and everyone now it's like cool, we need sleep. Here are the like cool, we need sleep. Here are the like cool, we need sleep. Here are the different states of sleep. We actually different states of sleep. We actually different states of sleep. We actually know very little, it seems, about waking know very little, it seems, about waking know very little, it seems, about waking states and the requirement for different states and the requirement for different states and the requirement for different waking states because if you stay up all waking states because if you stay up all waking states because if you stay up all night, &gt;&gt; you entirely expect to not be at your &gt;&gt; you entirely expect to not be at your &gt;&gt; you entirely expect to not be at your best the next day. best the next day. best the next day. &gt;&gt; But I have a feeling that based on your &gt;&gt; But I have a feeling that based on your &gt;&gt; But I have a feeling that based on your work that we're doing all sorts of work that we're doing all sorts of work that we're doing all sorts of things that are making us far less than things that are making us far less than things that are making us far less than our natural best. our natural best. our natural best. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; And that some of us who are clinically &gt;&gt; And that some of us who are clinically &gt;&gt; And that some of us who are clinically diagnosed with things diagnosed with things diagnosed with things &gt;&gt; I haven't been clinically diagnosed with &gt;&gt; I haven't been clinically diagnosed with &gt;&gt; I haven't been clinically diagnosed with ADHD. If anything, I'd probably veer ADHD. If anything, I'd probably veer ADHD. If anything, I'd probably veer more towards the OCD side of things when more towards the OCD side of things when more towards the OCD side of things when it comes to work. it comes to work. it comes to work. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; but my guess is that if we understand &gt;&gt; but my guess is that if we understand &gt;&gt; but my guess is that if we understand and engage in the proper waking states and engage in the proper waking states and engage in the proper waking states that our lives are going to improve that our lives are going to improve that our lives are going to improve marketkedly irrespective of whether or marketkedly irrespective of whether or marketkedly irrespective of whether or not we need medication. I mean that can not we need medication. I mean that can not we need medication. I mean that can only be determined it seems when we're only be determined it seems when we're only be determined it seems when we're doing the right behavioral things. doing the right behavioral things. doing the right behavioral things. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; So what are your thoughts? This is a big &gt;&gt; So what are your thoughts? This is a big &gt;&gt; So what are your thoughts? This is a big question, but what are your thoughts on question, but what are your thoughts on question, but what are your thoughts on really &gt;&gt; starting to understand what the &gt;&gt; starting to understand what the &gt;&gt; starting to understand what the different waking states are? different waking states are? different waking states are? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And our requirements for waking states, &gt;&gt; And our requirements for waking states, &gt;&gt; And our requirements for waking states, because I feel like that's pretty much because I feel like that's pretty much because I feel like that's pretty much what your work's about. what your work's about. what your work's about. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's right. That's right. And I &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's right. That's right. And I &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's right. That's right. And I think um you know, the social media and think um you know, the social media and think um you know, the social media and things on the phone are kind of like the things on the phone are kind of like the things on the phone are kind of like the junk food. They're just ruining our junk food. They're just ruining our junk food. They're just ruining our waking states to a large extent. And I waking states to a large extent. And I waking states to a large extent. And I think what we're what we're talking a think what we're what we're talking a think what we're what we're talking a lot about with um lot about with um lot about with um this attention restoration theory and this attention restoration theory and this attention restoration theory and walking in nature is that we need walking in nature is that we need walking in nature is that we need breaks. you need breaks during your breaks. you need breaks during your breaks. you need breaks during your waking time or if like you were talking waking time or if like you were talking waking time or if like you were talking about before that if we want to get into about before that if we want to get into about before that if we want to get into a state where we are going to be able to a state where we are going to be able to a state where we are going to be able to concentrate well maybe you have to take concentrate well maybe you have to take concentrate well maybe you have to take the nature walk first to kind of to kind the nature walk first to kind of to kind the nature walk first to kind of to kind of recharge the battery even you know of recharge the battery even you know of recharge the battery even you know right at the beginning of the day. So I right at the beginning of the day. So I right at the beginning of the day. So I think there's two elements there. One is think there's two elements there. One is think there's two elements there. One is that there's a lot of stuff that we're that there's a lot of stuff that we're that there's a lot of stuff that we're doing during our waking hours that's doing during our waking hours that's doing during our waking hours that's depleting directed attention and we want depleting directed attention and we want depleting directed attention and we want to mitigate a lot of that stuff. The to mitigate a lot of that stuff. The to mitigate a lot of that stuff. The other thing is that you can't work 10 other thing is that you can't work 10 other thing is that you can't work 10 hours straight. I mean I don't I maybe hours straight. I mean I don't I maybe hours straight. I mean I don't I maybe some people say they can but I just some people say they can but I just some people say they can but I just don't think people really can direct don't think people really can direct don't think people really can direct their attention for 10 hours straight. I their attention for 10 hours straight. I their attention for 10 hours straight. I think &gt;&gt; not continuously. &gt;&gt; not continuously. &gt;&gt; not continuously. &gt;&gt; Not continuously. in talking to a lot of &gt;&gt; Not continuously. in talking to a lot of &gt;&gt; Not continuously. in talking to a lot of writers um because working on this book. writers um because working on this book. writers um because working on this book. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Most writers who are like career writers &gt;&gt; Most writers who are like career writers &gt;&gt; Most writers who are like career writers will say that the most number of hours will say that the most number of hours will say that the most number of hours that they can do really focused writing that they can do really focused writing that they can do really focused writing per day on a regular basis is four. per day on a regular basis is four. per day on a regular basis is four. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; And some even say three. &gt;&gt; And some even say three. &gt;&gt; And some even say three. &gt;&gt; Some say five, but four seems to be the &gt;&gt; Some say five, but four seems to be the &gt;&gt; Some say five, but four seems to be the average. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; and that's where their entire day and &gt;&gt; and that's where their entire day and &gt;&gt; and that's where their entire day and night is dedicated to creating that four night is dedicated to creating that four night is dedicated to creating that four hours typically in the morning. Although hours typically in the morning. Although hours typically in the morning. Although some wrote at night, most wrote early in some wrote at night, most wrote early in some wrote at night, most wrote early in the morning the morning the morning &gt;&gt; and that after 4 hours they are &gt;&gt; and that after 4 hours they are &gt;&gt; and that after 4 hours they are saturated &gt;&gt; that the brain just can't do it &gt;&gt; that the brain just can't do it &gt;&gt; that the brain just can't do it &gt;&gt; right. So I think there's this element &gt;&gt; right. So I think there's this element &gt;&gt; right. So I think there's this element of during our waking hours protecting of during our waking hours protecting of during our waking hours protecting directed attention and then also doing directed attention and then also doing directed attention and then also doing these nature interventions as your these nature interventions as your these nature interventions as your breaks. &gt;&gt; I mean I love this. I mean I'm big on &gt;&gt; I mean I love this. I mean I'm big on &gt;&gt; I mean I love this. I mean I'm big on getting sunlight in the morning. I try getting sunlight in the morning. I try getting sunlight in the morning. I try to see a horizon when I do it. The to see a horizon when I do it. The to see a horizon when I do it. The reason I don't talk about that so reason I don't talk about that so reason I don't talk about that so broadly is many people don't live in broadly is many people don't live in broadly is many people don't live in environments where they can catch a environments where they can catch a environments where they can catch a horizon and I go up on my roof through a horizon and I go up on my roof through a horizon and I go up on my roof through a trap door, you know, and I don't want trap door, you know, and I don't want trap door, you know, and I don't want people falling off of roofs and EBMA is people falling off of roofs and EBMA is people falling off of roofs and EBMA is what people do with information. Um, what people do with information. Um, what people do with information. Um, &gt;&gt; at the same time, &gt;&gt; at the same time, &gt;&gt; at the same time, &gt;&gt; if I don't do that, I find it &gt;&gt; if I don't do that, I find it &gt;&gt; if I don't do that, I find it &gt;&gt; very difficult to ratchet into work in &gt;&gt; very difficult to ratchet into work in &gt;&gt; very difficult to ratchet into work in the same way. the same way. the same way. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, I mean, I think again to take a step I mean, I think again to take a step I mean, I think again to take a step back, what I think is so important about back, what I think is so important about back, what I think is so important about your work is that you've identified at your work is that you've identified at your work is that you've identified at least one and clearly uh several least one and clearly uh several least one and clearly uh several ways that we can reset our levels, maybe ways that we can reset our levels, maybe ways that we can reset our levels, maybe even improve our abilities at directed even improve our abilities at directed even improve our abilities at directed attention. And again, I don't want to demonize And again, I don't want to demonize And again, I don't want to demonize social media. social media. social media. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But social media is um it's a commercial &gt;&gt; But social media is um it's a commercial &gt;&gt; But social media is um it's a commercial product that we're engaging in and we product that we're engaging in and we product that we're engaging in and we get returns in likes, follows, and Some get returns in likes, follows, and Some get returns in likes, follows, and Some people get paid on there, but for the people get paid on there, but for the people get paid on there, but for the most part, it's a it's a business, most part, it's a it's a business, most part, it's a it's a business, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um that and we're the customer, &gt;&gt; Um that and we're the customer, &gt;&gt; Um that and we're the customer, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And they're the owner, &gt;&gt; And they're the owner, &gt;&gt; And they're the owner, &gt;&gt; right? And I'm just saying it you're &gt;&gt; right? And I'm just saying it you're &gt;&gt; right? And I'm just saying it you're it's using directed attention like it's using directed attention like it's using directed attention like it's not a restful activity is basically so not a restful activity is basically so not a restful activity is basically so you can choose to spend your directed you can choose to spend your directed you can choose to spend your directed attention allocation on that, but then attention allocation on that, but then attention allocation on that, but then you're going to have less, you're going to have less, you're going to have less, you know, for your work or for other you know, for your work or for other you know, for your work or for other things. So, is it fair to say that things. So, is it fair to say that things. So, is it fair to say that low cognitive demand activities are not low cognitive demand activities are not low cognitive demand activities are not always restorative? always restorative? always restorative? &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; I think people need to really understand &gt;&gt; I think people need to really understand &gt;&gt; I think people need to really understand that and hear that. I think because when that and hear that. I think because when that and hear that. I think because when I think about like okay like yesterday I think about like okay like yesterday I think about like okay like yesterday I recorded a solo on the podcast and those recorded a solo on the podcast and those recorded a solo on the podcast and those are extremely I don't use a teleprompter are extremely I don't use a teleprompter are extremely I don't use a teleprompter except for ads because those have proper except for ads because those have proper except for ads because those have proper wording for legal reasons. wording for legal reasons. wording for legal reasons. &gt;&gt; The amount of attentional demand is &gt;&gt; The amount of attentional demand is &gt;&gt; The amount of attentional demand is immense, &gt;&gt; right? So I didn't do this but in the &gt;&gt; right? So I didn't do this but in the &gt;&gt; right? So I didn't do this but in the past I would finish up go home and I past I would finish up go home and I past I would finish up go home and I would you know I find that scrolling would you know I find that scrolling would you know I find that scrolling social media it feels relax you can do social media it feels relax you can do social media it feels relax you can do it reclined if I just want I it's it reclined if I just want I it's it reclined if I just want I it's passive participation unless I'm posting passive participation unless I'm posting passive participation unless I'm posting or commenting like you maybe use my or commenting like you maybe use my or commenting like you maybe use my thumb you know like you know uh and like thumb you know like you know uh and like thumb you know like you know uh and like some things but some things but some things but &gt;&gt; even though it's low cognitive demand &gt;&gt; even though it's low cognitive demand &gt;&gt; even though it's low cognitive demand it's draining is what you're saying it's draining is what you're saying it's draining is what you're saying &gt;&gt; exactly and I mean that's you know &gt;&gt; exactly and I mean that's you know &gt;&gt; exactly and I mean that's you know Steve and I wrote this paper back in Steve and I wrote this paper back in Steve and I wrote this paper back in 2010 10, you know, then it was still 2010 10, you know, then it was still 2010 10, you know, then it was still television was still the kind of low television was still the kind of low television was still the kind of low cognitive load activity that we thought cognitive load activity that we thought cognitive load activity that we thought was not restful. And there's all these was not restful. And there's all these was not restful. And there's all these studies on television that people studies on television that people studies on television that people watching television after they watch for watching television after they watch for watching television after they watch for a couple hours, they report being a couple hours, they report being a couple hours, they report being fatigued and being irritable. fatigued and being irritable. fatigued and being irritable. &gt;&gt; Does cognitive performance decline after &gt;&gt; Does cognitive performance decline after &gt;&gt; Does cognitive performance decline after &gt;&gt; cognitive performance decline? So, so &gt;&gt; cognitive performance decline? So, so &gt;&gt; cognitive performance decline? So, so it's just even though it's low cognitive it's just even though it's low cognitive it's just even though it's low cognitive load, it's depleting. It's load, it's depleting. It's load, it's depleting. It's depleting of directed attention. Well, depleting of directed attention. Well, depleting of directed attention. Well, I'm really extreme about this stuff and I'm really extreme about this stuff and I'm really extreme about this stuff and I'm excited to be able to I'm excited to be able to I'm excited to be able to incorporate uh more knowledge toward incorporate uh more knowledge toward incorporate uh more knowledge toward creating better opportunities for creating better opportunities for creating better opportunities for directed attention to the right things directed attention to the right things directed attention to the right things and not depleting that. I mean, I'm so and not depleting that. I mean, I'm so and not depleting that. I mean, I'm so maniacal that like before I'll do a maniacal that like before I'll do a maniacal that like before I'll do a solo, I'll tell my assistant um when he solo, I'll tell my assistant um when he solo, I'll tell my assistant um when he comes to the house in the morning, like comes to the house in the morning, like comes to the house in the morning, like please don't talk to me today. I'm please don't talk to me today. I'm please don't talk to me today. I'm sorry. I don't want to be rude, but I sorry. I don't want to be rude, but I sorry. I don't want to be rude, but I need to keep rehearsing it in my head. need to keep rehearsing it in my head. need to keep rehearsing it in my head. Yeah, &gt;&gt; I need to keep &gt;&gt; I need to keep &gt;&gt; I need to keep &gt;&gt; not the specific words but the concepts &gt;&gt; not the specific words but the concepts &gt;&gt; not the specific words but the concepts in mind literally thinking about like in mind literally thinking about like in mind literally thinking about like the structure of the vag nerve and the structure of the vag nerve and the structure of the vag nerve and constantly for usually about 48 hours constantly for usually about 48 hours constantly for usually about 48 hours before &gt;&gt; in the same way that &gt;&gt; in the same way that &gt;&gt; in the same way that &gt;&gt; like you would obsess over something &gt;&gt; like you would obsess over something &gt;&gt; like you would obsess over something &gt;&gt; and then once it's done it's done &gt;&gt; and then once it's done it's done &gt;&gt; and then once it's done it's done &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; but anything that's introduced there &gt;&gt; but anything that's introduced there &gt;&gt; but anything that's introduced there like having to make a decision like having to make a decision like having to make a decision about what to eat for breakfast about what to eat for breakfast about what to eat for breakfast &gt;&gt; is interference &gt;&gt; is interference &gt;&gt; is interference &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; the brain is amazing but we're not that &gt;&gt; the brain is amazing but we're not that &gt;&gt; the brain is amazing but we're not that great at using our brain to its best great at using our brain to its best great at using our brain to its best advantage always. advantage always. advantage always. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or our bodies. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or our bodies. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or our bodies. &gt;&gt; Well put. &gt;&gt; Well put. &gt;&gt; Well put. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that we get back &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that we get back &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that we get back into this uh discussion about into this uh discussion about into this uh discussion about rumination. So you discovered that rumination. So you discovered that rumination. So you discovered that depressed people ruminate about their depressed people ruminate about their depressed people ruminate about their problem in nature in a way that allows problem in nature in a way that allows problem in nature in a way that allows them to dump the problem. We don't know them to dump the problem. We don't know them to dump the problem. We don't know if depress if people with depression if depress if people with depression if depress if people with depression ruminate by the problems. We in the ruminate by the problems. We in the ruminate by the problems. We in the experiment we kind of force them to experiment we kind of force them to experiment we kind of force them to ruminate. to ruminate. to ruminate. um to see if people are in this um to see if people are in this um to see if people are in this ruinative state, would nature still have ruinative state, would nature still have ruinative state, would nature still have a benefit? And it turns out that it did. a benefit? And it turns out that it did. a benefit? And it turns out that it did. Now, one thing that we were kind of Now, one thing that we were kind of Now, one thing that we were kind of wondering about is like do people just wondering about is like do people just wondering about is like do people just maybe they just think less about their maybe they just think less about their maybe they just think less about their problems in nature than the urban problems in nature than the urban problems in nature than the urban environment. And we found that wasn't environment. And we found that wasn't environment. And we found that wasn't true. We were also kind of this is true. We were also kind of this is true. We were also kind of this is actually work that we did um with Ethan actually work that we did um with Ethan actually work that we did um with Ethan Cross uh and actually my wife Cross uh and actually my wife Cross uh and actually my wife Katherine Kurpin was also uh an author Katherine Kurpin was also uh an author Katherine Kurpin was also uh an author on this study. We also thought maybe on this study. We also thought maybe on this study. We also thought maybe that um maybe interacting with nature that um maybe interacting with nature that um maybe interacting with nature might put you in this more third-party might put you in this more third-party might put you in this more third-party distance kind of state. So instead of distance kind of state. So instead of distance kind of state. So instead of saying you know Mark is so unhappy or saying you know Mark is so unhappy or saying you know Mark is so unhappy or instead of saying I'm so unhappy you'd instead of saying I'm so unhappy you'd instead of saying I'm so unhappy you'd say Mark is unhappy you know this say Mark is unhappy you know this say Mark is unhappy you know this distant state. We didn't find evidence distant state. We didn't find evidence distant state. We didn't find evidence of that too. It wasn't that people of that too. It wasn't that people of that too. It wasn't that people thought about their problems from a more thought about their problems from a more thought about their problems from a more distanced perspective in nature either. distanced perspective in nature either. distanced perspective in nature either. So, so what I think is happening is I So, so what I think is happening is I So, so what I think is happening is I think we just increase their directed think we just increase their directed think we just increase their directed attention. And when you increase attention. And when you increase attention. And when you increase directed attention, you're able to do directed attention, you're able to do directed attention, you're able to do lots of things and maybe um they lots of things and maybe um they lots of things and maybe um they could just deal with the ruminations could just deal with the ruminations could just deal with the ruminations better because they had more cognitive better because they had more cognitive better because they had more cognitive resources to deal with those problems. resources to deal with those problems. resources to deal with those problems. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklnt.com/huberman, spelled drinklnt.com/huberman, spelled drinklnt.com/huberman, to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. You to claim a free sample pack. You to claim a free sample pack. You mentioned impulsivity, uh, aggression, mentioned impulsivity, uh, aggression, mentioned impulsivity, uh, aggression, and the probability of committing a and the probability of committing a and the probability of committing a crime. Uh, you have some data that, um, crime. Uh, you have some data that, um, crime. Uh, you have some data that, um, there are these ways of reducing there are these ways of reducing there are these ways of reducing impulsivity more broadly. Yeah. more broadly. Yeah. more broadly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. Um, I don't think impulsivity is &gt;&gt; Right. Um, I don't think impulsivity is &gt;&gt; Right. Um, I don't think impulsivity is something that something that something that &gt;&gt; most people think they deal with, but &gt;&gt; most people think they deal with, but &gt;&gt; most people think they deal with, but I'll tell you, if you've ever found I'll tell you, if you've ever found I'll tell you, if you've ever found yourself picking up your phone just cuz yourself picking up your phone just cuz yourself picking up your phone just cuz everyone else did, that's impulsivity. everyone else did, that's impulsivity. everyone else did, that's impulsivity. And and by the way, I think perhaps I've And and by the way, I think perhaps I've And and by the way, I think perhaps I've been a little bit unfair to social been a little bit unfair to social been a little bit unfair to social media. Uh and I've spared the media. Uh and I've spared the media. Uh and I've spared the equally or maybe even more pernitious equally or maybe even more pernitious equally or maybe even more pernitious thing of modern life, which is texting. thing of modern life, which is texting. thing of modern life, which is texting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I mean, it's amazing to me on a plane &gt;&gt; I mean, it's amazing to me on a plane &gt;&gt; I mean, it's amazing to me on a plane how hard it is for people to disengage how hard it is for people to disengage how hard it is for people to disengage from texting. And it's also amazing to from texting. And it's also amazing to from texting. And it's also amazing to me how me how me how &gt;&gt; we can all get into like three or four &gt;&gt; we can all get into like three or four &gt;&gt; we can all get into like three or four conversations over text or three or four conversations over text or three or four conversations over text or three or four conversations with one person within a conversations with one person within a conversations with one person within a text thread. I mean, if that were text thread. I mean, if that were text thread. I mean, if that were converted into like actual dialogue, converted into like actual dialogue, converted into like actual dialogue, it'd be crazy. It' be, it'd be crazy. It' be, it'd be crazy. It' be, &gt;&gt; you know, it'd be like switching back &gt;&gt; you know, it'd be like switching back &gt;&gt; you know, it'd be like switching back and forth between four different and forth between four different and forth between four different conversations. I mean, I mean, that conversations. I mean, I mean, that conversations. I mean, I mean, that party &gt;&gt; is nuts, &gt;&gt; is nuts, &gt;&gt; is nuts, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; But in the form of texting, it's like &gt;&gt; But in the form of texting, it's like &gt;&gt; But in the form of texting, it's like we're doing it. Are there any data we're doing it. Are there any data we're doing it. Are there any data on what texting is doing to directed on what texting is doing to directed on what texting is doing to directed attention? &gt;&gt; I haven't seen any on it, but I again I &gt;&gt; I haven't seen any on it, but I again I &gt;&gt; I haven't seen any on it, but I again I would say it's got to be depleting. would say it's got to be depleting. would say it's got to be depleting. There was some interesting work um There was some interesting work um There was some interesting work um actually I think by one of your actually I think by one of your actually I think by one of your colleagues at Stanford Anthony Wagner colleagues at Stanford Anthony Wagner colleagues at Stanford Anthony Wagner who did work on these multimedia who did work on these multimedia who did work on these multimedia multitaskers. So people that text So people that text So people that text uh and are doing email or social media uh and are doing email or social media uh and are doing email or social media and you know something on the computer and you know something on the computer and you know something on the computer like you're using multiple media devices like you're using multiple media devices like you're using multiple media devices simultaneously does that train attention simultaneously does that train attention simultaneously does that train attention or does it deplete attention and I think or does it deplete attention and I think or does it deplete attention and I think those studies is quite evident that it those studies is quite evident that it those studies is quite evident that it depletes attention it's not training depletes attention it's not training depletes attention it's not training people's attention it's just depleting people's attention it's just depleting people's attention it's just depleting their attention um so I would say yeah I their attention um so I would say yeah I their attention um so I would say yeah I you know managing all those convers I you know managing all those convers I you know managing all those convers conversations is going to be very taxing conversations is going to be very taxing conversations is going to be very taxing of directed attention. Again, and I'm of directed attention. Again, and I'm of directed attention. Again, and I'm not somebody who's totally against not somebody who's totally against not somebody who's totally against smartphones. I have a smartphone. I smartphones. I have a smartphone. I smartphones. I have a smartphone. I don't do social media, but I do text a don't do social media, but I do text a don't do social media, but I do text a lot. Um lot. Um lot. Um I guess I try not to always be so fast, I guess I try not to always be so fast, I guess I try not to always be so fast, you know. I say sometimes I'm just you know. I say sometimes I'm just you know. I say sometimes I'm just going to have my time um and not going to have my time um and not going to have my time um and not always be so fast to respond. Um but always be so fast to respond. Um but always be so fast to respond. Um but it's hard. It's very difficult. You it's hard. It's very difficult. You it's hard. It's very difficult. You have to be really mindful and protective have to be really mindful and protective have to be really mindful and protective of your directed attention. of your directed attention. of your directed attention. &gt;&gt; And people get angry if they have kind &gt;&gt; And people get angry if they have kind &gt;&gt; And people get angry if they have kind of an expectation of response latency of an expectation of response latency of an expectation of response latency and then you depart from that, and then you depart from that, and then you depart from that, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Which is just nerd speak for sometimes &gt;&gt; Which is just nerd speak for sometimes &gt;&gt; Which is just nerd speak for sometimes I'll text back fast, sometimes it will I'll text back fast, sometimes it will I'll text back fast, sometimes it will take me several weeks or months. take me several weeks or months. take me several weeks or months. &gt;&gt; I think that's starting to normalize a &gt;&gt; I think that's starting to normalize a &gt;&gt; I think that's starting to normalize a little bit out there because of the little bit out there because of the little bit out there because of the sheer volume of communication that sheer volume of communication that sheer volume of communication that people are getting. A few years ago that people are getting. A few years ago that people are getting. A few years ago that was considered rude. Right. I've heard was considered rude. Right. I've heard was considered rude. Right. I've heard more and more discussions that I have more and more discussions that I have more and more discussions that I have no, you know, no real knowledge of what no, you know, no real knowledge of what no, you know, no real knowledge of what the discussions were, but there was a the discussions were, but there was a the discussions were, but there was a there's a very popular podcast um in there's a very popular podcast um in there's a very popular podcast um in particular for women um where the host particular for women um where the host particular for women um where the host was talking about this the other day. was talking about this the other day. was talking about this the other day. Someone sent it to me. There's like, oh, Someone sent it to me. There's like, oh, Someone sent it to me. There's like, oh, it's uh the texting 3 weeks it's uh the texting 3 weeks it's uh the texting 3 weeks later thing is becoming a norm. I later thing is becoming a norm. I later thing is becoming a norm. I think some people are just bombarded think some people are just bombarded think some people are just bombarded with text messages. I guess that with text messages. I guess that with text messages. I guess that our species is really good at creating our species is really good at creating our species is really good at creating technologies and then figuring out like technologies and then figuring out like technologies and then figuring out like darn like we need to backtrack a little darn like we need to backtrack a little darn like we need to backtrack a little bit, right? bit, right? bit, right? &gt;&gt; Um because all the programs so like um &gt;&gt; Um because all the programs so like um &gt;&gt; Um because all the programs so like um the program freedom for instance which the program freedom for instance which the program freedom for instance which shuts down the internet for a certain shuts down the internet for a certain shuts down the internet for a certain interval of time on your computer. That interval of time on your computer. That interval of time on your computer. That was great. Hardly anyone uses it. was great. Hardly anyone uses it. was great. Hardly anyone uses it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And hardly any of the people I know who &gt;&gt; And hardly any of the people I know who &gt;&gt; And hardly any of the people I know who used to use it use it anymore. Forgive used to use it use it anymore. Forgive used to use it use it anymore. Forgive me uh freedom uh designers. But it's me uh freedom uh designers. But it's me uh freedom uh designers. But it's like it starts to just disappear like it starts to just disappear like it starts to just disappear because the culture drifts in a in a new because the culture drifts in a in a new because the culture drifts in a in a new way, &gt;&gt; right? Um, and people like Cal Newport &gt;&gt; right? Um, and people like Cal Newport &gt;&gt; right? Um, and people like Cal Newport or you who don't have social media or me or you who don't have social media or me or you who don't have social media or me who put social media on a separate phone who put social media on a separate phone who put social media on a separate phone and takes a month to reply to a text and takes a month to reply to a text and takes a month to reply to a text unless it's urgent, unless it's urgent, unless it's urgent, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um, we're considered the weirdos. &gt;&gt; Um, we're considered the weirdos. &gt;&gt; Um, we're considered the weirdos. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's hard, but &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's hard, but &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's hard, but again, it's you know, I've seen people again, it's you know, I've seen people again, it's you know, I've seen people that like on email where they'll have an that like on email where they'll have an that like on email where they'll have an auto reply that just says I'm not going auto reply that just says I'm not going auto reply that just says I'm not going to respond really quickly or I only to respond really quickly or I only to respond really quickly or I only respond to email, you know, at this time respond to email, you know, at this time respond to email, you know, at this time and this time, you know, and this time, you know, and this time, you know, and I think that makes sense, you know, I think that makes sense, you know, I think that makes sense, you know, again, because we have to protect our again, because we have to protect our again, because we have to protect our directed attention. We're just not going directed attention. We're just not going directed attention. We're just not going to be to be to be um good functioning humans if we're just um good functioning humans if we're just um good functioning humans if we're just constantly being depleted. I read a constantly being depleted. I read a constantly being depleted. I read a study from Wendy Suzuki's lab uh at NYU study from Wendy Suzuki's lab uh at NYU study from Wendy Suzuki's lab uh at NYU a few years ago that people that do 13 a few years ago that people that do 13 a few years ago that people that do 13 minutes a day of mindfulness meditation, minutes a day of mindfulness meditation, minutes a day of mindfulness meditation, so basically sitting or lying down, so basically sitting or lying down, so basically sitting or lying down, closing one's eyes, focusing on their closing one's eyes, focusing on their closing one's eyes, focusing on their breathing, and breathing, and breathing, and &gt;&gt; constantly refocusing their attention as &gt;&gt; constantly refocusing their attention as &gt;&gt; constantly refocusing their attention as it drifts uh back to a location kind of it drifts uh back to a location kind of it drifts uh back to a location kind of like right in the middle of their like right in the middle of their like right in the middle of their forehead. Uh they observed improvements forehead. Uh they observed improvements forehead. Uh they observed improvements in memory tasks. Um, but actually in memory tasks. Um, but actually in memory tasks. Um, but actually decrements in sleep were mentioned there decrements in sleep were mentioned there decrements in sleep were mentioned there if especially if they did it too late in if especially if they did it too late in if especially if they did it too late in the day. And meditation to me always the day. And meditation to me always the day. And meditation to me always seemed like a focusing exercise. seemed like a focusing exercise. seemed like a focusing exercise. &gt;&gt; And so while it's relaxing because &gt;&gt; And so while it's relaxing because &gt;&gt; And so while it's relaxing because you're not jogging or socially engaging, you're not jogging or socially engaging, you're not jogging or socially engaging, it's cognitively demanding because you it's cognitively demanding because you it's cognitively demanding because you have to constantly bring your attention have to constantly bring your attention have to constantly bring your attention back. &gt;&gt; So for many years we thought of &gt;&gt; So for many years we thought of &gt;&gt; So for many years we thought of meditation as a reset. I think of meditation as a reset. I think of meditation as a reset. I think of meditation as focus training. meditation as focus training. meditation as focus training. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Not a reset. What you're talking about &gt;&gt; Not a reset. What you're talking about &gt;&gt; Not a reset. What you're talking about with nature walks is a reset. with nature walks is a reset. with nature walks is a reset. &gt;&gt; Reset. Yeah. And uh it's interesting &gt;&gt; Reset. Yeah. And uh it's interesting &gt;&gt; Reset. Yeah. And uh it's interesting because yeah there was a paper uh Tang I because yeah there was a paper uh Tang I because yeah there was a paper uh Tang I can't remember first name and Michael can't remember first name and Michael can't remember first name and Michael Pner they did some meditation results Pner they did some meditation results Pner they did some meditation results and then they and they found these kind and then they and they found these kind and then they and they found these kind of improvements in attention after of improvements in attention after of improvements in attention after meditation and they're kind of meditation and they're kind of meditation and they're kind of contacting me because I was doing this contacting me because I was doing this contacting me because I was doing this nature stuff and uh they ask me do you nature stuff and uh they ask me do you nature stuff and uh they ask me do you think it's the same mechanism and I was think it's the same mechanism and I was think it's the same mechanism and I was saying no I don't think it's the same saying no I don't think it's the same saying no I don't think it's the same mechanism that as you're saying mechanism that as you're saying mechanism that as you're saying Andrew that this meditation is very Andrew that this meditation is very Andrew that this meditation is very focused lots of directed attention right focused lots of directed attention right focused lots of directed attention right Whereas what I'm talking about in nature Whereas what I'm talking about in nature Whereas what I'm talking about in nature is sort of like eliminating the need for is sort of like eliminating the need for is sort of like eliminating the need for any directed attention that it's all any directed attention that it's all any directed attention that it's all just kind of mind wandering and just kind of mind wandering and just kind of mind wandering and involuntary attention. So I think um involuntary attention. So I think um involuntary attention. So I think um even though maybe you can get some of even though maybe you can get some of even though maybe you can get some of the same results at the end, I think the same results at the end, I think the same results at the end, I think they're very different mechanisms. What they're very different mechanisms. What they're very different mechanisms. What I do find fascinating is that I think in I do find fascinating is that I think in I do find fascinating is that I think in a lot of ancient meditation practices a lot of ancient meditation practices a lot of ancient meditation practices often they try to do it in beautiful often they try to do it in beautiful often they try to do it in beautiful nature. And I wonder if they knew nature. And I wonder if they knew nature. And I wonder if they knew something that actually they could something that actually they could something that actually they could meditate better in this beautiful nature meditate better in this beautiful nature meditate better in this beautiful nature because while they were using directed because while they were using directed because while they were using directed attention to meditate, being immersed in attention to meditate, being immersed in attention to meditate, being immersed in the beautiful nature was also sort of the beautiful nature was also sort of the beautiful nature was also sort of restoring directed attention at the same restoring directed attention at the same restoring directed attention at the same time. So I do kind of wonder sometimes time. So I do kind of wonder sometimes time. So I do kind of wonder sometimes if maybe combining them you could get if maybe combining them you could get if maybe combining them you could get some really interesting results. But but some really interesting results. But but some really interesting results. But but exactly you know being in nature to me exactly you know being in nature to me exactly you know being in nature to me is not a meditative process. It's it's a is not a meditative process. It's it's a is not a meditative process. It's it's a much more passive kind of cognitive much more passive kind of cognitive much more passive kind of cognitive process. &gt;&gt; So I think we need to distinguish &gt;&gt; So I think we need to distinguish &gt;&gt; So I think we need to distinguish between passive and restorative between passive and restorative between passive and restorative &gt;&gt; and passive and depleting. &gt;&gt; and passive and depleting. &gt;&gt; and passive and depleting. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; And it should be obvious which things &gt;&gt; And it should be obvious which things &gt;&gt; And it should be obvious which things fall into which categories. And then fall into which categories. And then fall into which categories. And then there are things that are perhaps there are things that are perhaps there are things that are perhaps &gt;&gt; passive and restorative but go beyond &gt;&gt; passive and restorative but go beyond &gt;&gt; passive and restorative but go beyond restorative. They might even be passive restorative. They might even be passive restorative. They might even be passive restorative and cognitive enhancing when restorative and cognitive enhancing when restorative and cognitive enhancing when you get back to work, you get back to work, you get back to work, &gt;&gt; back to focused attention on the real on &gt;&gt; back to focused attention on the real on &gt;&gt; back to focused attention on the real on the real stuff, the real stuff, the real stuff, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? And then the scary thought, which is And then the scary thought, which is And then the scary thought, which is probably true based on just real world probably true based on just real world probably true based on just real world observation, is that passive and observation, is that passive and observation, is that passive and depleting activities when you repeat depleting activities when you repeat depleting activities when you repeat them over time aren't just taking away them over time aren't just taking away them over time aren't just taking away your ability to engage directed your ability to engage directed your ability to engage directed attention later that day or the next attention later that day or the next attention later that day or the next day, but that over time the circuitry day, but that over time the circuitry day, but that over time the circuitry for directed attention in the brain is for directed attention in the brain is for directed attention in the brain is probably subject to plasticity in both probably subject to plasticity in both probably subject to plasticity in both directions. This is something that I've directions. This is something that I've directions. This is something that I've long been obsessed with. You know every long been obsessed with. You know every long been obsessed with. You know every neural circuit that we are aware of is neural circuit that we are aware of is neural circuit that we are aware of is available for plasticity. available for plasticity. available for plasticity. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; It requires focus, it requires alertness &gt;&gt; It requires focus, it requires alertness &gt;&gt; It requires focus, it requires alertness and it requires sleep. Those are the and it requires sleep. Those are the and it requires sleep. Those are the requirements, right? requirements, right? requirements, right? &gt;&gt; But it's also possible that the circuits &gt;&gt; But it's also possible that the circuits &gt;&gt; But it's also possible that the circuits for focus can strengthen. for focus can strengthen. for focus can strengthen. &gt;&gt; So you can get better at focusing by &gt;&gt; So you can get better at focusing by &gt;&gt; So you can get better at focusing by focusing, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um I certainly see that the more I do &gt;&gt; Um I certainly see that the more I do &gt;&gt; Um I certainly see that the more I do focused work, the better I get at it and focused work, the better I get at it and focused work, the better I get at it and the longer I can do it. There's a the longer I can do it. There's a the longer I can do it. There's a threshold there, threshold there, threshold there, &gt;&gt; but &gt;&gt; but &gt;&gt; but &gt;&gt; but also if I take time away from it for &gt;&gt; but also if I take time away from it for &gt;&gt; but also if I take time away from it for a while, it gets yes, I can replenish, a while, it gets yes, I can replenish, a while, it gets yes, I can replenish, but just like exercise, eventually you but just like exercise, eventually you but just like exercise, eventually you start to atrophy, start to atrophy, start to atrophy, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And it could be that passive and &gt;&gt; And it could be that passive and &gt;&gt; And it could be that passive and depleting stuff repeated for enough depleting stuff repeated for enough depleting stuff repeated for enough years kind of brings you to a state of years kind of brings you to a state of years kind of brings you to a state of like really true ADHD. like really true ADHD. like really true ADHD. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. Maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. Maybe &gt;&gt; like maybe you fall into clinical ADHD &gt;&gt; like maybe you fall into clinical ADHD &gt;&gt; like maybe you fall into clinical ADHD that probably existed before, but maybe that probably existed before, but maybe that probably existed before, but maybe we see it so much more now because we see it so much more now because we see it so much more now because people I mean this is the equivalent of people I mean this is the equivalent of people I mean this is the equivalent of mental obesity. mental obesity. mental obesity. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Basically, &gt;&gt; Basically, &gt;&gt; Basically, &gt;&gt; right? or mental metabolic syndrome. &gt;&gt; right? or mental metabolic syndrome. &gt;&gt; right? or mental metabolic syndrome. I don't let's just be direct. Mental I don't let's just be direct. Mental I don't let's just be direct. Mental obesity, right? If you don't exercise obesity, right? If you don't exercise obesity, right? If you don't exercise enough for long enough, chances are enough for long enough, chances are enough for long enough, chances are you're going to end up overweight or you're going to end up overweight or you're going to end up overweight or obese. &gt;&gt; Certainly with metabolic syndrome. &gt;&gt; Certainly with metabolic syndrome. &gt;&gt; Certainly with metabolic syndrome. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And unfortunately too, you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And unfortunately too, you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And unfortunately too, you know, like these technology things are like these technology things are like these technology things are addictive and you know, most addictive and you know, most addictive and you know, most addictions just are not healthy, right? addictions just are not healthy, right? addictions just are not healthy, right? So, um then it's hard to get out once So, um then it's hard to get out once So, um then it's hard to get out once you start. Um that is an interesting you start. Um that is an interesting you start. Um that is an interesting term, mental obesity. Um there was this term, mental obesity. Um there was this term, mental obesity. Um there was this interesting paper that kind of looked at interesting paper that kind of looked at interesting paper that kind of looked at how our collective intelligence, how our how our collective intelligence, how our how our collective intelligence, how our collective attention span has sort of collective attention span has sort of collective attention span has sort of changed. They looked at just a short changed. They looked at just a short changed. They looked at just a short time window, but like uh tweet hashtags, time window, but like uh tweet hashtags, time window, but like uh tweet hashtags, you know, maybe they used to last for 40 you know, maybe they used to last for 40 you know, maybe they used to last for 40 hours, you know, be popular now it's hours, you know, be popular now it's hours, you know, be popular now it's down to 20 hours. Uh move if you look at down to 20 hours. Uh move if you look at down to 20 hours. Uh move if you look at movie ticket sales like the best um you movie ticket sales like the best um you movie ticket sales like the best um you know, the most popular movies, they were know, the most popular movies, they were know, the most popular movies, they were more popular most popular for three more popular most popular for three more popular most popular for three months. Now it's like one and a half months. Now it's like one and a half months. Now it's like one and a half months. like it's just maybe our months. like it's just maybe our months. like it's just maybe our collective attention span has kind of collective attention span has kind of collective attention span has kind of shrinking a little bit and we've kind of shrinking a little bit and we've kind of shrinking a little bit and we've kind of been wondering like does that does that been wondering like does that does that been wondering like does that does that mean has our like individual directed mean has our like individual directed mean has our like individual directed attention kind of shrunk a little bit or attention kind of shrunk a little bit or attention kind of shrunk a little bit or is there just you know too many other is there just you know too many other is there just you know too many other possibilities that we're just too possibilities that we're just too possibilities that we're just too overwhelmed that that's causing that but overwhelmed that that's causing that but overwhelmed that that's causing that but it is something that is a bit worrisome it is something that is a bit worrisome it is something that is a bit worrisome um that um you know it's not just that um that um you know it's not just that um that um you know it's not just that we're having a lot of things and I'm we're having a lot of things and I'm we're having a lot of things and I'm speculating now it's not just that we speculating now it's not just that we speculating now it's not just that we have a lot of things vying of our have a lot of things vying of our have a lot of things vying of our directed attention. But if we're being directed attention. But if we're being directed attention. But if we're being so bombarded so much and as you say, so bombarded so much and as you say, so bombarded so much and as you say, we're kind of getting into these bad we're kind of getting into these bad we're kind of getting into these bad modes of thinking, could our directed modes of thinking, could our directed modes of thinking, could our directed attention span actually shrink? attention span actually shrink? attention span actually shrink? &gt;&gt; I believe it can and it is out there. &gt;&gt; I believe it can and it is out there. &gt;&gt; I believe it can and it is out there. I mean, to borrow from the mighty David I mean, to borrow from the mighty David I mean, to borrow from the mighty David Gogggins, who's kind of the I don't know Gogggins, who's kind of the I don't know Gogggins, who's kind of the I don't know if you're familiar with David, but if you're familiar with David, but if you're familiar with David, but author of Can't Hurt Me, and he's been author of Can't Hurt Me, and he's been author of Can't Hurt Me, and he's been on this podcast and a real proponent of on this podcast and a real proponent of on this podcast and a real proponent of doing hard things every single day, not doing hard things every single day, not doing hard things every single day, not because he wants to do them, but because he wants to do them, but because he wants to do them, but precisely because he doesn't want to do precisely because he doesn't want to do precisely because he doesn't want to do them. you know, forcing upon himself them. you know, forcing upon himself them. you know, forcing upon himself like real discipline. like real discipline. like real discipline. &gt;&gt; Um, he's the he's emblematic of that. &gt;&gt; Um, he's the he's emblematic of that. &gt;&gt; Um, he's the he's emblematic of that. &gt;&gt; He's also said, and this should be &gt;&gt; He's also said, and this should be &gt;&gt; He's also said, and this should be reassuring to people that nowadays it's reassuring to people that nowadays it's reassuring to people that nowadays it's easier than ever to be exceptional easier than ever to be exceptional easier than ever to be exceptional because all you have to do is overcome because all you have to do is overcome because all you have to do is overcome the urge to be on your phone as much, the urge to be on your phone as much, the urge to be on your phone as much, run a bit more. I mean, maybe what we're run a bit more. I mean, maybe what we're run a bit more. I mean, maybe what we're going to select for are the people who going to select for are the people who going to select for are the people who are very organized about their who are very organized about their who are very organized about their engagement with phones and social media. engagement with phones and social media. engagement with phones and social media. I mean, I will say coming from the Bay I mean, I will say coming from the Bay I mean, I will say coming from the Bay Area, I know a number of people who work Area, I know a number of people who work Area, I know a number of people who work for and have founded very large social for and have founded very large social for and have founded very large social media platforms. media platforms. media platforms. &gt;&gt; They're not on their phones all day, &gt;&gt; They're not on their phones all day, &gt;&gt; They're not on their phones all day, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; They're definitely not. And their kids &gt;&gt; They're definitely not. And their kids &gt;&gt; They're definitely not. And their kids aren't either. Their kids aren't either. aren't either. Their kids aren't either. aren't either. Their kids aren't either. So, you're a father of four. So, you're a father of four. So, you're a father of four. &gt;&gt; Are there things that you do with your &gt;&gt; Are there things that you do with your &gt;&gt; Are there things that you do with your kids to encourage the um buildup and kids to encourage the um buildup and kids to encourage the um buildup and reinforcement of these circuits? reinforcement of these circuits? reinforcement of these circuits? Certainly, their brains are still Certainly, their brains are still Certainly, their brains are still plastic. Um, and a lot of people plastic. Um, and a lot of people plastic. Um, and a lot of people listening to this have kids, um, or are listening to this have kids, um, or are listening to this have kids, um, or are kids and would like to know what they kids and would like to know what they kids and would like to know what they should do. Is it should do. Is it should do. Is it &gt;&gt; exactly what adults should do, &gt;&gt; exactly what adults should do, &gt;&gt; exactly what adults should do, &gt;&gt; you know? Um, so I try to practice what &gt;&gt; you know? Um, so I try to practice what &gt;&gt; you know? Um, so I try to practice what I preach. It's hard because all of their I preach. It's hard because all of their I preach. It's hard because all of their friends have the technologies, too. My friends have the technologies, too. My friends have the technologies, too. My oldest daughter does have a smartphone, oldest daughter does have a smartphone, oldest daughter does have a smartphone, but she doesn't have any uh social but she doesn't have any uh social but she doesn't have any uh social media. Um, she uses it mostly to text media. Um, she uses it mostly to text media. Um, she uses it mostly to text her friends and play Dualingo or her friends and play Dualingo or her friends and play Dualingo or something like that. Um, something like that. Um, something like that. Um, you know, I try to get them to go out in you know, I try to get them to go out in you know, I try to get them to go out in nature as much as possible. Sometimes nature as much as possible. Sometimes nature as much as possible. Sometimes they're hesitant or dad, I don't they don't want hesitant or dad, I don't they don't want hesitant or dad, I don't they don't want to do it. But, um, we definitely try to do it. But, um, we definitely try to do it. But, um, we definitely try to get them outside, uh, as much as get them outside, uh, as much as get them outside, uh, as much as possible. Um, and even, you know, when possible. Um, and even, you know, when possible. Um, and even, you know, when we get to go on vacation once in a we get to go on vacation once in a we get to go on vacation once in a while, my wife's family, um, we're while, my wife's family, um, we're while, my wife's family, um, we're fortunate they have like a little cabin fortunate they have like a little cabin fortunate they have like a little cabin uh, in northern Ontario that we go to uh, in northern Ontario that we go to uh, in northern Ontario that we go to and there's, you know, there's really no and there's, you know, there's really no and there's, you know, there's really no internet there or anything and the kids internet there or anything and the kids internet there or anything and the kids are just running around with their are just running around with their are just running around with their cousins and playing in the lake and, you cousins and playing in the lake and, you cousins and playing in the lake and, you know, doing just normal kid things. And know, doing just normal kid things. And know, doing just normal kid things. And you know, I think you've had Jonathan you know, I think you've had Jonathan you know, I think you've had Jonathan Height on the on the podcast and he kind Height on the on the podcast and he kind Height on the on the podcast and he kind of talked about this um and he said, you of talked about this um and he said, you of talked about this um and he said, you know, the kids have to have more free know, the kids have to have more free know, the kids have to have more free play. And the thing that I would just play. And the thing that I would just play. And the thing that I would just kind of add to what Johnson is saying, I kind of add to what Johnson is saying, I kind of add to what Johnson is saying, I would say you want them to have more would say you want them to have more would say you want them to have more free play in nature and we want them free play in nature and we want them free play in nature and we want them getting out in nature more. And I think, getting out in nature more. And I think, getting out in nature more. And I think, you know, back to um uh what's it you know, back to um uh what's it you know, back to um uh what's it Gogggins was his name? Gogggins was his name? Gogggins was his name? &gt;&gt; David Gogggins. &gt;&gt; David Gogggins. &gt;&gt; David Gogggins. &gt;&gt; David Gogggins. &gt;&gt; David Gogggins. &gt;&gt; David Gogggins. &gt;&gt; I do agree too that we should do hard &gt;&gt; I do agree too that we should do hard &gt;&gt; I do agree too that we should do hard things. Um, and I think taking breaks in things. Um, and I think taking breaks in things. Um, and I think taking breaks in nature actually allows us to do more nature actually allows us to do more nature actually allows us to do more hard things. That's, you know, just like hard things. That's, you know, just like hard things. That's, you know, just like you can't lift weights continuously all you can't lift weights continuously all you can't lift weights continuously all day long, every day. You got to rest. day long, every day. You got to rest. day long, every day. You got to rest. You and you got to take good rest. And I You and you got to take good rest. And I You and you got to take good rest. And I think the nature breaks are the good think the nature breaks are the good think the nature breaks are the good mental rest which is going to allow you mental rest which is going to allow you mental rest which is going to allow you then to later do the heavy cognitive then to later do the heavy cognitive then to later do the heavy cognitive work better. So, but many of us are not work better. So, but many of us are not work better. So, but many of us are not taking good rest breaks. We're taking good rest breaks. We're taking good rest breaks. We're taking bad rest breaks. And I think if we can bad rest breaks. And I think if we can bad rest breaks. And I think if we can eliminate those bad rest breaks and eliminate those bad rest breaks and eliminate those bad rest breaks and substitute in the good nature rest substitute in the good nature rest substitute in the good nature rest breaks, people are just going to be much breaks, people are just going to be much breaks, people are just going to be much healthier cognitively, physically, you healthier cognitively, physically, you healthier cognitively, physically, you know, socially. know, socially. know, socially. &gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to offer something &gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to offer something &gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to offer something controversial, but uh with a purpose. Uh I did a but uh with a purpose. Uh I did a but uh with a purpose. Uh I did a episode on alcohol about that. episode on alcohol about that. episode on alcohol about that. Basically, the conclusion was zero is Basically, the conclusion was zero is Basically, the conclusion was zero is better than any and two a week is better than any and two a week is better than any and two a week is probably fine and yes, it's poison and probably fine and yes, it's poison and probably fine and yes, it's poison and um remains one of our most popular um remains one of our most popular um remains one of our most popular episodes. But even though I'm not a episodes. But even though I'm not a episodes. But even though I'm not a drinker, um you have to kind of wonder drinker, um you have to kind of wonder drinker, um you have to kind of wonder whether the uh kind of doing away with whether the uh kind of doing away with whether the uh kind of doing away with happy hour, which by the way used to be happy hour, which by the way used to be happy hour, which by the way used to be every day at the end of work, every day at the end of work, every day at the end of work, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; created this gap for &gt;&gt; created this gap for &gt;&gt; created this gap for passive depleting stuff to come in. And passive depleting stuff to come in. And passive depleting stuff to come in. And it kind of raises this question of like, it kind of raises this question of like, it kind of raises this question of like, well, was happy hour restorative? And well, was happy hour restorative? And well, was happy hour restorative? And just to give people a clear sense of how just to give people a clear sense of how just to give people a clear sense of how pervasive &gt;&gt; happy hour with alcohol was when I first &gt;&gt; happy hour with alcohol was when I first &gt;&gt; happy hour with alcohol was when I first was a graduate student at Berkeley and was a graduate student at Berkeley and was a graduate student at Berkeley and uh was at Tolman Hall. So first I was at uh was at Tolman Hall. So first I was at uh was at Tolman Hall. So first I was at Berkeley and then I did a diff a second Berkeley and then I did a diff a second Berkeley and then I did a diff a second uh graduate degree elsewhere. But when I uh graduate degree elsewhere. But when I uh graduate degree elsewhere. But when I was at Tolman Hall, there was this was at Tolman Hall, there was this was at Tolman Hall, there was this library in the psychology building. And library in the psychology building. And library in the psychology building. And I was told that up until just three I was told that up until just three I was told that up until just three years before, so I that was in 1998. It years before, so I that was in 1998. It years before, so I that was in 1998. It was customary for people to gather in was customary for people to gather in was customary for people to gather in the library for drinks every day at the library for drinks every day at the library for drinks every day at the end of the day and that for many end of the day and that for many end of the day and that for many decades prior the founders of this of decades prior the founders of this of decades prior the founders of this of Frank Beach and all those guys used to Frank Beach and all those guys used to Frank Beach and all those guys used to get together and get like really drunk get together and get like really drunk get together and get like really drunk at the end of each day and go home, walk at the end of each day and go home, walk at the end of each day and go home, walk home hopefully, not drive home and then home hopefully, not drive home and then home hopefully, not drive home and then spend time with their families and then spend time with their families and then spend time with their families and then &gt;&gt; get up the next morning, drink coffee &gt;&gt; get up the next morning, drink coffee &gt;&gt; get up the next morning, drink coffee and go back to work. And so, you know, and go back to work. And so, you know, and go back to work. And so, you know, alcohol culture, drinking culture, alcohol culture, drinking culture, alcohol culture, drinking culture, &gt;&gt; was a big part of how people socialize &gt;&gt; was a big part of how people socialize &gt;&gt; was a big part of how people socialize and decompress at the end of the day. we and decompress at the end of the day. we and decompress at the end of the day. we know it's not good for you. You'll live know it's not good for you. You'll live know it's not good for you. You'll live a shorter life um and has a bunch of a shorter life um and has a bunch of a shorter life um and has a bunch of other issues with it and what happens other issues with it and what happens other issues with it and what happens when people drink together etc. that can when people drink together etc. that can when people drink together etc. that can often not be good. But the point here is often not be good. But the point here is often not be good. But the point here is I think for many people who have I think for many people who have I think for many people who have families but especially who don't have families but especially who don't have families but especially who don't have families the sort of the number of families the sort of the number of families the sort of the number of healthy ways to reset healthy ways to reset healthy ways to reset &gt;&gt; in the evening uh to reset on a weekend &gt;&gt; in the evening uh to reset on a weekend &gt;&gt; in the evening uh to reset on a weekend in non-destructive ways in non-destructive ways in non-destructive ways &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; is has become more limited &gt;&gt; is has become more limited &gt;&gt; is has become more limited &gt;&gt; in part because what's offered to us as &gt;&gt; in part because what's offered to us as &gt;&gt; in part because what's offered to us as passive restoration passive restoration passive restoration &gt;&gt; I'm realizing today is passive depletion &gt;&gt; I'm realizing today is passive depletion &gt;&gt; I'm realizing today is passive depletion &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; so do we bring back happy hour. &gt;&gt; so do we bring back happy hour. &gt;&gt; so do we bring back happy hour. &gt;&gt; Maybe maybe with uh maybe with &gt;&gt; Maybe maybe with uh maybe with &gt;&gt; Maybe maybe with uh maybe with non-alcoholic beverages or something. non-alcoholic beverages or something. non-alcoholic beverages or something. &gt;&gt; The happy hour is probably good &gt;&gt; The happy hour is probably good &gt;&gt; The happy hour is probably good socially, but I'm not sure it was so socially, but I'm not sure it was so socially, but I'm not sure it was so good for directed attention. good for directed attention. good for directed attention. &gt;&gt; Do they still do a happy hour in your &gt;&gt; Do they still do a happy hour in your &gt;&gt; Do they still do a happy hour in your department? You're chair of a department department? You're chair of a department department? You're chair of a department at University of Chicago. They used to at University of Chicago. They used to at University of Chicago. They used to do graduate student happy hour every do graduate student happy hour every do graduate student happy hour every Friday when I was a graduate student. Friday when I was a graduate student. Friday when I was a graduate student. Wow. And a volleyball game. And then Wow. And a volleyball game. And then Wow. And a volleyball game. And then people go out to dinner. people go out to dinner. people go out to dinner. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And this was prior to smartphones. &gt;&gt; And this was prior to smartphones. &gt;&gt; And this was prior to smartphones. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh right at the right as smartphones &gt;&gt; Uh right at the right as smartphones &gt;&gt; Uh right at the right as smartphones showed up because it was two or 2000 was showed up because it was two or 2000 was showed up because it was two or 2000 was when I started my PhD. Um, and it was when I started my PhD. Um, and it was when I started my PhD. Um, and it was really nice. I didn't always go. I was really nice. I didn't always go. I was really nice. I didn't always go. I was often in lab late working. Uh, but I often in lab late working. Uh, but I often in lab late working. Uh, but I would go sometimes. would go sometimes. would go sometimes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um, I feel like being on one's phone is &gt;&gt; Um, I feel like being on one's phone is &gt;&gt; Um, I feel like being on one's phone is not that. not that. not that. &gt;&gt; It's not a volleyball game with friends. &gt;&gt; It's not a volleyball game with friends. &gt;&gt; It's not a volleyball game with friends. It was a friendly volleyball game, It was a friendly volleyball game, It was a friendly volleyball game, meaning if you weren't good at meaning if you weren't good at meaning if you weren't good at volleyball, like people didn't give you volleyball, like people didn't give you volleyball, like people didn't give you a hard time, right? a hard time, right? a hard time, right? &gt;&gt; Um, and then people would go out for &gt;&gt; Um, and then people would go out for &gt;&gt; Um, and then people would go out for dinner and drinks, dinner and drinks, dinner and drinks, &gt;&gt; right? We do happy hours once in a &gt;&gt; right? We do happy hours once in a &gt;&gt; right? We do happy hours once in a while. I think it's kind of funny after while. I think it's kind of funny after while. I think it's kind of funny after co I kind of felt like co I kind of felt like co I kind of felt like students didn't always know how to students didn't always know how to students didn't always know how to interact with faculty anymore. There was interact with faculty anymore. There was interact with faculty anymore. There was kind of this weird dynamic. So the happy kind of this weird dynamic. So the happy kind of this weird dynamic. So the happy hours have been kind of a good way to hours have been kind of a good way to hours have been kind of a good way to kind of reset and you know show that kind of reset and you know show that kind of reset and you know show that we're all colleagues and um you know we're all colleagues and um you know we're all colleagues and um you know kind of help uh students to interact kind of help uh students to interact kind of help uh students to interact more with faculty and faculty to more with faculty and faculty to more with faculty and faculty to interact more with students. I think one interact more with students. I think one interact more with students. I think one thing, you know, about the reset is thing, you know, about the reset is thing, you know, about the reset is I didn't say this, but I think the I didn't say this, but I think the I didn't say this, but I think the going in nature also has to be solitary going in nature also has to be solitary going in nature also has to be solitary to really get the benefit. You if you're to really get the benefit. You if you're to really get the benefit. You if you're going with a friend, you're going to be going with a friend, you're going to be going with a friend, you're going to be chit cchatting with the friend. That's chit cchatting with the friend. That's chit cchatting with the friend. That's going to take directed attention. When I going to take directed attention. When I going to take directed attention. When I take my kids in nature, it's good for my take my kids in nature, it's good for my take my kids in nature, it's good for my kids, but I'm I don't count that as kids, but I'm I don't count that as kids, but I'm I don't count that as necessarily restorative experience for necessarily restorative experience for necessarily restorative experience for me. &gt;&gt; You're tracking their positions. We got &gt;&gt; You're tracking their positions. We got &gt;&gt; You're tracking their positions. We got four little ones, so that's your that's four little ones, so that's your that's four little ones, so that's your that's your evolutionary task, you know. So I your evolutionary task, you know. So I your evolutionary task, you know. So I have to carve out time where I can go on have to carve out time where I can go on have to carve out time where I can go on my own and um I think you know there's my own and um I think you know there's my own and um I think you know there's different buckets. I think there's a different buckets. I think there's a different buckets. I think there's a bucket for you know getting the good bucket for you know getting the good bucket for you know getting the good social interaction. And so I don't I'm social interaction. And so I don't I'm social interaction. And so I don't I'm not advocating that people do like throw not advocating that people do like throw not advocating that people do like throw and you build a cabin in the woods and you build a cabin in the woods and you build a cabin in the woods and you're just there solo. I'm kind of more you're just there solo. I'm kind of more you're just there solo. I'm kind of more advocating for these kind of advocating for these kind of advocating for these kind of micro doses of nature to kind of bump micro doses of nature to kind of bump micro doses of nature to kind of bump directed attention up. Can you bring a directed attention up. Can you bring a directed attention up. Can you bring a dog? &gt;&gt; I think a dog would work well. A &gt;&gt; I think a dog would work well. A &gt;&gt; I think a dog would work well. A dog doesn't require a conversation, no dog doesn't require a conversation, no dog doesn't require a conversation, no words, no language. Um, you know, as a words, no language. Um, you know, as a words, no language. Um, you know, as a log as a dog is pretty well behaved. I log as a dog is pretty well behaved. I log as a dog is pretty well behaved. I think that would work too. And dogs, you think that would work too. And dogs, you think that would work too. And dogs, you know, in some sense that's also kind of know, in some sense that's also kind of know, in some sense that's also kind of I mean, we're part of nature. Dogs are I mean, we're part of nature. Dogs are I mean, we're part of nature. Dogs are part of nature. And, you know, in some part of nature. And, you know, in some part of nature. And, you know, in some elements to me, too, I think dogs are elements to me, too, I think dogs are elements to me, too, I think dogs are kind of softly fascinating and kind of softly fascinating and kind of softly fascinating and interesting. Um, but I do think these interesting. Um, but I do think these interesting. Um, but I do think these nature to get the really most bang for nature to get the really most bang for nature to get the really most bang for your buck for these nature experiences, your buck for these nature experiences, your buck for these nature experiences, they do have to be solitary, they do have to be solitary, they do have to be solitary, &gt;&gt; right? So, minimum 20 minutes. Uh, but &gt;&gt; right? So, minimum 20 minutes. Uh, but &gt;&gt; right? So, minimum 20 minutes. Uh, but perhaps on the weekend you can get out perhaps on the weekend you can get out perhaps on the weekend you can get out for longer if you can't do it every day for longer if you can't do it every day for longer if you can't do it every day because I because I because I &gt;&gt; I'm not going to say I can't, but I &gt;&gt; I'm not going to say I can't, but I &gt;&gt; I'm not going to say I can't, but I think many people aren't going to manage think many people aren't going to manage think many people aren't going to manage 20 minutes in nature every single day by 20 minutes in nature every single day by 20 minutes in nature every single day by themselves, right? themselves, right? themselves, right? &gt;&gt; But if you can, it sounds like a &gt;&gt; But if you can, it sounds like a &gt;&gt; But if you can, it sounds like a terrific thing to do. And certainly terrific thing to do. And certainly terrific thing to do. And certainly people are going to start thinking about people are going to start thinking about people are going to start thinking about new concepts like soft fascination and new concepts like soft fascination and new concepts like soft fascination and directed attention and the ability to directed attention and the ability to directed attention and the ability to restore directed attention if something restore directed attention if something restore directed attention if something is actually restorative versus passively is actually restorative versus passively is actually restorative versus passively depleting. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that I ask you about &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that I ask you about &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that I ask you about stroke, diabetes, and heart disease. You stroke, diabetes, and heart disease. You stroke, diabetes, and heart disease. You have some really interesting data that have some really interesting data that have some really interesting data that people who people who people who &gt;&gt; take on this practice of getting into &gt;&gt; take on this practice of getting into &gt;&gt; take on this practice of getting into nature can actually improve their health nature can actually improve their health nature can actually improve their health outcomes beyond just being able to focus outcomes beyond just being able to focus outcomes beyond just being able to focus better. &gt;&gt; Right? So there there's you know there's &gt;&gt; Right? So there there's you know there's &gt;&gt; Right? So there there's you know there's all this incredible work on physical all this incredible work on physical all this incredible work on physical health benefits of nature. Now of course health benefits of nature. Now of course health benefits of nature. Now of course mind and body are united and you know mind and body are united and you know mind and body are united and you know that's one thing that we talk about in that's one thing that we talk about in that's one thing that we talk about in the book that it's mind body are united the book that it's mind body are united the book that it's mind body are united and that we have to deal with the and that we have to deal with the and that we have to deal with the environment too. But it's interesting environment too. But it's interesting environment too. But it's interesting that there have been these studies about that there have been these studies about that there have been these studies about um these incredible physical health um these incredible physical health um these incredible physical health benefits that people get from benefits that people get from benefits that people get from interacting with nature. And and one of interacting with nature. And and one of interacting with nature. And and one of the most incredible ones, I don't know the most incredible ones, I don't know the most incredible ones, I don't know if you're familiar with this, Andrew, if you're familiar with this, Andrew, if you're familiar with this, Andrew, was a study done by Roger Olrich in the was a study done by Roger Olrich in the was a study done by Roger Olrich in the 1980s. And what Roger Alrich uh was looking at And what Roger Alrich uh was looking at And what Roger Alrich uh was looking at was a hospital corridor in this hospital was a hospital corridor in this hospital was a hospital corridor in this hospital in Philadelphia. in Philadelphia. in Philadelphia. And he looked at in these hospital And he looked at in these hospital And he looked at in these hospital rooms, what view did they have out of rooms, what view did they have out of rooms, what view did they have out of the window of these hospital rooms? And the window of these hospital rooms? And the window of these hospital rooms? And some of the hospital rooms had views of some of the hospital rooms had views of some of the hospital rooms had views of modest nature like tree and some shrubs. modest nature like tree and some shrubs. modest nature like tree and some shrubs. Others were just looking out to a brick Others were just looking out to a brick Others were just looking out to a brick wall. And it was interesting that um And it was interesting that um And it was interesting that um patients who were recovering from patients who were recovering from patients who were recovering from gallbladder surgery when they had the gallbladder surgery when they had the gallbladder surgery when they had the view of nature out of their window, this view of nature out of their window, this view of nature out of their window, this modest view of nature, they recovered modest view of nature, they recovered modest view of nature, they recovered from gallbladder surgery a day earlier from gallbladder surgery a day earlier from gallbladder surgery a day earlier and they use less pain medication and they use less pain medication and they use less pain medication compared to the people that had the view compared to the people that had the view compared to the people that had the view of the brick wall. And what's cool about of the brick wall. And what's cool about of the brick wall. And what's cool about this study is that it wasn't um you know this study is that it wasn't um you know this study is that it wasn't um you know didn't have the power to randomly put didn't have the power to randomly put didn't have the power to randomly put people in different rooms, but people in different rooms, but people in different rooms, but essentially patients were just randomly put into patients were just randomly put into patients were just randomly put into these different hospital rooms. So it's these different hospital rooms. So it's these different hospital rooms. So it's not like healthier people got the views not like healthier people got the views not like healthier people got the views of nature or wealthier people got the of nature or wealthier people got the of nature or wealthier people got the views of nature. These patients were views of nature. These patients were views of nature. These patients were just randomly just randomly just randomly uh placed into these different uh placed into these different uh placed into these different hospital rooms and the ones that have hospital rooms and the ones that have hospital rooms and the ones that have the modest view of nature recovered the modest view of nature recovered the modest view of nature recovered faster from gallbladder surgery and use faster from gallbladder surgery and use faster from gallbladder surgery and use less pain medication. And you got to be less pain medication. And you got to be less pain medication. And you got to be thinking what's up with that? Like thinking what's up with that? Like thinking what's up with that? Like what's the mechanism there? what's the mechanism there? what's the mechanism there? I don't think it's air quality. I don't think it's air quality. I don't think it's air quality. I don't think the people with the views I don't think the people with the views I don't think the people with the views of nature somehow exercised more. There of nature somehow exercised more. There of nature somehow exercised more. There is something about the aesthetic of is something about the aesthetic of is something about the aesthetic of nature that can also be physically nature that can also be physically nature that can also be physically healing. I mean, that's pretty wild. Um healing. I mean, that's pretty wild. Um healing. I mean, that's pretty wild. Um we kind of followed up on that um in a we kind of followed up on that um in a we kind of followed up on that um in a study that we did in Toronto which was study that we did in Toronto which was study that we did in Toronto which was kind of cool. We had um health data from kind of cool. We had um health data from kind of cool. We had um health data from about 30,000 people in Toronto and then about 30,000 people in Toronto and then about 30,000 people in Toronto and then we had two incredible data sets to we had two incredible data sets to we had two incredible data sets to quantify green space in people's quantify green space in people's quantify green space in people's neighborhoods that then we then could neighborhoods that then we then could neighborhoods that then we then could relate to health. So the University of relate to health. So the University of relate to health. So the University of Toronto forestry department had a data Toronto forestry department had a data Toronto forestry department had a data set where they cataloged every single set where they cataloged every single set where they cataloged every single tree on public land in the city of tree on public land in the city of tree on public land in the city of Toronto. So we had data for 580,000 Toronto. So we had data for 580,000 Toronto. So we had data for 580,000 trees in the city of Toronto. We knew trees in the city of Toronto. We knew trees in the city of Toronto. We knew the uh species of the tree and the uh species of the tree and the uh species of the tree and the diameter of the tree at breast height. diameter of the tree at breast height. diameter of the tree at breast height. Basically saying how old the tree was. Basically saying how old the tree was. Basically saying how old the tree was. And then my student Omid Cardan And then my student Omid Cardan And then my student Omid Cardan calculated basically how much tree calculated basically how much tree calculated basically how much tree canopy each individual tree provided. canopy each individual tree provided. canopy each individual tree provided. Then we had this other data set that was Then we had this other data set that was Then we had this other data set that was satellite imagery of uh the whole city satellite imagery of uh the whole city satellite imagery of uh the whole city of Toronto where we could quantify all of Toronto where we could quantify all of Toronto where we could quantify all the other trees that were like in the other trees that were like in the other trees that were like in people's backyards or something like people's backyards or something like people's backyards or something like that. And from those data we basically that. And from those data we basically that. And from those data we basically related health the health data to the related health the health data to the related health the health data to the tree data. And we found uh so for one tree data. And we found uh so for one tree data. And we found uh so for one variable subjective. So how healthy do variable subjective. So how healthy do variable subjective. So how healthy do people uh think they are? How healthy do people uh think they are? How healthy do people uh think they are? How healthy do they feel? And we found that uh if you they feel? And we found that uh if you they feel? And we found that uh if you just added one tree on their city block just added one tree on their city block just added one tree on their city block that was related to a 1% increase in that was related to a 1% increase in that was related to a 1% increase in people's health perception. Now, that people's health perception. Now, that people's health perception. Now, that sounds pretty modest, but to get that sounds pretty modest, but to get that sounds pretty modest, but to get that equivalent benefit monetarily, you'd equivalent benefit monetarily, you'd equivalent benefit monetarily, you'd have to give everybody in that have to give everybody in that have to give everybody in that neighborhood $10,000 and have them move to a $10,000 and have them move to a $10,000 and have them move to a neighborhood that had immediate income neighborhood that had immediate income neighborhood that had immediate income that was $10,000 wealthier or it was that was $10,000 wealthier or it was that was $10,000 wealthier or it was also related with being seven years also related with being seven years also related with being seven years younger. And again, the tree effect was younger. And again, the tree effect was younger. And again, the tree effect was controlling for age, education, income. controlling for age, education, income. controlling for age, education, income. So, that was pretty interesting. So, that was pretty interesting. So, that was pretty interesting. We also had data on more objective We also had data on more objective We also had data on more objective health measures. Does somebody have a health measures. Does somebody have a health measures. Does somebody have a stroke? Did they have diabetes or heart stroke? Did they have diabetes or heart stroke? Did they have diabetes or heart disease? And there we found if you disease? And there we found if you disease? And there we found if you increased uh the amount of trees on the increased uh the amount of trees on the increased uh the amount of trees on the street by one tree per neighborhood, street by one tree per neighborhood, street by one tree per neighborhood, that was related to a 1% reduction uh in that was related to a 1% reduction uh in that was related to a 1% reduction uh in stroke, diabetes, and heart disease. stroke, diabetes, and heart disease. stroke, diabetes, and heart disease. Again, sounds pretty modest, but to get Again, sounds pretty modest, but to get Again, sounds pretty modest, but to get that equivalent benefit monetarily, that equivalent benefit monetarily, that equivalent benefit monetarily, you'd have to give every household in you'd have to give every household in you'd have to give every household in that neighborhood $20,000. Have them all that neighborhood $20,000. Have them all that neighborhood $20,000. Have them all move to a neighborhood that's $20,000 move to a neighborhood that's $20,000 move to a neighborhood that's $20,000 wealthier, or it was also related to wealthier, or it was also related to wealthier, or it was also related to being one and a half years younger. So, being one and a half years younger. So, being one and a half years younger. So, pretty incredible. Again, I can't say pretty incredible. Again, I can't say pretty incredible. Again, I can't say causality because it's correlational. causality because it's correlational. causality because it's correlational. Um, but I'm fairly confident in the Um, but I'm fairly confident in the Um, but I'm fairly confident in the direction because we're the worst case direction because we're the worst case direction because we're the worst case scenario is just healthier people choose scenario is just healthier people choose scenario is just healthier people choose to live in neighborhoods that have more to live in neighborhoods that have more to live in neighborhoods that have more trees. but they can't be younger, they trees. but they can't be younger, they trees. but they can't be younger, they can't be wealthier, they can't be more can't be wealthier, they can't be more can't be wealthier, they can't be more educated because we controlled for that. educated because we controlled for that. educated because we controlled for that. Now, for that study, maybe the mechanism Now, for that study, maybe the mechanism Now, for that study, maybe the mechanism could be air quality or maybe the could be air quality or maybe the could be air quality or maybe the mechanism could be, you know, maybe mechanism could be, you know, maybe mechanism could be, you know, maybe people are more willing to exercise if people are more willing to exercise if people are more willing to exercise if there's more trees on the street. Um, there's more trees on the street. Um, there's more trees on the street. Um, but pretty incredible stuff that but pretty incredible stuff that but pretty incredible stuff that just increasing the tree canopy a little just increasing the tree canopy a little just increasing the tree canopy a little bit, you could get these physical health bit, you could get these physical health bit, you could get these physical health benefits. &gt;&gt; That is impressive. For people that &gt;&gt; That is impressive. For people that &gt;&gt; That is impressive. For people that don't have the opportunity to plant more don't have the opportunity to plant more don't have the opportunity to plant more trees in their neighborhood, would trees in their neighborhood, would trees in their neighborhood, would getting and tending to an indoor plant getting and tending to an indoor plant getting and tending to an indoor plant have any positive effect? have any positive effect? have any positive effect? &gt;&gt; So, people have found some uh effects of &gt;&gt; So, people have found some uh effects of &gt;&gt; So, people have found some uh effects of having um indoor plants. I not having um indoor plants. I not having um indoor plants. I not necessarily to um these physical health necessarily to um these physical health necessarily to um these physical health benefits, but to some there's some benefits, but to some there's some benefits, but to some there's some attention benefits of having indoor attention benefits of having indoor attention benefits of having indoor greenery. There's also been some greenery. There's also been some greenery. There's also been some benefits um like hospitals now are benefits um like hospitals now are benefits um like hospitals now are starting to take this seriously that starting to take this seriously that starting to take this seriously that patients subjectively feel better when patients subjectively feel better when patients subjectively feel better when there's this greenery around. I've seen there's this greenery around. I've seen there's this greenery around. I've seen other work too that um people that are other work too that um people that are other work too that um people that are having uh some procedures that are very having uh some procedures that are very having uh some procedures that are very painful uh that actually bringing greenery into uh that actually bringing greenery into uh that actually bringing greenery into um the hospital rooms can be uh helpful um the hospital rooms can be uh helpful um the hospital rooms can be uh helpful for reducing feelings of pain. for reducing feelings of pain. for reducing feelings of pain. Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I'm about to embark on putting a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I'm about to embark on putting a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I'm about to embark on putting a bunch of plants in my place. I'm also a bunch of plants in my place. I'm also a bunch of plants in my place. I'm also a big um fan of fish tanks. as long as you big um fan of fish tanks. as long as you big um fan of fish tanks. as long as you take good care of them. Underwater take good care of them. Underwater take good care of them. Underwater scapes are really cool. And I like to scapes are really cool. And I like to scapes are really cool. And I like to think, I don't have any data on this, think, I don't have any data on this, think, I don't have any data on this, but I like to think that they are but I like to think that they are but I like to think that they are passive and restorative. Staring at a passive and restorative. Staring at a passive and restorative. Staring at a fish tank is um it's a lot like being in fish tank is um it's a lot like being in fish tank is um it's a lot like being in a dream. a dream. a dream. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a in Toronto there's a &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a in Toronto there's a &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a in Toronto there's a Ripley's aquarium and they have this um Ripley's aquarium and they have this um Ripley's aquarium and they have this um tank that's got kelp. tank that's got kelp. tank that's got kelp. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; And you can see the kelp kind of moving &gt;&gt; And you can see the kelp kind of moving &gt;&gt; And you can see the kelp kind of moving in the water. It it definitely feels in the water. It it definitely feels in the water. It it definitely feels very restorative. And watching the fish very restorative. And watching the fish very restorative. And watching the fish swim around also feels very swim around also feels very swim around also feels very restorative. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The feeling that might be familiar &gt;&gt; Yeah. The feeling that might be familiar &gt;&gt; Yeah. The feeling that might be familiar to people that visited, for instance, to people that visited, for instance, to people that visited, for instance, the Monterey Bear Aquarium or this the Monterey Bear Aquarium or this the Monterey Bear Aquarium or this aquarium that you're describing is aquarium that you're describing is aquarium that you're describing is &gt;&gt; when the tanks are at eye level or &gt;&gt; when the tanks are at eye level or &gt;&gt; when the tanks are at eye level or higher, &gt;&gt; um it puts you into this &gt;&gt; um it puts you into this &gt;&gt; um it puts you into this &gt;&gt; other world, right? Like you're at the &gt;&gt; other world, right? Like you're at the &gt;&gt; other world, right? Like you're at the bottom of the ocean or you're in the bottom of the ocean or you're in the bottom of the ocean or you're in the ocean. Yes. Uh, but the feeling that's ocean. Yes. Uh, but the feeling that's ocean. Yes. Uh, but the feeling that's always striking to me is when you leave always striking to me is when you leave always striking to me is when you leave an aquarium and you're out into the real an aquarium and you're out into the real an aquarium and you're out into the real world again, it feels so different. It's world again, it feels so different. It's world again, it feels so different. It's what you take away from it that's what you take away from it that's what you take away from it that's equally interesting. equally interesting. equally interesting. &gt;&gt; In the same way that when you walk out &gt;&gt; In the same way that when you walk out &gt;&gt; In the same way that when you walk out of a really great movie, of a really great movie, of a really great movie, &gt;&gt; the world feels different. &gt;&gt; the world feels different. &gt;&gt; the world feels different. &gt;&gt; Um, it feels lighter, brighter. It's of &gt;&gt; Um, it feels lighter, brighter. It's of &gt;&gt; Um, it feels lighter, brighter. It's of course physically brighter, but there's course physically brighter, but there's course physically brighter, but there's really something to it. The contrast really something to it. The contrast really something to it. The contrast between experiences, which is so much of between experiences, which is so much of between experiences, which is so much of what we're talking about today. what we're talking about today. what we're talking about today. I think a lot of people who have some I think a lot of people who have some I think a lot of people who have some aesthetic sense will be familiar with aesthetic sense will be familiar with aesthetic sense will be familiar with the experience of you know like seeing a the experience of you know like seeing a the experience of you know like seeing a building or walking into a space like oh building or walking into a space like oh building or walking into a space like oh this like feels good or um this doesn't this like feels good or um this doesn't this like feels good or um this doesn't feel right and sometimes they can point feel right and sometimes they can point feel right and sometimes they can point to the clutter or the lack of whatever to the clutter or the lack of whatever to the clutter or the lack of whatever it is you know some people are more it is you know some people are more it is you know some people are more designoriented what's this um phrase designoriented what's this um phrase designoriented what's this um phrase it's the fun f it's the fun f it's the fun f &gt;&gt; funue &gt;&gt; funue &gt;&gt; funue &gt;&gt; funue right uh what do we know about &gt;&gt; funue right uh what do we know about &gt;&gt; funue right uh what do we know about nature and physical spaces and how they nature and physical spaces and how they nature and physical spaces and how they impact how we feel or even how we think. impact how we feel or even how we think. impact how we feel or even how we think. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um it's a really interesting &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um it's a really interesting &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um it's a really interesting question and um there's a couple question and um there's a couple question and um there's a couple interesting things that we've done interesting things that we've done interesting things that we've done that's related to this. So one design that's related to this. So one design that's related to this. So one design concept that u people talk about quite a concept that u people talk about quite a concept that u people talk about quite a bit now is this idea of bofilic design. bit now is this idea of bofilic design. bit now is this idea of bofilic design. So kind of trying to mimic patterns of So kind of trying to mimic patterns of So kind of trying to mimic patterns of nature and architecture. Um, and like nature and architecture. Um, and like nature and architecture. Um, and like you can imagine like a Gaudy building you can imagine like a Gaudy building you can imagine like a Gaudy building in Barcelona that's got all the curves in Barcelona that's got all the curves in Barcelona that's got all the curves and you know Gaudy was trying to mimic and you know Gaudy was trying to mimic and you know Gaudy was trying to mimic um nature in a lot of his buildings and um nature in a lot of his buildings and um nature in a lot of his buildings and people really like that kind of people really like that kind of people really like that kind of architecture and uh so we collaborated with this and uh so we collaborated with this and uh so we collaborated with this architect Alex Coburn and we basically architect Alex Coburn and we basically architect Alex Coburn and we basically um took a bunch of building facades um took a bunch of building facades um took a bunch of building facades um and had people basically look at um and had people basically look at um and had people basically look at these facads and rate uh how much they these facads and rate uh how much they these facads and rate uh how much they like these buildings and building like these buildings and building like these buildings and building interiors. And we also had them um do this kind of And we also had them um do this kind of And we also had them um do this kind of game on the computer where we'd show game on the computer where we'd show game on the computer where we'd show them uh a few of these architectural uh them uh a few of these architectural uh them uh a few of these architectural uh scenes on the screen and they'd have to scenes on the screen and they'd have to scenes on the screen and they'd have to move them around like lumping the ones move them around like lumping the ones move them around like lumping the ones that are most similar together and that are most similar together and that are most similar together and lumping different ones uh somewhere lumping different ones uh somewhere lumping different ones uh somewhere else. And when we analyzed the data, we saw And when we analyzed the data, we saw And when we analyzed the data, we saw something really interesting, which is something really interesting, which is something really interesting, which is that um people kind of lumped together a that um people kind of lumped together a that um people kind of lumped together a lot of this architecture that had a lot of this architecture that had a lot of this architecture that had a lot of the fractal patterns kind of on one of the fractal patterns kind of on one of the fractal patterns kind of on one side and other kinds of architecture side and other kinds of architecture side and other kinds of architecture that was kind of more, you know, that was kind of more, you know, that was kind of more, you know, brutalist with the straight lines kind brutalist with the straight lines kind brutalist with the straight lines kind of on the other side. And when we had of on the other side. And when we had of on the other side. And when we had people actually another set of people actually another set of people actually another set of people rate these images for how natural they rate these images for how natural they rate these images for how natural they thought they were, thought they were, thought they were, people were actually using naturalness people were actually using naturalness people were actually using naturalness to make these similarity judgments to make these similarity judgments to make these similarity judgments suggesting that even in an architectural suggesting that even in an architectural suggesting that even in an architectural scene, people will like see nature in a scene, people will like see nature in a scene, people will like see nature in a building. Uh, and it may not even be building. Uh, and it may not even be building. Uh, and it may not even be conscious. And they like that kind of conscious. And they like that kind of conscious. And they like that kind of architecture better. They find it more architecture better. They find it more architecture better. They find it more comforting. And so, you know, again, comforting. And so, you know, again, comforting. And so, you know, again, when we're kind of talking about like a when we're kind of talking about like a when we're kind of talking about like a nature revolution like we do in the a nature revolution like we do in the a nature revolution like we do in the book, um it's maybe not just even about book, um it's maybe not just even about book, um it's maybe not just even about putting real nature in, but even putting real nature in, but even putting real nature in, but even building spaces, trying to mimic the building spaces, trying to mimic the building spaces, trying to mimic the patterns of nature that might also have patterns of nature that might also have patterns of nature that might also have some benefits. So, we found that to be some benefits. So, we found that to be some benefits. So, we found that to be pretty interesting. Another student of pretty interesting. Another student of pretty interesting. Another student of mine, Kate Schz, led another set of mine, Kate Schz, led another set of mine, Kate Schz, led another set of studies where we collaborated with this studies where we collaborated with this studies where we collaborated with this foundation that was called TKF foundation that was called TKF foundation that was called TKF Foundation. now is called Nature Sacred. Foundation. now is called Nature Sacred. Foundation. now is called Nature Sacred. And this was a foundation that built um And this was a foundation that built um And this was a foundation that built um many parks in the Baltimore, DC, many parks in the Baltimore, DC, many parks in the Baltimore, DC, Annapolis, Maryland area. And uh they Annapolis, Maryland area. And uh they Annapolis, Maryland area. And uh they built like a hundred of these parks. And built like a hundred of these parks. And built like a hundred of these parks. And what they also did in these parks is what they also did in these parks is what they also did in these parks is they would they would put a bench, this they would they would put a bench, this they would they would put a bench, this characteristic bench in the park, and uh characteristic bench in the park, and uh characteristic bench in the park, and uh underneath the bench was a journal. And underneath the bench was a journal. And underneath the bench was a journal. And people could write uh things in the people could write uh things in the people could write uh things in the journal. And so I found this foundation and I got And so I found this foundation and I got And so I found this foundation and I got a small grant from them to do some a small grant from them to do some a small grant from them to do some research with them and they actually research with them and they actually research with them and they actually transcribed all these journal entries transcribed all these journal entries transcribed all these journal entries uh digitally uh digitally uh digitally and we also had pictures of these parks. and we also had pictures of these parks. and we also had pictures of these parks. And so one thing that we did is we ran And so one thing that we did is we ran And so one thing that we did is we ran um a topic model on these uh journal um a topic model on these uh journal um a topic model on these uh journal entries to kind of see what are some entries to kind of see what are some entries to kind of see what are some themes that people are talking about and themes that people are talking about and themes that people are talking about and people a lot of these parks were people a lot of these parks were people a lot of these parks were actually near churches or hospitals. So actually near churches or hospitals. So actually near churches or hospitals. So people wrote concepts related to people wrote concepts related to people wrote concepts related to religion. They wrote things about religion. They wrote things about religion. They wrote things about nature. Um and they also wrote things nature. Um and they also wrote things nature. Um and they also wrote things related to spirituality. related to spirituality. related to spirituality. So one uh analysis that we did, we also So one uh analysis that we did, we also So one uh analysis that we did, we also had another set of people rate the parks had another set of people rate the parks had another set of people rate the parks for how natural they were based on the for how natural they were based on the for how natural they were based on the pictures. And we found that if the park pictures. And we found that if the park pictures. And we found that if the park was rated as being more natural, people was rated as being more natural, people was rated as being more natural, people actually wrote more about things related actually wrote more about things related actually wrote more about things related to naturalness. Okay, not too to naturalness. Okay, not too to naturalness. Okay, not too surprising, but a nice sanity check. surprising, but a nice sanity check. surprising, but a nice sanity check. What was even more surprising is with What was even more surprising is with What was even more surprising is with computer vision algorithms, we could computer vision algorithms, we could computer vision algorithms, we could quantify the amount of curved edges in quantify the amount of curved edges in quantify the amount of curved edges in these park pictures. And it turns out if these park pictures. And it turns out if these park pictures. And it turns out if the park had more curved edges in it, the park had more curved edges in it, the park had more curved edges in it, people wrote more about topics related people wrote more about topics related people wrote more about topics related to spirituality and their life journey. to spirituality and their life journey. to spirituality and their life journey. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Pretty wild. It gets wilder. &gt;&gt; Pretty wild. It gets wilder. &gt;&gt; Pretty wild. It gets wilder. So that was very correlational. And we So that was very correlational. And we So that was very correlational. And we kind of found, you know, like I don't kind of found, you know, like I don't kind of found, you know, like I don't know, maybe there's some kind of know, maybe there's some kind of know, maybe there's some kind of confounding variables there. So, we did confounding variables there. So, we did confounding variables there. So, we did another study where we actually another study where we actually another study where we actually manipulated uh we had images that had more curved uh we had images that had more curved uh we had images that had more curved edges or less curved edges and also edges or less curved edges and also edges or less curved edges and also images that were more natural and less images that were more natural and less images that were more natural and less natural. And we did an online study natural. And we did an online study natural. And we did an online study where we would show people one image and where we would show people one image and where we would show people one image and then had them select like when you look then had them select like when you look then had them select like when you look at this image, do you think it's related at this image, do you think it's related at this image, do you think it's related more to nature or time or spirituality? more to nature or time or spirituality? more to nature or time or spirituality? And it turns out if the picture had more And it turns out if the picture had more And it turns out if the picture had more curved edges in it, people were more curved edges in it, people were more curved edges in it, people were more likely to say, "Yeah, this picture kind likely to say, "Yeah, this picture kind likely to say, "Yeah, this picture kind of has me thinking about spirituality in of has me thinking about spirituality in of has me thinking about spirituality in my life journey." So that's causal. my life journey." So that's causal. my life journey." So that's causal. It gets even crazier because we were It gets even crazier because we were It gets even crazier because we were kind of wondering, you know, when we kind of wondering, you know, when we kind of wondering, you know, when we looked at some of the images, we were looked at some of the images, we were looked at some of the images, we were saying, you know, some of the images saying, you know, some of the images saying, you know, some of the images that don't have as much curved edge that don't have as much curved edge that don't have as much curved edge structure, they have more water in them. structure, they have more water in them. structure, they have more water in them. So maybe there's like something about So maybe there's like something about So maybe there's like something about having water that maybe makes you think having water that maybe makes you think having water that maybe makes you think less about spirituality. You know, I less about spirituality. You know, I less about spirituality. You know, I don't know if I believe that, but maybe don't know if I believe that, but maybe don't know if I believe that, but maybe there's something in there. So we did there's something in there. So we did there's something in there. So we did something even crazier. We took these something even crazier. We took these something even crazier. We took these images and we scrambled them. So we images and we scrambled them. So we images and we scrambled them. So we would like we have this image and it would like we have this image and it would like we have this image and it looks like uh you know a park with trees looks like uh you know a park with trees looks like uh you know a park with trees and some water and then we scramble all and some water and then we scramble all and some water and then we scramble all the pixels and now you can't really tell the pixels and now you can't really tell the pixels and now you can't really tell what it is anymore. or it just looks what it is anymore. or it just looks what it is anymore. or it just looks kind of like a Jackson Pollock painting. kind of like a Jackson Pollock painting. kind of like a Jackson Pollock painting. It turns out if those scrambled images It turns out if those scrambled images It turns out if those scrambled images have more curved edges, people also say have more curved edges, people also say have more curved edges, people also say they think more about spirituality and they think more about spirituality and they think more about spirituality and their life journey. their life journey. their life journey. &gt;&gt; So there's something, you know, we don't &gt;&gt; So there's something, you know, we don't &gt;&gt; So there's something, you know, we don't know the mechanism, but there's know the mechanism, but there's know the mechanism, but there's something interesting there about just something interesting there about just something interesting there about just perceiving these curved edges that has perceiving these curved edges that has perceiving these curved edges that has people thinking more about spirituality. people thinking more about spirituality. people thinking more about spirituality. &gt;&gt; So it can't be object related because &gt;&gt; So it can't be object related because &gt;&gt; So it can't be object related because they're scrambled. they're scrambled. they're scrambled. &gt;&gt; That's right. This is almost reminiscent &gt;&gt; That's right. This is almost reminiscent &gt;&gt; That's right. This is almost reminiscent of this connect the dot experiment where of this connect the dot experiment where of this connect the dot experiment where if the dots are more distantly uh if the dots are more distantly uh if the dots are more distantly uh placed, it seems to trigger some placed, it seems to trigger some placed, it seems to trigger some different form of cognition related to different form of cognition related to different form of cognition related to creativity. &gt;&gt; Right? &gt;&gt; Right? &gt;&gt; Right? &gt;&gt; If nothing else, um it's becoming &gt;&gt; If nothing else, um it's becoming &gt;&gt; If nothing else, um it's becoming increasingly clear that increasingly clear that increasingly clear that visual scenes visual scenes visual scenes have a profound impact on our cognition. have a profound impact on our cognition. have a profound impact on our cognition. And I don't even know what brain network And I don't even know what brain network And I don't even know what brain network to think of when we think about to think of when we think about to think of when we think about spirituality. probably somewhere down spirituality. probably somewhere down spirituality. probably somewhere down the temporal lobe because if you don't the temporal lobe because if you don't the temporal lobe because if you don't know where something is in the brain, know where something is in the brain, know where something is in the brain, you almost always say it's down the you almost always say it's down the you almost always say it's down the infrateemporal lobe where all the other infrateemporal lobe where all the other infrateemporal lobe where all the other sort of uh mysterious stuff is. Um, sort of uh mysterious stuff is. Um, sort of uh mysterious stuff is. Um, super interesting. Uh, this also tells super interesting. Uh, this also tells super interesting. Uh, this also tells me that I need to introduce more curved me that I need to introduce more curved me that I need to introduce more curved edges to my home environment. edges to my home environment. edges to my home environment. &gt;&gt; And people seem to really like curved &gt;&gt; And people seem to really like curved &gt;&gt; And people seem to really like curved edges and even they find that in other edges and even they find that in other edges and even they find that in other species that other species tend to species that other species tend to species that other species tend to prefer curvature and curved edges. If prefer curvature and curved edges. If prefer curvature and curved edges. If you had a magic wand and you could wave you had a magic wand and you could wave you had a magic wand and you could wave that magic wand and have people change that magic wand and have people change that magic wand and have people change one maybe two behaviors on a daily and one maybe two behaviors on a daily and one maybe two behaviors on a daily and weekly basis. weekly basis. weekly basis. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; On the basis of everything that you've &gt;&gt; On the basis of everything that you've &gt;&gt; On the basis of everything that you've learned from your work and related work. learned from your work and related work. learned from your work and related work. &gt;&gt; What would you wish with that wand? &gt;&gt; What would you wish with that wand? &gt;&gt; What would you wish with that wand? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I think I would So I think in a couple I think I would So I think in a couple I think I would So I think in a couple things. The one I would just the easy things. The one I would just the easy things. The one I would just the easy one is just people need to get out into one is just people need to get out into one is just people need to get out into nature more. Um, and they need to do it nature more. Um, and they need to do it nature more. Um, and they need to do it especially when they kind of feel especially when they kind of feel especially when they kind of feel mentally fatigued. mentally fatigued. mentally fatigued. I think that's easier than saying, you I think that's easier than saying, you I think that's easier than saying, you know, get off of the devices. know, get off of the devices. know, get off of the devices. &gt;&gt; It's not going to happen, &gt;&gt; It's not going to happen, &gt;&gt; It's not going to happen, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Not entirely. &gt;&gt; Not entirely. &gt;&gt; Not entirely. &gt;&gt; Not entirely. So, I think, you know, &gt;&gt; Not entirely. So, I think, you know, &gt;&gt; Not entirely. So, I think, you know, forget about that for a moment. Go out forget about that for a moment. Go out forget about that for a moment. Go out in nature and do it without your in nature and do it without your in nature and do it without your phone and be engaged with it. And if you phone and be engaged with it. And if you phone and be engaged with it. And if you don't have access to nature, try these don't have access to nature, try these don't have access to nature, try these simulations. Bring nature into your simulations. Bring nature into your simulations. Bring nature into your home. You can even have fake plants in home. You can even have fake plants in home. You can even have fake plants in your home. There's been some evidence your home. There's been some evidence your home. There's been some evidence even fake plants uh can work. You know, even fake plants uh can work. You know, even fake plants uh can work. You know, get some nature sounds going. Uh maybe get some nature sounds going. Uh maybe get some nature sounds going. Uh maybe think about where you're going to take think about where you're going to take think about where you're going to take your next vacation. Maybe think about your next vacation. Maybe think about your next vacation. Maybe think about going to a national park or something going to a national park or something going to a national park or something like that. So, that's one thing. The like that. So, that's one thing. The like that. So, that's one thing. The other thing and you know this kind of other thing and you know this kind of other thing and you know this kind of building up kind of you know in the book building up kind of you know in the book building up kind of you know in the book I kind of want to start this nature I kind of want to start this nature I kind of want to start this nature revolution where we're we really take revolution where we're we really take revolution where we're we really take this work seriously and I think part of this work seriously and I think part of this work seriously and I think part of it is that I think everybody has this it is that I think everybody has this it is that I think everybody has this intuition that nature is good for us but intuition that nature is good for us but intuition that nature is good for us but it's sort of like h it's an amenity not it's sort of like h it's an amenity not it's sort of like h it's an amenity not a necessity you know it would be nice to a necessity you know it would be nice to a necessity you know it would be nice to have but we don't really need it and I have but we don't really need it and I have but we don't really need it and I think if I wanted to wave my magic wand think if I wanted to wave my magic wand think if I wanted to wave my magic wand I would want to change that to actually I would want to change that to actually I would want to change that to actually No, nature, these experiences are a No, nature, these experiences are a No, nature, these experiences are a necessity, not an amenity. And it's not necessity, not an amenity. And it's not necessity, not an amenity. And it's not just a necessity because of climate just a necessity because of climate just a necessity because of climate change and things like that. It's it's a change and things like that. It's it's a change and things like that. It's it's a necessity for us as humans to reach necessity for us as humans to reach necessity for us as humans to reach our full potential. We can't reach our full potential. We can't reach our full potential. We can't reach our full potential without nature. So, I full potential without nature. So, I full potential without nature. So, I think that's another critical think that's another critical think that's another critical element. And then I think when people element. And then I think when people element. And then I think when people start feeling it and feeling the effects start feeling it and feeling the effects start feeling it and feeling the effects then I think we need to start changing a then I think we need to start changing a then I think we need to start changing a lot of things like you know lot of things like you know lot of things like you know schools like they want to take away schools like they want to take away schools like they want to take away recess and they want to take away recess and they want to take away recess and they want to take away playtime outside right and that's almost playtime outside right and that's almost playtime outside right and that's almost exactly counter to what I would exactly counter to what I would exactly counter to what I would recommend. I would recommend that we recommend. I would recommend that we recommend. I would recommend that we actually want to have more recess and actually want to have more recess and actually want to have more recess and more recess out in nature that you know more recess out in nature that you know more recess out in nature that you know think about this Andrew. What if this think about this Andrew. What if this think about this Andrew. What if this would be incredible, but what if um you would be incredible, but what if um you would be incredible, but what if um you know, school is like an 8 hour day. What know, school is like an 8 hour day. What know, school is like an 8 hour day. What if instead of 8 hours of instruction, it if instead of 8 hours of instruction, it if instead of 8 hours of instruction, it was six hours of instruction and two was six hours of instruction and two was six hours of instruction and two hours of a nature break? hours of a nature break? hours of a nature break? &gt;&gt; I'd go back to school. &gt;&gt; I'd go back to school. &gt;&gt; I'd go back to school. &gt;&gt; Well, kids might perform better. I mean, &gt;&gt; Well, kids might perform better. I mean, &gt;&gt; Well, kids might perform better. I mean, it might be it actually might be it might be it actually might be it might be it actually might be revolutionary. Kids might actually revolutionary. Kids might actually revolutionary. Kids might actually perform better. Now, you know, sometimes perform better. Now, you know, sometimes perform better. Now, you know, sometimes talk to people talk to me about nature talk to people talk to me about nature talk to people talk to me about nature schools and like doing all the learning schools and like doing all the learning schools and like doing all the learning in nature. like I'm not so sure about in nature. like I'm not so sure about in nature. like I'm not so sure about that like doing calculus when wind is that like doing calculus when wind is that like doing calculus when wind is blowing my papers around. But definitely blowing my papers around. But definitely blowing my papers around. But definitely to take a break out in nature, you know, to take a break out in nature, you know, to take a break out in nature, you know, give the kids a break in nature. give the kids a break in nature. give the kids a break in nature. They might actually learn more. You They might actually learn more. You They might actually learn more. You know, you it might be this win-win kind know, you it might be this win-win kind know, you it might be this win-win kind of thing where they would actually learn of thing where they would actually learn of thing where they would actually learn more from less. more from less. more from less. Same thing with work. Same thing with work. Same thing with work. you know, we would need to redesign you know, we would need to redesign you know, we would need to redesign schedules around work that, you know, schedules around work that, you know, schedules around work that, you know, maybe your employees will be more maybe your employees will be more maybe your employees will be more productive if you can give them some of productive if you can give them some of productive if you can give them some of these nature breaks. Um, and then, you these nature breaks. Um, and then, you these nature breaks. Um, and then, you know, I want to start building out from know, I want to start building out from know, I want to start building out from that. It's like, we have not built the that. It's like, we have not built the that. It's like, we have not built the built environment to improve people's built environment to improve people's built environment to improve people's psychological well-being, right? We psychological well-being, right? We psychological well-being, right? We basically built the built environment to basically built the built environment to basically built the built environment to move goods efficiently, house people move goods efficiently, house people move goods efficiently, house people efficiently. But when have you ever been efficiently. But when have you ever been efficiently. But when have you ever been in a place where they're like, you know, in a place where they're like, you know, in a place where they're like, you know, we built this school to increase we built this school to increase we built this school to increase people's directed attention or we built people's directed attention or we built people's directed attention or we built this school to make people more this school to make people more this school to make people more cooperative. What we're finding is that cooperative. What we're finding is that cooperative. What we're finding is that interacting with nature kind of does interacting with nature kind of does interacting with nature kind of does both things. So we need we need people both things. So we need we need people both things. So we need we need people ar I mean there are architects that are ar I mean there are architects that are ar I mean there are architects that are starting to do this but we need to starting to do this but we need to starting to do this but we need to incorporate these natural elements into incorporate these natural elements into incorporate these natural elements into all built spaces. all built spaces. all built spaces. And then I think, you know, going on And then I think, you know, going on And then I think, you know, going on even more is that in a city, you want to even more is that in a city, you want to even more is that in a city, you want to jam as much nature as possible into jam as much nature as possible into jam as much nature as possible into cities. And I love cities. Cities are cities. And I love cities. Cities are cities. And I love cities. Cities are great. Uh they're beacons of innovation, great. Uh they're beacons of innovation, great. Uh they're beacons of innovation, wealth. Uh we even find that bigger wealth. Uh we even find that bigger wealth. Uh we even find that bigger cities have lower racial biases and we cities have lower racial biases and we cities have lower racial biases and we actually find that depression is lower actually find that depression is lower actually find that depression is lower in bigger cities per capita. But we can in bigger cities per capita. But we can in bigger cities per capita. But we can do a lot more. And I think by kind of do a lot more. And I think by kind of do a lot more. And I think by kind of naturizing cities um can be really cities um can be really cities um can be really beneficial. And then you know a lot of beneficial. And then you know a lot of beneficial. And then you know a lot of people don't live in cities but you know people don't live in cities but you know people don't live in cities but you know I have family that live in rural areas I have family that live in rural areas I have family that live in rural areas and often yeah they're surrounded by and often yeah they're surrounded by and often yeah they're surrounded by nature but it's not really nature they nature but it's not really nature they nature but it's not really nature they can use you know it might be more can use you know it might be more can use you know it might be more agricultural. So I think even in these agricultural. So I think even in these agricultural. So I think even in these more rural places you need to think more rural places you need to think more rural places you need to think about hey is a nature that's actually about hey is a nature that's actually about hey is a nature that's actually there really usable for people to get there really usable for people to get there really usable for people to get restoration. &gt;&gt; S I absolutely love the work you're &gt;&gt; S I absolutely love the work you're &gt;&gt; S I absolutely love the work you're doing. I especially love it because it's doing. I especially love it because it's doing. I especially love it because it's grounded in data, right? grounded in data, right? grounded in data, right? &gt;&gt; It's grounded in laboratory data &gt;&gt; It's grounded in laboratory data &gt;&gt; It's grounded in laboratory data &gt;&gt; and it's grounded in real world data. &gt;&gt; and it's grounded in real world data. &gt;&gt; and it's grounded in real world data. And I just asked you for two and I'm And I just asked you for two and I'm And I just asked you for two and I'm actually very gratified that you offered actually very gratified that you offered actually very gratified that you offered six. I think that's very much the sort six. I think that's very much the sort six. I think that's very much the sort of answers I tend to give. Right. I'm of answers I tend to give. Right. I'm of answers I tend to give. Right. I'm going to ask you one question, but I end going to ask you one question, but I end going to ask you one question, but I end up asking you four. So that's not just up asking you four. So that's not just up asking you four. So that's not just welcome, it's invited and encouraged welcome, it's invited and encouraged welcome, it's invited and encouraged here. Um, I think the work you're doing here. Um, I think the work you're doing here. Um, I think the work you're doing is extremely important because it's is extremely important because it's is extremely important because it's highlighting these principles of brain highlighting these principles of brain highlighting these principles of brain function and psychological health that function and psychological health that function and psychological health that are unaware to most people about are unaware to most people about are unaware to most people about themselves and others. Certainly, even themselves and others. Certainly, even themselves and others. Certainly, even as a neuroscientist with who I like to as a neuroscientist with who I like to as a neuroscientist with who I like to think of myself as psychologically think of myself as psychologically think of myself as psychologically minded. I mean, this notion of um minded. I mean, this notion of um minded. I mean, this notion of um passive but depleting, it just has never passive but depleting, it just has never passive but depleting, it just has never occurred to me until I got familiar with occurred to me until I got familiar with occurred to me until I got familiar with your work and um more so during today's your work and um more so during today's your work and um more so during today's conversation. I also am delighted, conversation. I also am delighted, conversation. I also am delighted, believe it or not, that you didn't use believe it or not, that you didn't use believe it or not, that you didn't use the word forest bathing. I guess that's the word forest bathing. I guess that's the word forest bathing. I guess that's two words. And I want to be very clear, two words. And I want to be very clear, two words. And I want to be very clear, it's not because I don't think forest it's not because I don't think forest it's not because I don't think forest bathing is a wonderful concept. I mean, bathing is a wonderful concept. I mean, bathing is a wonderful concept. I mean, what is more lovely than bathing in a what is more lovely than bathing in a what is more lovely than bathing in a forest? I imagine, you know, uh people forest? I imagine, you know, uh people forest? I imagine, you know, uh people maybe with clothes, minimal clothes, maybe with clothes, minimal clothes, maybe with clothes, minimal clothes, maybe no clothes, who knows? In in the maybe no clothes, who knows? In in the maybe no clothes, who knows? In in the forest, greenery everywhere. And we forest, greenery everywhere. And we forest, greenery everywhere. And we we've heard of this incredible set of we've heard of this incredible set of we've heard of this incredible set of discoveries and this concept from uh discoveries and this concept from uh discoveries and this concept from uh Japanese laboratories about forest Japanese laboratories about forest Japanese laboratories about forest bathing. But the problem with the term bathing. But the problem with the term bathing. But the problem with the term forest bathing is that it implies you forest bathing is that it implies you forest bathing is that it implies you need a forest, need a forest, need a forest, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And it implies that you need to bathe, &gt;&gt; And it implies that you need to bathe, &gt;&gt; And it implies that you need to bathe, which sounds like um a vacation. It which sounds like um a vacation. It which sounds like um a vacation. It sounds like something that you really sounds like something that you really sounds like something that you really have to devote a ton of time to. And so have to devote a ton of time to. And so have to devote a ton of time to. And so I'm a big fan of forest bathing um as a I'm a big fan of forest bathing um as a I'm a big fan of forest bathing um as a concept and as a practice, but I really concept and as a practice, but I really concept and as a practice, but I really appreciate that your work is focused on appreciate that your work is focused on appreciate that your work is focused on what people can do in a real practical what people can do in a real practical what people can do in a real practical sense as we bring more nature into sense as we bring more nature into sense as we bring more nature into cities, into homes, into rural areas cities, into homes, into rural areas cities, into homes, into rural areas that's accessible. that's accessible. that's accessible. &gt;&gt; Uh hopefully people will forest bathe, &gt;&gt; Uh hopefully people will forest bathe, &gt;&gt; Uh hopefully people will forest bathe, continue to or go out and forest bathe. continue to or go out and forest bathe. continue to or go out and forest bathe. uh what you're talking about is very uh what you're talking about is very uh what you're talking about is very practical um and very feasible for practical um and very feasible for practical um and very feasible for people to get 20 minutes alone nature people to get 20 minutes alone nature people to get 20 minutes alone nature walk maybe with a dog maybe just alone walk maybe with a dog maybe just alone walk maybe with a dog maybe just alone disconnect as a way to be able to engage disconnect as a way to be able to engage disconnect as a way to be able to engage focused attention better focused attention better focused attention better &gt;&gt; or who knows maybe just to get back into &gt;&gt; or who knows maybe just to get back into &gt;&gt; or who knows maybe just to get back into life and enjoy non-focused attention life and enjoy non-focused attention life and enjoy non-focused attention hanging out with your kids or your hanging out with your kids or your hanging out with your kids or your spouse or what whatever it might be spouse or what whatever it might be spouse or what whatever it might be friends &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; so uh very excited about the book which &gt;&gt; so uh very excited about the book which &gt;&gt; so uh very excited about the book which comes out soon we'll put a link to the comes out soon we'll put a link to the comes out soon we'll put a link to the book uh in the show not captions of book uh in the show not captions of book uh in the show not captions of Um, and I'm delighted you're doing this Um, and I'm delighted you're doing this Um, and I'm delighted you're doing this work and that you're going to continue work and that you're going to continue work and that you're going to continue to do this work. Even though you have to do this work. Even though you have to do this work. Even though you have the uh unfortunate honor of being a the uh unfortunate honor of being a the uh unfortunate honor of being a chair, which basically means you get a chair, which basically means you get a chair, which basically means you get a lot of administrative duties, you've lot of administrative duties, you've lot of administrative duties, you've still kept up your research and are still kept up your research and are still kept up your research and are continuing to. So, um, if ever there was continuing to. So, um, if ever there was continuing to. So, um, if ever there was a uh, an example of where uh, research a uh, an example of where uh, research a uh, an example of where uh, research can really be put to practical use for can really be put to practical use for can really be put to practical use for people and uh, the book is helping people and uh, the book is helping people and uh, the book is helping disseminate that. Certainly, this disseminate that. Certainly, this disseminate that. Certainly, this conversation will as well. It's uh, it's conversation will as well. It's uh, it's conversation will as well. It's uh, it's you and what you're doing. So, thank you and what you're doing. So, thank you and what you're doing. So, thank you. I really appreciate it. and come you. I really appreciate it. and come you. I really appreciate it. and come back again and update us on the latest back again and update us on the latest back again and update us on the latest data when there are more data. data when there are more data. data when there are more data. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks so much for having me on &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks so much for having me on &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks so much for having me on the podcast. the podcast. the podcast. &gt;&gt; Great. We'll do and I'll get into nature &gt;&gt; Great. We'll do and I'll get into nature &gt;&gt; Great. We'll do and I'll get into nature today. &gt;&gt; Great. &gt;&gt; Great. &gt;&gt; Great. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Mark Berman today's discussion with Dr. Mark Berman today's discussion with Dr. Mark Berman to learn more about his work and to find to learn more about his work and to find to learn more about his work and to find a link to the pre-sale of his new book. a link to the pre-sale of his new book. a link to the pre-sale of his new book. Please see the show note captions. If Please see the show note captions. If Please see the show note captions. If you're learning from andor enjoying this you're learning from andor enjoying this you're learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review, and leave us up to a five-star review, and leave us up to a five-star review, and you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three-page protocols in the form of 1 to three-page protocols in the form of 1 to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Mark Berman. today's discussion with Dr. Mark Berman. today's discussion with Dr. Mark Berman. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]