Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Ask Me Anything episode, or Today is an Ask Me Anything episode, or Today is an Ask Me Anything episode, or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber This is part of our premium subscriber This is part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel channel. Our premium subscriber channel channel. Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support was started in order to provide support was started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which comes out every Monday and is which comes out every Monday and is which comes out every Monday and is available at zero cost to everybody on available at zero cost to everybody on available at zero cost to everybody on all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate the premium channel as a way to generate the premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm physical health, and performance. I'm physical health, and performance. I'm also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match that amount. So, now we are able to that amount. So, now we are able to that amount. So, now we are able to double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical health, and human performance. If you'd health, and human performance. If you'd health, and human performance. If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, please go to podcast premium channel, please go to podcast premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one-time payment, and model that is a one-time payment, and model that is a one-time payment, and again, you can find that option at again, you can find that option at again, you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already For those of you that are already For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not Huberman Lab podcast premium Huberman Lab podcast premium Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. So, premium subscriber is for you. So, premium subscriber is for you. So, without further ado, let's get to without further ado, let's get to without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. answering your questions. answering your questions. The first question is about the pros and The first question is about the pros and The first question is about the pros and cons of daily caffeine consumption. cons of daily caffeine consumption. cons of daily caffeine consumption. The question reads, "What is your The question reads, "What is your The question reads, "What is your opinion on the net benefit of daily opinion on the net benefit of daily opinion on the net benefit of daily caffeine consumption, and how can caffeine consumption, and how can caffeine consumption, and how can somebody determine if daily caffeine somebody determine if daily caffeine somebody determine if daily caffeine consumption is right for them? consumption is right for them? consumption is right for them? Well, first of all, I did an entire Well, first of all, I did an entire Well, first of all, I did an entire episode about caffeine. You can find episode about caffeine. You can find episode about caffeine. You can find that by going to hubermanlab.com. At that by going to hubermanlab.com. At that by going to hubermanlab.com. At that website, you can put in that website, you can put in that website, you can put in caffeine into the search function, and caffeine into the search function, and caffeine into the search function, and you'll find links to that episode in all you'll find links to that episode in all you'll find links to that episode in all the formats, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, the formats, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, the formats, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc. And it's timestamped, of course. etc. And it's timestamped, of course. etc. And it's timestamped, of course. You can navigate to the particular You can navigate to the particular You can navigate to the particular topics most of interest to you. topics most of interest to you. topics most of interest to you. However, for the sake of this However, for the sake of this However, for the sake of this discussion, I can summarize a few of the discussion, I can summarize a few of the discussion, I can summarize a few of the key points. key points. key points. The most important thing to understand The most important thing to understand The most important thing to understand is that for most adults, so that is that for most adults, so that is that for most adults, so that is people about age 18 to 20 and older, people about age 18 to 20 and older, people about age 18 to 20 and older, daily caffeine consumption is not going daily caffeine consumption is not going daily caffeine consumption is not going to be a problem, provided it does not to be a problem, provided it does not to be a problem, provided it does not induce anxiety, induce anxiety, induce anxiety, and certainly provided that not induce and certainly provided that not induce and certainly provided that not induce anxiety or panic attacks, anxiety or panic attacks, anxiety or panic attacks, and provided that it does not disrupt and provided that it does not disrupt and provided that it does not disrupt your nighttime sleep. your nighttime sleep. your nighttime sleep. This is why I always recommend that if This is why I always recommend that if This is why I always recommend that if you are going to consume caffeine in any you are going to consume caffeine in any you are going to consume caffeine in any form, coffee, tea, soda, or otherwise, form, coffee, tea, soda, or otherwise, form, coffee, tea, soda, or otherwise, that you try not to ingest caffeine that you try not to ingest caffeine that you try not to ingest caffeine within the 8, and ideally within the 10 within the 8, and ideally within the 10 within the 8, and ideally within the 10 or even 12 hours prior to bedtime. or even 12 hours prior to bedtime. or even 12 hours prior to bedtime. That's because the half-life of caffeine That's because the half-life of caffeine That's because the half-life of caffeine is such that even if you were able to, is such that even if you were able to, is such that even if you were able to, for instance, have a cup of coffee for instance, have a cup of coffee for instance, have a cup of coffee around 3:00 p.m. or 4:00 p.m., and then around 3:00 p.m. or 4:00 p.m., and then around 3:00 p.m. or 4:00 p.m., and then fall asleep around midnight, fall asleep around midnight, fall asleep around midnight, the architecture of the sleep that you the architecture of the sleep that you the architecture of the sleep that you get is going to be disrupted. For get is going to be disrupted. For get is going to be disrupted. For instance, it is very important that you instance, it is very important that you instance, it is very important that you get sufficient amounts of both slow wave get sufficient amounts of both slow wave get sufficient amounts of both slow wave deep sleep as well as rapid eye movement deep sleep as well as rapid eye movement deep sleep as well as rapid eye movement sleep each night. And if you consume sleep each night. And if you consume sleep each night. And if you consume caffeine too close to bedtime, and here caffeine too close to bedtime, and here caffeine too close to bedtime, and here I'm defining too close as anywhere from I'm defining too close as anywhere from I'm defining too close as anywhere from 8 to 12 hours before going to sleep, 8 to 12 hours before going to sleep, 8 to 12 hours before going to sleep, chances are you're not going to get as chances are you're not going to get as chances are you're not going to get as much rapid eye movement sleep or slow much rapid eye movement sleep or slow much rapid eye movement sleep or slow wave sleep that you would otherwise. And wave sleep that you would otherwise. And wave sleep that you would otherwise. And it is the amount of rapid eye movement it is the amount of rapid eye movement it is the amount of rapid eye movement sleep and slow wave sleep that together sleep and slow wave sleep that together sleep and slow wave sleep that together lead to whether or not you feel you had lead to whether or not you feel you had lead to whether or not you feel you had a good night's sleep in terms of your a good night's sleep in terms of your a good night's sleep in terms of your next day alertness and cognitive next day alertness and cognitive next day alertness and cognitive abilities. Now again, some people may abilities. Now again, some people may abilities. Now again, some people may find that they can drink caffeine in the find that they can drink caffeine in the find that they can drink caffeine in the late afternoon, maybe even at night, and late afternoon, maybe even at night, and late afternoon, maybe even at night, and still fall asleep, but I promise you, still fall asleep, but I promise you, still fall asleep, but I promise you, even if you're in that category, you even if you're in that category, you even if you're in that category, you will sleep far better, meaning the will sleep far better, meaning the will sleep far better, meaning the architecture of your sleep will be architecture of your sleep will be architecture of your sleep will be better, and you will feel far more better, and you will feel far more better, and you will feel far more rested the next day if you abstain from rested the next day if you abstain from rested the next day if you abstain from caffeine within the 8 to 12 hours prior caffeine within the 8 to 12 hours prior caffeine within the 8 to 12 hours prior to bedtime. And I should also say that to bedtime. And I should also say that to bedtime. And I should also say that none of us are perfect, myself included. none of us are perfect, myself included. none of us are perfect, myself included. I will sometimes have a cup of coffee in I will sometimes have a cup of coffee in I will sometimes have a cup of coffee in the late afternoon, and sometimes that the late afternoon, and sometimes that the late afternoon, and sometimes that will cause me to stay up a little bit will cause me to stay up a little bit will cause me to stay up a little bit later, sometimes it won't. I don't think later, sometimes it won't. I don't think later, sometimes it won't. I don't think you want to obsess or worry too much you want to obsess or worry too much you want to obsess or worry too much about having some caffeine every once in about having some caffeine every once in about having some caffeine every once in a while in the late afternoon if you are a while in the late afternoon if you are a while in the late afternoon if you are still able to fall asleep, but don't still able to fall asleep, but don't still able to fall asleep, but don't make it a regular habit. Now, as far as make it a regular habit. Now, as far as make it a regular habit. Now, as far as we know, there is no drawback to we know, there is no drawback to we know, there is no drawback to consuming caffeine on a daily basis, consuming caffeine on a daily basis, consuming caffeine on a daily basis, again, provided it does not disrupt your again, provided it does not disrupt your again, provided it does not disrupt your nighttime sleep, and provided it does nighttime sleep, and provided it does nighttime sleep, and provided it does not induce anxiety. In fact, most of the not induce anxiety. In fact, most of the not induce anxiety. In fact, most of the world consumes caffeine every single world consumes caffeine every single world consumes caffeine every single day. The current estimates are that 90%, day. The current estimates are that 90%, day. The current estimates are that 90%, that's right, 9 0, 90% of adults that's right, 9 0, 90% of adults that's right, 9 0, 90% of adults throughout the world consume a throughout the world consume a throughout the world consume a caffeinated beverage every single day. caffeinated beverage every single day. caffeinated beverage every single day. That's a staggeringly high number, That's a staggeringly high number, That's a staggeringly high number, making caffeine the most popular drug on making caffeine the most popular drug on making caffeine the most popular drug on the planet. In fact, because of the way the planet. In fact, because of the way the planet. In fact, because of the way that caffeine works, and just to remind that caffeine works, and just to remind that caffeine works, and just to remind you how it works, it effectively blocks you how it works, it effectively blocks you how it works, it effectively blocks adenosine receptors. Adenosine is a adenosine receptors. Adenosine is a adenosine receptors. Adenosine is a molecule that builds up in your brain molecule that builds up in your brain molecule that builds up in your brain and body and body and body more and more according to how long more and more according to how long more and more according to how long you've been awake. It makes you feel you've been awake. It makes you feel you've been awake. It makes you feel sleepy. Caffeine blocks the adenosine sleepy. Caffeine blocks the adenosine sleepy. Caffeine blocks the adenosine receptor, and then when it is dislodged receptor, and then when it is dislodged receptor, and then when it is dislodged from that receptor, whatever adenosine from that receptor, whatever adenosine from that receptor, whatever adenosine has built up and is around can then bind has built up and is around can then bind has built up and is around can then bind to the adenosine receptor, and makes you to the adenosine receptor, and makes you to the adenosine receptor, and makes you feel very sleepy. That's the caffeine feel very sleepy. That's the caffeine feel very sleepy. That's the caffeine crash. So, if 90% of the adult crash. So, if 90% of the adult crash. So, if 90% of the adult population of the planet Earth is population of the planet Earth is population of the planet Earth is consuming caffeine every day, that means consuming caffeine every day, that means consuming caffeine every day, that means 90% of the adult population of planet 90% of the adult population of planet 90% of the adult population of planet Earth is blocking their adenosine Earth is blocking their adenosine Earth is blocking their adenosine receptors for some portion of their receptors for some portion of their receptors for some portion of their daily life, and then their adenosine is daily life, and then their adenosine is daily life, and then their adenosine is binding to the vacant receptor once the binding to the vacant receptor once the binding to the vacant receptor once the caffeine has dislodged. And why are 90% caffeine has dislodged. And why are 90% caffeine has dislodged. And why are 90% of adult humans of adult humans of adult humans consuming caffeine every day? Well, to consuming caffeine every day? Well, to consuming caffeine every day? Well, to feel more energized, more focused, to feel more energized, more focused, to feel more energized, more focused, to have more both cognitive energy and have more both cognitive energy and have more both cognitive energy and physical energy. Now, of course, most physical energy. Now, of course, most physical energy. Now, of course, most people are not walking around thinking, people are not walking around thinking, people are not walking around thinking, "Oh, caffeine gives me more energy, more "Oh, caffeine gives me more energy, more "Oh, caffeine gives me more energy, more focus, etc." Most people are consuming focus, etc." Most people are consuming focus, etc." Most people are consuming caffeine every single day and are caffeine every single day and are caffeine every single day and are consuming caffeine every single day in consuming caffeine every single day in consuming caffeine every single day in order to feel {quote} normal, to be at order to feel {quote} normal, to be at order to feel {quote} normal, to be at their baseline level of cognitive their baseline level of cognitive their baseline level of cognitive ability and physical energy and so on. ability and physical energy and so on. ability and physical energy and so on. In fact, if you look at the data on In fact, if you look at the data on In fact, if you look at the data on caffeine consumption, what you'll find caffeine consumption, what you'll find caffeine consumption, what you'll find is that caffeine actually is a cognitive is that caffeine actually is a cognitive is that caffeine actually is a cognitive enhancer. It can improve learning and enhancer. It can improve learning and enhancer. It can improve learning and memory. It can increase physical energy. memory. It can increase physical energy. memory. It can increase physical energy. It can increase mental and physical It can increase mental and physical It can increase mental and physical stamina. But, a feature of those studies that's But, a feature of those studies that's But, a feature of those studies that's not often discussed, but that was not often discussed, but that was not often discussed, but that was however discussed in the full episode on however discussed in the full episode on however discussed in the full episode on caffeine, is that studies of caffeine typically is that studies of caffeine typically is that studies of caffeine typically are done by taking chronic caffeine are done by taking chronic caffeine are done by taking chronic caffeine users and then having them abstain from users and then having them abstain from users and then having them abstain from caffeine for some period of time, caffeine for some period of time, caffeine for some period of time, usually 4 days to 2 weeks, usually 4 days to 2 weeks, usually 4 days to 2 weeks, in which time they undergo caffeine in which time they undergo caffeine in which time they undergo caffeine withdrawal. They do not feel well. They withdrawal. They do not feel well. They withdrawal. They do not feel well. They get foggy-headed. They have less energy. get foggy-headed. They have less energy. get foggy-headed. They have less energy. There's some malaise, sometimes even There's some malaise, sometimes even There's some malaise, sometimes even some mild depression. some mild depression. some mild depression. And then what they do is they have And then what they do is they have And then what they do is they have people take caffeine and take a people take caffeine and take a people take caffeine and take a cognitive exam or do some physical cognitive exam or do some physical cognitive exam or do some physical activity and compare their performance activity and compare their performance activity and compare their performance to what it was when they were in the to what it was when they were in the to what it was when they were in the withdrawal state. Another typical form withdrawal state. Another typical form withdrawal state. Another typical form of study on caffeine is to take people of study on caffeine is to take people of study on caffeine is to take people who are naive to caffeine or who never who are naive to caffeine or who never who are naive to caffeine or who never take caffeine and then have them ingest take caffeine and then have them ingest take caffeine and then have them ingest caffeine and then measure their caffeine and then measure their caffeine and then measure their cognitive and/or physical performance. cognitive and/or physical performance. cognitive and/or physical performance. And in both cases, you see improvements. And in both cases, you see improvements. And in both cases, you see improvements. What I'm saying here is that daily What I'm saying here is that daily What I'm saying here is that daily caffeine consumption caffeine consumption caffeine consumption is not going to lead to improvements in is not going to lead to improvements in is not going to lead to improvements in cognitive ability cognitive ability cognitive ability or improvements in physical ability or improvements in physical ability or improvements in physical ability above one's baseline unless you either above one's baseline unless you either above one's baseline unless you either abstain from caffeine for some period of abstain from caffeine for some period of abstain from caffeine for some period of time typically 4 days to 2 weeks prior time typically 4 days to 2 weeks prior time typically 4 days to 2 weeks prior or you are not somebody who typically or you are not somebody who typically or you are not somebody who typically ingest caffeine. In other words, 90% of ingest caffeine. In other words, 90% of ingest caffeine. In other words, 90% of the world's population is drinking the world's population is drinking the world's population is drinking caffeine on a daily basis to be at their caffeine on a daily basis to be at their caffeine on a daily basis to be at their normal level of mental and physical normal level of mental and physical normal level of mental and physical functioning. So, the question was is functioning. So, the question was is functioning. So, the question was is there a net benefit to daily caffeine there a net benefit to daily caffeine there a net benefit to daily caffeine consumption? And here I can reliably say consumption? And here I can reliably say consumption? And here I can reliably say provided you don't suffer from anxiety provided you don't suffer from anxiety provided you don't suffer from anxiety attacks or lack of sleep from the attacks or lack of sleep from the attacks or lack of sleep from the caffeine consumption provided that caffeine consumption provided that caffeine consumption provided that you're mindful of not ingesting caffeine you're mindful of not ingesting caffeine you're mindful of not ingesting caffeine too late in the day. too late in the day. too late in the day. There doesn't seem to be any big There doesn't seem to be any big There doesn't seem to be any big drawback to drinking caffeine on a daily drawback to drinking caffeine on a daily drawback to drinking caffeine on a daily basis. However, there doesn't seem to be any However, there doesn't seem to be any However, there doesn't seem to be any great benefit at least in terms of great benefit at least in terms of great benefit at least in terms of direct effects on cognitive or physical direct effects on cognitive or physical direct effects on cognitive or physical ability. Okay, so I realize this is a little bit Okay, so I realize this is a little bit Okay, so I realize this is a little bit of a of a convoluted answer, but we have of a of a convoluted answer, but we have of a of a convoluted answer, but we have to be honest with one another here. to be honest with one another here. to be honest with one another here. Caffeine is a performance-enhancing Caffeine is a performance-enhancing Caffeine is a performance-enhancing drug, but only when compared to the drug, but only when compared to the drug, but only when compared to the non-caffeinated state and 90% of the non-caffeinated state and 90% of the non-caffeinated state and 90% of the adult population of the world is adult population of the world is adult population of the world is caffeinated. So, adding more caffeine caffeinated. So, adding more caffeine caffeinated. So, adding more caffeine above what you would normally consume is above what you would normally consume is above what you would normally consume is certainly not going to allow you to certainly not going to allow you to certainly not going to allow you to think better and perform better think better and perform better think better and perform better physically. Here's a useful way to think physically. Here's a useful way to think physically. Here's a useful way to think about caffeine. Most people can pretty about caffeine. Most people can pretty about caffeine. Most people can pretty well tolerate doses of caffeine anywhere well tolerate doses of caffeine anywhere well tolerate doses of caffeine anywhere from 100 mg to 300 mg. from 100 mg to 300 mg. from 100 mg to 300 mg. Depends on body weight and depends on Depends on body weight and depends on Depends on body weight and depends on your tolerance. your tolerance. your tolerance. Tolerance of course based on how Tolerance of course based on how Tolerance of course based on how familiar you are with the effects of familiar you are with the effects of familiar you are with the effects of caffeine and how regularly you consume caffeine and how regularly you consume caffeine and how regularly you consume it. A typical cup of coffee which by the it. A typical cup of coffee which by the it. A typical cup of coffee which by the way does not exist depending on the way does not exist depending on the way does not exist depending on the vendor, depending on how much water to vendor, depending on how much water to vendor, depending on how much water to coffee ratio one uses, depending on coffee ratio one uses, depending on coffee ratio one uses, depending on whether or not it's French press or it's whether or not it's French press or it's whether or not it's French press or it's pour over, pour over, pour over, the type of coffee etc. All of that is the type of coffee etc. All of that is the type of coffee etc. All of that is going to determine the total amount of going to determine the total amount of going to determine the total amount of caffeine in that coffee, but we can set caffeine in that coffee, but we can set caffeine in that coffee, but we can set some outer bounds on the total amount of some outer bounds on the total amount of some outer bounds on the total amount of caffeine that likely exists in a cup of caffeine that likely exists in a cup of caffeine that likely exists in a cup of coffee and it's probably somewhere coffee and it's probably somewhere coffee and it's probably somewhere between 100 mg that would be on the between 100 mg that would be on the between 100 mg that would be on the weaker side for a 6 or 8 oz cup of weaker side for a 6 or 8 oz cup of weaker side for a 6 or 8 oz cup of coffee out to about 300 mg for the coffee out to about 300 mg for the coffee out to about 300 mg for the equivalent 6 to 8 oz of coffee. But, if equivalent 6 to 8 oz of coffee. But, if equivalent 6 to 8 oz of coffee. But, if you were to brew your coffee very, very you were to brew your coffee very, very you were to brew your coffee very, very strong, or like me, occasionally throw a strong, or like me, occasionally throw a strong, or like me, occasionally throw a shot of espresso in there, too, you shot of espresso in there, too, you shot of espresso in there, too, you could get that number up to 400 or 500 could get that number up to 400 or 500 could get that number up to 400 or 500 mg of caffeine. I personally tolerate mg of caffeine. I personally tolerate mg of caffeine. I personally tolerate caffeine pretty well. I've been drinking caffeine pretty well. I've been drinking caffeine pretty well. I've been drinking caffeine since I was a teenager, mostly caffeine since I was a teenager, mostly caffeine since I was a teenager, mostly in the form of brewed, unflavored yerba in the form of brewed, unflavored yerba in the form of brewed, unflavored yerba mate tea. It's important to stay away mate tea. It's important to stay away mate tea. It's important to stay away from the smoked varieties of yerba mate. from the smoked varieties of yerba mate. from the smoked varieties of yerba mate. If you're going to get your caffeine If you're going to get your caffeine If you're going to get your caffeine from yerba mate, the smoked varieties from yerba mate, the smoked varieties from yerba mate, the smoked varieties can be carcinogenic. can be carcinogenic. can be carcinogenic. The non-smoked varieties uh don't seem The non-smoked varieties uh don't seem The non-smoked varieties uh don't seem to have that property. But, there's a to have that property. But, there's a to have that property. But, there's a lot of caffeine in yerba mate, so I'll lot of caffeine in yerba mate, so I'll lot of caffeine in yerba mate, so I'll drink yerba mate and have for many, many drink yerba mate and have for many, many drink yerba mate and have for many, many years, or I'll drink black coffee, or years, or I'll drink black coffee, or years, or I'll drink black coffee, or espresso, or espresso Americano, things espresso, or espresso Americano, things espresso, or espresso Americano, things of that sort. That's my preferred source of that sort. That's my preferred source of that sort. That's my preferred source of caffeine. Most people are drinking of caffeine. Most people are drinking of caffeine. Most people are drinking coffee to get their caffeine. And I coffee to get their caffeine. And I coffee to get their caffeine. And I would say that if you are going to drink would say that if you are going to drink would say that if you are going to drink your caffeine, drink it in the early your caffeine, drink it in the early your caffeine, drink it in the early part of the day. As I mentioned earlier, part of the day. As I mentioned earlier, part of the day. As I mentioned earlier, I am a big proponent of delaying your I am a big proponent of delaying your I am a big proponent of delaying your first caffeine intake until at least 90 first caffeine intake until at least 90 first caffeine intake until at least 90 minutes after waking in order to avoid minutes after waking in order to avoid minutes after waking in order to avoid the afternoon crash. I've talked a lot the afternoon crash. I've talked a lot the afternoon crash. I've talked a lot about this on the podcast. There are a about this on the podcast. There are a about this on the podcast. There are a lot of clips on the internet explaining lot of clips on the internet explaining lot of clips on the internet explaining the rationale behind that. And if you do the rationale behind that. And if you do the rationale behind that. And if you do experience an afternoon crash in energy, experience an afternoon crash in energy, experience an afternoon crash in energy, I do recommend delaying your morning I do recommend delaying your morning I do recommend delaying your morning caffeine intake to 90 to 120 minutes caffeine intake to 90 to 120 minutes caffeine intake to 90 to 120 minutes after waking. after waking. after waking. Now, for people that want to get more of Now, for people that want to get more of Now, for people that want to get more of a true cognitive enhancing and a true cognitive enhancing and a true cognitive enhancing and performance enhancing effect from performance enhancing effect from performance enhancing effect from caffeine, again, you're going to have to caffeine, again, you're going to have to caffeine, again, you're going to have to abstain from caffeine for about 4 days. abstain from caffeine for about 4 days. abstain from caffeine for about 4 days. For regular caffeine drinkers, that's For regular caffeine drinkers, that's For regular caffeine drinkers, that's going to be difficult. All right, that going to be difficult. All right, that going to be difficult. All right, that is going to lead to headaches, that's is going to lead to headaches, that's is going to lead to headaches, that's going to lead to brain fog, that's going to lead to brain fog, that's going to lead to brain fog, that's going to lead to feelings of malaise. In fact, to lead to feelings of malaise. In fact, to lead to feelings of malaise. In fact, the last time I took 4 days off, or even the last time I took 4 days off, or even the last time I took 4 days off, or even a week off from caffeine consumption, a week off from caffeine consumption, a week off from caffeine consumption, was when I was sick. I don't get sick was when I was sick. I don't get sick was when I was sick. I don't get sick very often, but when I am sick, I very often, but when I am sick, I very often, but when I am sick, I generally abstain from caffeine. And generally abstain from caffeine. And generally abstain from caffeine. And sometimes I wonder whether or not the sometimes I wonder whether or not the sometimes I wonder whether or not the malaise I feel from whatever um, you malaise I feel from whatever um, you malaise I feel from whatever um, you know, viral or bacterial thing I might know, viral or bacterial thing I might know, viral or bacterial thing I might be dealing with when I'm sick, is in be dealing with when I'm sick, is in be dealing with when I'm sick, is in part the malaise of caffeine withdrawal. part the malaise of caffeine withdrawal. part the malaise of caffeine withdrawal. I certainly notice I feel much better I certainly notice I feel much better I certainly notice I feel much better when I return to drinking caffeine, but when I return to drinking caffeine, but when I return to drinking caffeine, but that to coincide with feeling that to coincide with feeling that to coincide with feeling relief from whatever sinus symptoms and relief from whatever sinus symptoms and relief from whatever sinus symptoms and other symptoms they might have been other symptoms they might have been other symptoms they might have been experiencing from the illness. So, it's experiencing from the illness. So, it's experiencing from the illness. So, it's not a good experiment. I can't tease not a good experiment. I can't tease not a good experiment. I can't tease apart those variables. So, the short apart those variables. So, the short apart those variables. So, the short answer is for most adults there does not answer is for most adults there does not answer is for most adults there does not seem to be any major downside to seem to be any major downside to seem to be any major downside to consuming caffeine. And there have been consuming caffeine. And there have been consuming caffeine. And there have been scattered reports here and there in scattered reports here and there in scattered reports here and there in humans showing that ingesting caffeine humans showing that ingesting caffeine humans showing that ingesting caffeine can increase dopamine receptors, which can increase dopamine receptors, which can increase dopamine receptors, which will effectively allow you to get more will effectively allow you to get more will effectively allow you to get more out of the dopamine that you produce. out of the dopamine that you produce. out of the dopamine that you produce. This is why caffeine has a mood This is why caffeine has a mood This is why caffeine has a mood elevating as well as energy elevating as well as energy elevating as well as energy elevating effect. I should point out that some effect. I should point out that some effect. I should point out that some people just cannot tolerate caffeine. It people just cannot tolerate caffeine. It people just cannot tolerate caffeine. It makes them too jittery, too anxious. makes them too jittery, too anxious. makes them too jittery, too anxious. They start sweating. They get heart They start sweating. They get heart They start sweating. They get heart palpitations. It's very hard for these palpitations. It's very hard for these palpitations. It's very hard for these people to build up a tolerance to people to build up a tolerance to people to build up a tolerance to caffeine that allows them to enjoy it. caffeine that allows them to enjoy it. caffeine that allows them to enjoy it. These are the people that can even feel These are the people that can even feel These are the people that can even feel a fluttering of the heart and a lot of a fluttering of the heart and a lot of a fluttering of the heart and a lot of energy lift from decaf coffee. You know, energy lift from decaf coffee. You know, energy lift from decaf coffee. You know, something that, you know, to me is just something that, you know, to me is just something that, you know, to me is just a foreign concept, but some people are a foreign concept, but some people are a foreign concept, but some people are just that sensitive to caffeine that just that sensitive to caffeine that just that sensitive to caffeine that even the small amounts of caffeine in even the small amounts of caffeine in even the small amounts of caffeine in chocolate or decaf coffee make them feel chocolate or decaf coffee make them feel chocolate or decaf coffee make them feel too alert. And they should abstain from too alert. And they should abstain from too alert. And they should abstain from caffeine. I don't think they are in any caffeine. I don't think they are in any caffeine. I don't think they are in any way harming their health by abstaining way harming their health by abstaining way harming their health by abstaining from caffeine. Then there's the issue of from caffeine. Then there's the issue of from caffeine. Then there's the issue of children and adolescents and teenagers children and adolescents and teenagers children and adolescents and teenagers and young adults ingesting caffeine. And and young adults ingesting caffeine. And and young adults ingesting caffeine. And I covered some of this in the episode I covered some of this in the episode I covered some of this in the episode about caffeine. about caffeine. about caffeine. But there's been a lot of debate as to But there's been a lot of debate as to But there's been a lot of debate as to whether or not caffeine can cause whether or not caffeine can cause whether or not caffeine can cause osteoporosis, whether or not it can osteoporosis, whether or not it can osteoporosis, whether or not it can leach calcium out of the bones, whether leach calcium out of the bones, whether leach calcium out of the bones, whether or not it can stunt growth. or not it can stunt growth. or not it can stunt growth. Frankly, there's not a lot of evidence Frankly, there's not a lot of evidence Frankly, there's not a lot of evidence for those sorts of claims. And yet the for those sorts of claims. And yet the for those sorts of claims. And yet the developing brain is a very tender and developing brain is a very tender and developing brain is a very tender and malleable environment. And somebody who malleable environment. And somebody who malleable environment. And somebody who started off his career as a started off his career as a started off his career as a developmental neurobiologist studying developmental neurobiologist studying developmental neurobiologist studying developmental brain plasticity and developmental brain plasticity and developmental brain plasticity and wiring, it does sort of make me cringe to think it does sort of make me cringe to think it does sort of make me cringe to think about children younger than the age of, about children younger than the age of, about children younger than the age of, say, 14 ingesting large amounts of say, 14 ingesting large amounts of say, 14 ingesting large amounts of caffeine in any form, soda, coffee, tea, caffeine in any form, soda, coffee, tea, caffeine in any form, soda, coffee, tea, etc. Despite the fact that there's very etc. Despite the fact that there's very etc. Despite the fact that there's very little evidence that it can stunt their little evidence that it can stunt their little evidence that it can stunt their growth. I don't personally like the idea of the I don't personally like the idea of the I don't personally like the idea of the young brain being bathed in an adenosine young brain being bathed in an adenosine young brain being bathed in an adenosine receptor antagonist, which is receptor antagonist, which is receptor antagonist, which is effectively what caffeine is. You know, effectively what caffeine is. You know, effectively what caffeine is. You know, as much as possible one wants the as much as possible one wants the as much as possible one wants the developing brain to develop in a milieu developing brain to develop in a milieu developing brain to develop in a milieu of unencumbered, non-chemically encumbered unencumbered, non-chemically encumbered unencumbered, non-chemically encumbered interactions between neurotransmitters interactions between neurotransmitters interactions between neurotransmitters and their receptors, unless of course and their receptors, unless of course and their receptors, unless of course there's a clinical need for prescription there's a clinical need for prescription there's a clinical need for prescription drug or a supplement or drug or a supplement or drug or a supplement or some modification of a nutritional some modification of a nutritional some modification of a nutritional program specifically to up or down program specifically to up or down program specifically to up or down regulate the dopamine system or up or regulate the dopamine system or up or regulate the dopamine system or up or down regulate the serotonin system. But down regulate the serotonin system. But down regulate the serotonin system. But those are the sorts of decisions that those are the sorts of decisions that those are the sorts of decisions that really should be made in close oversight really should be made in close oversight really should be made in close oversight and recommendations by a psychiatrist. and recommendations by a psychiatrist. and recommendations by a psychiatrist. So, the short answer around daily So, the short answer around daily So, the short answer around daily caffeine consumption in young people, caffeine consumption in young people, caffeine consumption in young people, meaning 14 and younger, is avoid it if meaning 14 and younger, is avoid it if meaning 14 and younger, is avoid it if you can. Have your children avoid you can. Have your children avoid you can. Have your children avoid caffeine if they can. The occasional bit caffeine if they can. The occasional bit caffeine if they can. The occasional bit of caffeine is probably not going to be of caffeine is probably not going to be of caffeine is probably not going to be a problem. The amount of caffeine in a problem. The amount of caffeine in a problem. The amount of caffeine in small amounts of chocolate probably not small amounts of chocolate probably not small amounts of chocolate probably not going to be a problem. But caffeine in going to be a problem. But caffeine in going to be a problem. But caffeine in the form of energy drinks, sodas, the form of energy drinks, sodas, the form of energy drinks, sodas, coffee, tea for children younger than 14 coffee, tea for children younger than 14 coffee, tea for children younger than 14 just seems like a bad idea from just seems like a bad idea from just seems like a bad idea from everything we understand about brain everything we understand about brain everything we understand about brain wiring and the trajectories of brains wiring and the trajectories of brains wiring and the trajectories of brains that develop with a lot of chemical that develop with a lot of chemical that develop with a lot of chemical adjustment from adjustment from adjustment from other sources like caffeine. Now, for other sources like caffeine. Now, for other sources like caffeine. Now, for kids age 15 to say 18 or 20, kids age 15 to say 18 or 20, kids age 15 to say 18 or 20, a lot of brain wiring is still a lot of brain wiring is still a lot of brain wiring is still occurring, but a lot of it has been occurring, but a lot of it has been occurring, but a lot of it has been completed. So, probably not as risky to completed. So, probably not as risky to completed. So, probably not as risky to consume caffeine consume caffeine consume caffeine every once in a while or maybe even on a every once in a while or maybe even on a every once in a while or maybe even on a daily basis. But there are two I think daily basis. But there are two I think daily basis. But there are two I think there are great advantages to limiting there are great advantages to limiting there are great advantages to limiting the amount of caffeine that one ingests. the amount of caffeine that one ingests. the amount of caffeine that one ingests. And of course, And of course, And of course, in the adolescent and teen years, in the adolescent and teen years, in the adolescent and teen years, nowadays a lot of kids are consuming nowadays a lot of kids are consuming nowadays a lot of kids are consuming energy drinks and soda. And some of energy drinks and soda. And some of energy drinks and soda. And some of those energy drinks and sodas contain a those energy drinks and sodas contain a those energy drinks and sodas contain a lot of caffeine, anywhere from 200 to lot of caffeine, anywhere from 200 to lot of caffeine, anywhere from 200 to 800 mg of caffeine. And nowadays more 800 mg of caffeine. And nowadays more 800 mg of caffeine. And nowadays more sodas and energy drinks contain other sodas and energy drinks contain other sodas and energy drinks contain other things like amino acid precursors to things like amino acid precursors to things like amino acid precursors to neuromodulators like dopamine. So, for neuromodulators like dopamine. So, for neuromodulators like dopamine. So, for instance, a lot of energy drinks now instance, a lot of energy drinks now instance, a lot of energy drinks now contain L-tyrosine, which is a precursor contain L-tyrosine, which is a precursor contain L-tyrosine, which is a precursor to dopamine. A lot of them will contain to dopamine. A lot of them will contain to dopamine. A lot of them will contain theanine. I've talked about theanine as theanine. I've talked about theanine as theanine. I've talked about theanine as a supplement that can promote more a supplement that can promote more a supplement that can promote more restful sleep if taken 30 to 60 minutes restful sleep if taken 30 to 60 minutes restful sleep if taken 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. The reason why before sleep. The reason why before sleep. The reason why a lot of energy drinks and sodas and a lot of energy drinks and sodas and a lot of energy drinks and sodas and frankly now coffee brands are including frankly now coffee brands are including frankly now coffee brands are including theanine in the coffee or energy drink theanine in the coffee or energy drink theanine in the coffee or energy drink or soda or soda or soda is because it tends to have a mild is because it tends to have a mild is because it tends to have a mild anxiety reducing effect and it reduces anxiety reducing effect and it reduces anxiety reducing effect and it reduces the jitters that caffeine creates. And the jitters that caffeine creates. And the jitters that caffeine creates. And so that's actually a trick that these so that's actually a trick that these so that's actually a trick that these companies are using in order to get companies are using in order to get companies are using in order to get people to ingest more caffeine because people to ingest more caffeine because people to ingest more caffeine because by including the theanine it's by including the theanine it's by including the theanine it's preventing the kid or adult from feeling preventing the kid or adult from feeling preventing the kid or adult from feeling too jittery and therefore they can too jittery and therefore they can too jittery and therefore they can continue to consume that drink without continue to consume that drink without continue to consume that drink without feeling like they're overstimulated. feeling like they're overstimulated. feeling like they're overstimulated. So if I were to take the you know parental if I were to take the you know parental if I were to take the you know parental neuroscientist adult voice here and I would say avoid adult voice here and I would say avoid adult voice here and I would say avoid caffeine intake as much as you can until caffeine intake as much as you can until caffeine intake as much as you can until you're about 18 years old, but I'm you're about 18 years old, but I'm you're about 18 years old, but I'm realistic. I realize that adolescence realistic. I realize that adolescence realistic. I realize that adolescence and teens age say you know 14 or 15 out and teens age say you know 14 or 15 out and teens age say you know 14 or 15 out to 18 and older are going to be to 18 and older are going to be to 18 and older are going to be consuming caffeine in the form of energy consuming caffeine in the form of energy consuming caffeine in the form of energy drinks and sodas, but reducing the total drinks and sodas, but reducing the total drinks and sodas, but reducing the total amount of caffeine amount of caffeine amount of caffeine that one is ingesting in those years it that one is ingesting in those years it that one is ingesting in those years it just seems really advantageous. Again, just seems really advantageous. Again, just seems really advantageous. Again, for all the same reasons I mentioned for all the same reasons I mentioned for all the same reasons I mentioned earlier. You don't want the young brain earlier. You don't want the young brain earlier. You don't want the young brain bathing in a bunch of exogenous meaning bathing in a bunch of exogenous meaning bathing in a bunch of exogenous meaning externally introduced neurochemicals or externally introduced neurochemicals or externally introduced neurochemicals or in things like theanine or L-tyrosine. in things like theanine or L-tyrosine. in things like theanine or L-tyrosine. If you're going to If you're going to If you're going to indulge in caffeine or in energy drinks indulge in caffeine or in energy drinks indulge in caffeine or in energy drinks or theanine or L-tyrosine for that matter. theanine or L-tyrosine for that matter. theanine or L-tyrosine for that matter. That's the sort of thing that probably That's the sort of thing that probably That's the sort of thing that probably is best left for people 18 and older. is best left for people 18 and older. is best left for people 18 and older. And even there if one finds that And even there if one finds that And even there if one finds that caffeine is for them as do I, I think caffeine is for them as do I, I think caffeine is for them as do I, I think always best to try and get your caffeine always best to try and get your caffeine always best to try and get your caffeine from a clean source. A clean source from a clean source. A clean source from a clean source. A clean source meaning something that contains just meaning something that contains just meaning something that contains just coffee or just tea. coffee or just tea. coffee or just tea. Again, this isn't a knock on energy Again, this isn't a knock on energy Again, this isn't a knock on energy drink specifically, but you really have drink specifically, but you really have drink specifically, but you really have to make sure that whatever energy drink to make sure that whatever energy drink to make sure that whatever energy drink you're going to consume you're going to consume you're going to consume you know what's in it. You recognize you know what's in it. You recognize you know what's in it. You recognize what the different ingredients do, and what the different ingredients do, and what the different ingredients do, and you recognize the potential of ingesting you recognize the potential of ingesting you recognize the potential of ingesting those ingredients chronically over and those ingredients chronically over and those ingredients chronically over and over again. And I've talked a little bit over again. And I've talked a little bit over again. And I've talked a little bit about this on previous podcast, and I'll about this on previous podcast, and I'll about this on previous podcast, and I'll get into this again. Maybe we'll do an get into this again. Maybe we'll do an get into this again. Maybe we'll do an entire episode about energy drinks entire episode about energy drinks entire episode about energy drinks because they are so commonly consumed because they are so commonly consumed because they are so commonly consumed nowadays. Now, getting back to the nowadays. Now, getting back to the nowadays. Now, getting back to the original question about daily caffeine original question about daily caffeine original question about daily caffeine consumption, this person goes on to say consumption, this person goes on to say consumption, this person goes on to say that for them, okay, this is their that for them, okay, this is their that for them, okay, this is their personal experience, after a few weeks personal experience, after a few weeks personal experience, after a few weeks of consumption of daily caffeine, the of consumption of daily caffeine, the of consumption of daily caffeine, the negative start to outweigh the positive negative start to outweigh the positive negative start to outweigh the positive ones. They're getting poor quality ones. They're getting poor quality ones. They're getting poor quality sleep, lack of appetite, anxiety, etc. sleep, lack of appetite, anxiety, etc. sleep, lack of appetite, anxiety, etc. And when they don't consume caffeine, And when they don't consume caffeine, And when they don't consume caffeine, they find it a lot easier to be mindful, they find it a lot easier to be mindful, they find it a lot easier to be mindful, and their meditation practice is much and their meditation practice is much and their meditation practice is much better, but they're lethargic and less better, but they're lethargic and less better, but they're lethargic and less motivated. Okay, so what they're motivated. Okay, so what they're motivated. Okay, so what they're describing are all the classic symptoms describing are all the classic symptoms describing are all the classic symptoms of caffeine overuse, probably not abuse of caffeine overuse, probably not abuse of caffeine overuse, probably not abuse in this case, although caffeine can be in this case, although caffeine can be in this case, although caffeine can be truly abused. People taking caffeine truly abused. People taking caffeine truly abused. People taking caffeine pills, etc. pills, etc. pills, etc. in large quantities. in large quantities. in large quantities. We're not talking about that, but this We're not talking about that, but this We're not talking about that, but this person is describing the classic pattern person is describing the classic pattern person is describing the classic pattern of overuse of caffeine and the classic of overuse of caffeine and the classic of overuse of caffeine and the classic pattern of withdrawal from caffeine when pattern of withdrawal from caffeine when pattern of withdrawal from caffeine when they stop taking it. So, what should they stop taking it. So, what should they stop taking it. So, what should somebody like this do? And I think it's somebody like this do? And I think it's somebody like this do? And I think it's an important question to answer because an important question to answer because an important question to answer because I think a lot of people fall into this I think a lot of people fall into this I think a lot of people fall into this category. They drink caffeine every day. category. They drink caffeine every day. category. They drink caffeine every day. They're no longer getting the They're no longer getting the They're no longer getting the performance-enhancing effect of performance-enhancing effect of performance-enhancing effect of caffeine, so they're taking it just to caffeine, so they're taking it just to caffeine, so they're taking it just to be normal or feel like they can focus be normal or feel like they can focus be normal or feel like they can focus normally and have normal amounts of normally and have normal amounts of normally and have normal amounts of energy, but then if they try and come energy, but then if they try and come energy, but then if they try and come off, they feel worse. Okay, there are a off, they feel worse. Okay, there are a off, they feel worse. Okay, there are a couple ways to do this. You can couple ways to do this. You can couple ways to do this. You can taper your caffeine intake off over the taper your caffeine intake off over the taper your caffeine intake off over the course of 4 to 7 days, but most people course of 4 to 7 days, but most people course of 4 to 7 days, but most people don't have the discipline or don't want don't have the discipline or don't want don't have the discipline or don't want to spend the time doing that. But if you to spend the time doing that. But if you to spend the time doing that. But if you want to, the way you would do that is want to, the way you would do that is want to, the way you would do that is you would cut it by about 10 or 15% per you would cut it by about 10 or 15% per you would cut it by about 10 or 15% per day. You could do that by volume, or you day. You could do that by volume, or you day. You could do that by volume, or you could do that by concentration of could do that by concentration of could do that by concentration of coffee, that sort of thing. A simpler coffee, that sort of thing. A simpler coffee, that sort of thing. A simpler way to go about all this that still will way to go about all this that still will way to go about all this that still will allow you to get some of the allow you to get some of the allow you to get some of the performance-enhancing effects of performance-enhancing effects of performance-enhancing effects of caffeine, and yet experience far less caffeine, and yet experience far less caffeine, and yet experience far less withdrawal, would be two things. First withdrawal, would be two things. First withdrawal, would be two things. First of all, just halve your amount of all, just halve your amount of all, just halve your amount of caffeine intake for two or three days. caffeine intake for two or three days. caffeine intake for two or three days. So, again, that could be by volume or it So, again, that could be by volume or it So, again, that could be by volume or it could be by concentration. could be by concentration. could be by concentration. Probably easiest to do by volume. And Probably easiest to do by volume. And Probably easiest to do by volume. And so, instead of drinking an 8-oz coffee so, instead of drinking an 8-oz coffee so, instead of drinking an 8-oz coffee in the morning, maybe you do 4 oz of in the morning, maybe you do 4 oz of in the morning, maybe you do 4 oz of regular coffee, 4 oz of decaf, or you regular coffee, 4 oz of decaf, or you regular coffee, 4 oz of decaf, or you just have the 4 oz of coffee. You do just have the 4 oz of coffee. You do just have the 4 oz of coffee. You do that for 3 or 4 days, and then you take that for 3 or 4 days, and then you take that for 3 or 4 days, and then you take perhaps one full day off from caffeine, perhaps one full day off from caffeine, perhaps one full day off from caffeine, maybe another full day off. You're going maybe another full day off. You're going maybe another full day off. You're going to feel a lot less to feel a lot less to feel a lot less bad on those 2 days having cut your bad on those 2 days having cut your bad on those 2 days having cut your caffeine intake in half in the previous caffeine intake in half in the previous caffeine intake in half in the previous 4 days than you would if you just went 4 days than you would if you just went 4 days than you would if you just went cold turkey. cold turkey. cold turkey. And then, you go back to ingesting And then, you go back to ingesting And then, you go back to ingesting caffeine, but you go back to ingesting caffeine, but you go back to ingesting caffeine, but you go back to ingesting caffeine at that 50% dose, or what used caffeine at that 50% dose, or what used caffeine at that 50% dose, or what used to represent that 50% dose of caffeine to represent that 50% dose of caffeine to represent that 50% dose of caffeine for you. And you just continue that way for you. And you just continue that way for you. And you just continue that way on a daily basis. And then, every once on a daily basis. And then, every once on a daily basis. And then, every once in a while, when you want the in a while, when you want the in a while, when you want the performance-enhancing effects of performance-enhancing effects of performance-enhancing effects of caffeine, you go back to what was your caffeine, you go back to what was your caffeine, you go back to what was your original dose, which is now double what original dose, which is now double what original dose, which is now double what you're taking on a on a daily basis. So, you're taking on a on a daily basis. So, you're taking on a on a daily basis. So, what we're really talking about here is what we're really talking about here is what we're really talking about here is not going cold turkey. We're not talking not going cold turkey. We're not talking not going cold turkey. We're not talking about quitting caffeine indefinitely. about quitting caffeine indefinitely. about quitting caffeine indefinitely. What we're talking about is cutting the What we're talking about is cutting the What we're talking about is cutting the amount of caffeine that you drink in amount of caffeine that you drink in amount of caffeine that you drink in half for about 4 days, okay, plus or half for about 4 days, okay, plus or half for about 4 days, okay, plus or minus a day. minus a day. minus a day. And then, taking 2 days off from And then, taking 2 days off from And then, taking 2 days off from caffeine completely, and then going back caffeine completely, and then going back caffeine completely, and then going back on that half dose of caffeine on that half dose of caffeine on that half dose of caffeine indefinitely. That's your new baseline indefinitely. That's your new baseline indefinitely. That's your new baseline of caffeine intake. And then, every once of caffeine intake. And then, every once of caffeine intake. And then, every once in a while, if you need a bit more of a in a while, if you need a bit more of a in a while, if you need a bit more of a lift, you ingest twice as much caffeine lift, you ingest twice as much caffeine lift, you ingest twice as much caffeine or a coffee that's twice as or a coffee that's twice as or a coffee that's twice as concentrated. We should acknowledge that concentrated. We should acknowledge that concentrated. We should acknowledge that most people aren't going to be really most people aren't going to be really most people aren't going to be really precise about the amount of ounces and precise about the amount of ounces and precise about the amount of ounces and the amount of caffeine. Nonetheless, the amount of caffeine. Nonetheless, the amount of caffeine. Nonetheless, it's pretty straightforward to know that it's pretty straightforward to know that it's pretty straightforward to know that you're reducing your caffeine intake. you're reducing your caffeine intake. you're reducing your caffeine intake. Certainly, it's clear to know if you're Certainly, it's clear to know if you're Certainly, it's clear to know if you're ingesting no caffeine for a couple of ingesting no caffeine for a couple of ingesting no caffeine for a couple of days. And it's pretty clear when you're days. And it's pretty clear when you're days. And it's pretty clear when you're doubling the amount of caffeine, but doubling the amount of caffeine, but doubling the amount of caffeine, but you don't have to worry so much that you don't have to worry so much that you don't have to worry so much that you're exactly doubling the amount of you're exactly doubling the amount of you're exactly doubling the amount of caffeine. You could drink 1 and 1/2 caffeine. You could drink 1 and 1/2 caffeine. You could drink 1 and 1/2 times as much as you happen to drink on times as much as you happen to drink on times as much as you happen to drink on the day before, or you could drink three the day before, or you could drink three the day before, or you could drink three times as much. You would definitely feel times as much. You would definitely feel times as much. You would definitely feel it if you drank three times as much. One it if you drank three times as much. One it if you drank three times as much. One very important thing to recognize is very important thing to recognize is very important thing to recognize is that on any day where you really spike that on any day where you really spike that on any day where you really spike your caffeine intake above baseline, no your caffeine intake above baseline, no your caffeine intake above baseline, no matter where that baseline is when you matter where that baseline is when you matter where that baseline is when you start, could be zero, could be 400 mg, start, could be zero, could be 400 mg, start, could be zero, could be 400 mg, could be 200 mg, when you double that could be 200 mg, when you double that could be 200 mg, when you double that intake, you will get a big boost of intake, you will get a big boost of intake, you will get a big boost of energy, and the next day you're going to energy, and the next day you're going to energy, and the next day you're going to feel the crash from that. You're going feel the crash from that. You're going feel the crash from that. You're going to feel more lethargic, you're going to feel more lethargic, you're going to feel more lethargic, you're going to feel not so good. This has to do with feel not so good. This has to do with feel not so good. This has to do with dopamine receptor modulation, this has dopamine receptor modulation, this has dopamine receptor modulation, this has to do with adenosine receptor to do with adenosine receptor to do with adenosine receptor modulation. The important thing to do is modulation. The important thing to do is modulation. The important thing to do is not continue to consume that elevated not continue to consume that elevated not continue to consume that elevated level of caffeine, which is what most level of caffeine, which is what most level of caffeine, which is what most people do, and then they set a new people do, and then they set a new people do, and then they set a new higher baseline just to feel normal. The higher baseline just to feel normal. The higher baseline just to feel normal. The key thing is to just key thing is to just key thing is to just manage to get through that manage to get through that manage to get through that crash day. Manage to get through that crash day. Manage to get through that crash day. Manage to get through that one day where you feel a little less one day where you feel a little less one day where you feel a little less good, or maybe even down a bit. Get good, or maybe even down a bit. Get good, or maybe even down a bit. Get outside a bit, get some more sunshine, outside a bit, get some more sunshine, outside a bit, get some more sunshine, we know that spikes your cortisol in a we know that spikes your cortisol in a we know that spikes your cortisol in a good way, right? It can increase good way, right? It can increase good way, right? It can increase the catecholamines, dopamine, etc. Get a the catecholamines, dopamine, etc. Get a the catecholamines, dopamine, etc. Get a little bit more sunlight, get a little bit more sunlight, get a little bit more sunlight, get a little bit more movement, get outside, do bit more movement, get outside, do bit more movement, get outside, do something to offset those feelings of something to offset those feelings of something to offset those feelings of malaise, and then get right back to your malaise, and then get right back to your malaise, and then get right back to your original goal level of caffeine each original goal level of caffeine each original goal level of caffeine each day. There's no use in getting so day. There's no use in getting so day. There's no use in getting so quantitative that you make your life quantitative that you make your life quantitative that you make your life miserable, you're measuring things out miserable, you're measuring things out miserable, you're measuring things out like a laboratory chemist. If you're like a laboratory chemist. If you're like a laboratory chemist. If you're that type and you want to do that, be my that type and you want to do that, be my that type and you want to do that, be my guest. But unless you're taking caffeine guest. But unless you're taking caffeine guest. But unless you're taking caffeine in pill form, it's very, very hard to in pill form, it's very, very hard to in pill form, it's very, very hard to get extremely exact about the amounts of get extremely exact about the amounts of get extremely exact about the amounts of caffeine that you're ingesting. So, it caffeine that you're ingesting. So, it caffeine that you're ingesting. So, it is okay to eyeball it, but understand is okay to eyeball it, but understand is okay to eyeball it, but understand the contour of how caffeine works and the contour of how caffeine works and the contour of how caffeine works and what the caffeine performance enhancing what the caffeine performance enhancing what the caffeine performance enhancing effect comes from. It comes from a effect comes from. It comes from a effect comes from. It comes from a caffeine intake above baseline. caffeine intake above baseline. caffeine intake above baseline. Understand that anytime you go above Understand that anytime you go above Understand that anytime you go above baseline with your caffeine intake, baseline with your caffeine intake, baseline with your caffeine intake, there's a potential of some anxiety. there's a potential of some anxiety. there's a potential of some anxiety. Understand that there's going to be a Understand that there's going to be a Understand that there's going to be a slight withdrawal effect that lasts slight withdrawal effect that lasts slight withdrawal effect that lasts about 24 to 48 hours. Battle through about 24 to 48 hours. Battle through about 24 to 48 hours. Battle through that short period, and you'll be right that short period, and you'll be right that short period, and you'll be right back where you started and where you back where you started and where you back where you started and where you need to be so that you can enjoy need to be so that you can enjoy need to be so that you can enjoy caffeine on a daily basis and derive the caffeine on a daily basis and derive the caffeine on a daily basis and derive the benefits because there are many benefits because there are many benefits because there are many benefits to drinking caffeine and avoiding some to drinking caffeine and avoiding some to drinking caffeine and avoiding some of the potential hazards. And again, if of the potential hazards. And again, if of the potential hazards. And again, if you're a young person, I recommend you're a young person, I recommend you're a young person, I recommend delaying that caffeine intake maybe, I delaying that caffeine intake maybe, I delaying that caffeine intake maybe, I don't know, 10 years. Thank you for don't know, 10 years. Thank you for don't know, 10 years. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me joining for the beginning of this Ask Me joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full Anything episode. To hear the full Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of episode and to hear future episodes of episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and receive transcripts of them and receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab Podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab Podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab Podcast standard channel and premium tools not standard channel and premium tools not standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which of course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab Podcast. And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is a species which I think we all agree is a species which I think we all agree is a species that we are most interested in. And we that we are most interested in. And we that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And those health, and performance. And those health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab Podcast and other media Huberman Lab Podcast and other media Huberman Lab Podcast and other media channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give you information to your burning you information to your burning you information to your burning questions in-depth and allow you the questions in-depth and allow you the questions in-depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium channel. So, this is a terrific way that channel. So, this is a terrific way that channel. So, this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds they're going to amplify whatever funds they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to come in through the premium channel to come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and further support research for science and further support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be some premium content, such as some premium content, such as some premium content, such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your interest in science.