Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. Today I Stamford School of Medicine. Today I Stamford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. have the pleasure of introducing Dr. have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Anna Lemi. Dr. Lemy is a psychiatrist Anna Lemi. Dr. Lemy is a psychiatrist Anna Lemi. Dr. Lemy is a psychiatrist and the chief of the addiction medicine and the chief of the addiction medicine and the chief of the addiction medicine dual diagnosis clinic at Stamford dual diagnosis clinic at Stamford dual diagnosis clinic at Stamford University School of Medicine. She's a University School of Medicine. She's a University School of Medicine. She's a psychiatrist who treats patients psychiatrist who treats patients psychiatrist who treats patients struggling with addiction. She has struggling with addiction. She has struggling with addiction. She has successfully treated patients dealing successfully treated patients dealing successfully treated patients dealing with drug addiction, alcohol addiction, with drug addiction, alcohol addiction, with drug addiction, alcohol addiction, and behavioral addictions such as and behavioral addictions such as and behavioral addictions such as gambling and sex addiction, as well as gambling and sex addiction, as well as gambling and sex addiction, as well as other types of addiction. In fact, other types of addiction. In fact, other types of addiction. In fact, during our discussion, I learned that during our discussion, I learned that during our discussion, I learned that there are a huge range of behaviors and there are a huge range of behaviors and there are a huge range of behaviors and substances to which people can become substances to which people can become substances to which people can become addicted to, and that there is a common addicted to, and that there is a common addicted to, and that there is a common biological underpinning of all those biological underpinning of all those biological underpinning of all those addictions. I also learned that there is addictions. I also learned that there is addictions. I also learned that there is a common path to the treatment and a common path to the treatment and a common path to the treatment and recovery from essentially all recovery from essentially all recovery from essentially all addictions. Dr. Lemi explained that to addictions. Dr. Lemi explained that to addictions. Dr. Lemi explained that to me and explained how to think about and me and explained how to think about and me and explained how to think about and conceptualize our own addictions as well conceptualize our own addictions as well conceptualize our own addictions as well as the addictions of other people who as the addictions of other people who as the addictions of other people who are struggling to get treatment, move are struggling to get treatment, move are struggling to get treatment, move through treatment, and stay sober from through treatment, and stay sober from through treatment, and stay sober from their addictions. In addition to their addictions. In addition to their addictions. In addition to treating patients, Dr. Lenkkey is an treating patients, Dr. Lenkkey is an treating patients, Dr. Lenkkey is an author and was featured in the 2020 author and was featured in the 2020 author and was featured in the 2020 Netflix documentary, The Social Dilemma. Netflix documentary, The Social Dilemma. Netflix documentary, The Social Dilemma. I'm excited to tell you that she has a I'm excited to tell you that she has a I'm excited to tell you that she has a new book coming out called Dopamine new book coming out called Dopamine new book coming out called Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence. The book comes out August Indulgence. The book comes out August Indulgence. The book comes out August 24th and is an absolutely fascinating 24th and is an absolutely fascinating 24th and is an absolutely fascinating read into addiction and ways to treat read into addiction and ways to treat read into addiction and ways to treat various types of addiction. I've read various types of addiction. I've read various types of addiction. I've read the book cover to cover and all I'll the book cover to cover and all I'll the book cover to cover and all I'll tell you is that at the very first tell you is that at the very first tell you is that at the very first chapter and throughout, you are going to chapter and throughout, you are going to chapter and throughout, you are going to be absolutely blown away. The stories be absolutely blown away. The stories be absolutely blown away. The stories about her patients are extremely about her patients are extremely about her patients are extremely engaging. It brings forward the real engaging. It brings forward the real engaging. It brings forward the real struggle of addiction and the struggle of addiction and the struggle of addiction and the incredible, I think it's fair to say, incredible, I think it's fair to say, incredible, I think it's fair to say, heroic battles that people fight in heroic battles that people fight in heroic battles that people fight in order to get through addictions of order to get through addictions of order to get through addictions of various kinds. And all of that is woven various kinds. And all of that is woven various kinds. And all of that is woven through with story, with science in ways through with story, with science in ways through with story, with science in ways that make it very accessible to anyone, that make it very accessible to anyone, that make it very accessible to anyone, whether or not you have a science whether or not you have a science whether or not you have a science background or not. I can't recommend it background or not. I can't recommend it background or not. I can't recommend it highly enough. So again, the book is highly enough. So again, the book is highly enough. So again, the book is Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence. It comes out August Age of Indulgence. It comes out August Age of Indulgence. It comes out August 24th of this year, 2021. And you can 24th of this year, 2021. And you can 24th of this year, 2021. And you can pre-order that book by going to Amazon. pre-order that book by going to Amazon. pre-order that book by going to Amazon. We will provide a link to that in the We will provide a link to that in the We will provide a link to that in the show caption. Before we begin, I just show caption. Before we begin, I just show caption. Before we begin, I just want to mention that this podcast is want to mention that this podcast is want to mention that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stamford. It is however part of roles at Stamford. It is however part of roles at Stamford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science to consumer information about science to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROA. ROA podcast. Our first sponsor is ROA. ROA podcast. Our first sponsor is ROA. ROA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute utmost quality. Founded of the absolute utmost quality. Founded of the absolute utmost quality. Founded by two all-American swimmers from by two all-American swimmers from by two all-American swimmers from Stamford, everything about the Stamford, everything about the Stamford, everything about the sunglasses and eyeglasses that ROA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that ROA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that ROA makes was designed with performance in mind. was designed with performance in mind. was designed with performance in mind. First of all, they're very lightweight. First of all, they're very lightweight. First of all, they're very lightweight. You don't even really notice that You don't even really notice that You don't even really notice that they're on your face. Second of all, they're on your face. Second of all, they're on your face. Second of all, even if you get sweaty, they don't slip even if you get sweaty, they don't slip even if you get sweaty, they don't slip off. In fact, they were designed to be off. In fact, they were designed to be off. In fact, they were designed to be worn at work or around the house, but worn at work or around the house, but worn at work or around the house, but also if you're running or biking, so you also if you're running or biking, so you also if you're running or biking, so you can move seamlessly between different can move seamlessly between different can move seamlessly between different activities without having to change your activities without having to change your activities without having to change your sunglasses or eyeglasses. In addition, sunglasses or eyeglasses. In addition, sunglasses or eyeglasses. In addition, the lenses are designed with the science the lenses are designed with the science the lenses are designed with the science of the visual system in mind. I've spent of the visual system in mind. I've spent of the visual system in mind. I've spent my career working on the science of the my career working on the science of the my career working on the science of the visual system, and I can tell you that visual system, and I can tell you that visual system, and I can tell you that it's not trivial to build a lens that it's not trivial to build a lens that it's not trivial to build a lens that allows you to see with perfect clarity, allows you to see with perfect clarity, allows you to see with perfect clarity, whether or not you're in bright sunshine whether or not you're in bright sunshine whether or not you're in bright sunshine and then move into shadows. But the ROA and then move into shadows. But the ROA and then move into shadows. But the ROA glasses allow you to do that. you always glasses allow you to do that. you always glasses allow you to do that. you always see things with absolute clarity. see things with absolute clarity. see things with absolute clarity. Another terrific thing about ROA Another terrific thing about ROA Another terrific thing about ROA eyeglasses and sunglasses is the eyeglasses and sunglasses is the eyeglasses and sunglasses is the aesthetic. A lot of so-called aesthetic. A lot of so-called aesthetic. A lot of so-called performance sunglasses and eyeglasses, performance sunglasses and eyeglasses, performance sunglasses and eyeglasses, they're not really built with the best they're not really built with the best they're not really built with the best aesthetic, and they kind of make people aesthetic, and they kind of make people aesthetic, and they kind of make people look like cyborgs. With ROA, they have a look like cyborgs. With ROA, they have a look like cyborgs. With ROA, they have a lot of different styles to choose from, lot of different styles to choose from, lot of different styles to choose from, but all those styles of the sort that but all those styles of the sort that but all those styles of the sort that you could wear out to dinner or to work you could wear out to dinner or to work you could wear out to dinner or to work or when engaging in physical activity. or when engaging in physical activity. or when engaging in physical activity. If you'd like to try ROA glasses, you If you'd like to try ROA glasses, you If you'd like to try ROA glasses, you can go to ROA, that's roka.com, and can go to ROA, that's roka.com, and can go to ROA, that's roka.com, and enter the code huberman at checkout. And enter the code huberman at checkout. And enter the code huberman at checkout. And if you do that, you'll get 20% off your if you do that, you'll get 20% off your if you do that, you'll get 20% off your first order. Today's podcast is also first order. Today's podcast is also first order. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition Tracker is a personalized nutrition Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your platform that analyzes data from your platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better blood and DNA to help you better blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your understand your body and reach your understand your body and reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in health goals. I'm a big believer in health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done and I've getting regular blood work done and I've getting regular blood work done and I've been doing that for a number of years been doing that for a number of years been doing that for a number of years for the simple reason that most if not for the simple reason that most if not for the simple reason that most if not all of the factors that impact your all of the factors that impact your all of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only immediate and long-term health can only immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed in detail with a quality be analyzed in detail with a quality be analyzed in detail with a quality blood test. And now with the advent of blood test. And now with the advent of blood test. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can get further modern DNA tests, you can get further modern DNA tests, you can get further insight into what's going on beneath the insight into what's going on beneath the insight into what's going on beneath the hood, so to speak. The problem with a hood, so to speak. The problem with a hood, so to speak. The problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests, however, is lot of blood and DNA tests, however, is lot of blood and DNA tests, however, is you get numbers back. you get the levels you get numbers back. you get the levels you get numbers back. you get the levels back of various things and you find out back of various things and you find out back of various things and you find out if certain things are too high or too if certain things are too high or too if certain things are too high or too low or right on target, but there are no low or right on target, but there are no low or right on target, but there are no directives about how to move those directives about how to move those directives about how to move those numbers in the direction that you would numbers in the direction that you would numbers in the direction that you would want them to go. With inside tracker, want them to go. With inside tracker, want them to go. With inside tracker, they have a dashboard that makes all of they have a dashboard that makes all of they have a dashboard that makes all of that very easy. And that dashboard takes that very easy. And that dashboard takes that very easy. And that dashboard takes your numbers and can help direct you your numbers and can help direct you your numbers and can help direct you towards particular lifestyle factors, towards particular lifestyle factors, towards particular lifestyle factors, nutrition factors, exercise, nutrition factors, exercise, nutrition factors, exercise, supplementation, etc. that can help you supplementation, etc. that can help you supplementation, etc. that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that bring those numbers into the ranges that bring those numbers into the ranges that are right for you. If you'd like to try are right for you. If you'd like to try are right for you. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can go to Inside Tracker, you can go to Inside Tracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off And if you do that, you'll get 25% off And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Just use any of Inside Tracker's plans. Just use any of Inside Tracker's plans. Just use the code hubman at checkout. Today's the code hubman at checkout. Today's the code hubman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's backed by 25 published peerreview that's backed by 25 published peerreview that's backed by 25 published peerreview studies and has over 600,000 five-star studies and has over 600,000 five-star studies and has over 600,000 five-star reviews. I've been meditating for a very reviews. I've been meditating for a very reviews. I've been meditating for a very long time. I'm 45 years old now, almost long time. I'm 45 years old now, almost long time. I'm 45 years old now, almost 46. And I started meditating when I was 46. And I started meditating when I was 46. And I started meditating when I was about 15 years old. The problem, about 15 years old. The problem, about 15 years old. The problem, however, is keeping up a meditation however, is keeping up a meditation however, is keeping up a meditation practice. I've experienced this myself. practice. I've experienced this myself. practice. I've experienced this myself. I've had periods of time where I'm I've had periods of time where I'm I've had periods of time where I'm meditating regularly and then periods of meditating regularly and then periods of meditating regularly and then periods of time where I just kind of fall off the time where I just kind of fall off the time where I just kind of fall off the rails and I'm just not doing it at all. rails and I'm just not doing it at all. rails and I'm just not doing it at all. There's now tons of evidence, evidence There's now tons of evidence, evidence There's now tons of evidence, evidence from neuroscience, evidence from neuroscience, evidence from neuroscience, evidence from psychology, evidence from areas of psychology, evidence from areas of psychology, evidence from areas of biology focused on stress and the immune biology focused on stress and the immune biology focused on stress and the immune system that a meditation practice when system that a meditation practice when system that a meditation practice when done regularly is extremely beneficial done regularly is extremely beneficial done regularly is extremely beneficial for mental and physical health and for mental and physical health and for mental and physical health and things like focus and creativity. things like focus and creativity. things like focus and creativity. However, you have to do the meditation However, you have to do the meditation However, you have to do the meditation practice and so if you're not doing it practice and so if you're not doing it practice and so if you're not doing it regularly, that's a serious problem. And regularly, that's a serious problem. And regularly, that's a serious problem. And if you are doing it regularly, great. if you are doing it regularly, great. if you are doing it regularly, great. With Headspace, I find that I can stick With Headspace, I find that I can stick With Headspace, I find that I can stick to a meditation practice very easily. In to a meditation practice very easily. In to a meditation practice very easily. In fact, that's why I started using it and fact, that's why I started using it and fact, that's why I started using it and that's why I continue to use it. I try that's why I continue to use it. I try that's why I continue to use it. I try and get a meditation practice in every and get a meditation practice in every and get a meditation practice in every day, but sometimes that requires that it day, but sometimes that requires that it day, but sometimes that requires that it be a brief meditation practice. With be a brief meditation practice. With be a brief meditation practice. With Headspace, they have a huge range of Headspace, they have a huge range of Headspace, they have a huge range of different meditations of different meditations of different meditations of different durations. And so, that's really helpful durations. And so, that's really helpful durations. And so, that's really helpful in building and maintaining these in building and maintaining these in building and maintaining these powerful meditation practices. If you powerful meditation practices. If you powerful meditation practices. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to want to try Headspace, you can go to want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/special offer. And if you do that, you'll get a offer. And if you do that, you'll get a offer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one-month trial with Headspace's free one-month trial with Headspace's free one-month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations. This is the full library of meditations. This is the full library of meditations. This is the best deal offered by Headspace. best deal offered by Headspace. best deal offered by Headspace. Basically, you get access to everything Basically, you get access to everything Basically, you get access to everything they've got completely free for a they've got completely free for a they've got completely free for a one-month trial. So, if you'd like to one-month trial. So, if you'd like to one-month trial. So, if you'd like to try that, go to headspace.com/sp try that, go to headspace.com/sp try that, go to headspace.com/sp specialcial offer. And now for my specialcial offer. And now for my specialcial offer. And now for my discussion with Dr. Anna Lumpkkey. All discussion with Dr. Anna Lumpkkey. All discussion with Dr. Anna Lumpkkey. All right. Great to have you here. right. Great to have you here. right. Great to have you here. Thank you for having me. I'm excited to Thank you for having me. I'm excited to Thank you for having me. I'm excited to be here. be here. be here. Yeah, I have a lot of questions for you. Yeah, I have a lot of questions for you. Yeah, I have a lot of questions for you. I and many listeners of this podcast I and many listeners of this podcast I and many listeners of this podcast are obsessed with dopamine. And what is are obsessed with dopamine. And what is are obsessed with dopamine. And what is dopamine? How does it work? We all hear dopamine? How does it work? We all hear dopamine? How does it work? We all hear that dopamine is this molecule that dopamine is this molecule that dopamine is this molecule associated with pleasure. I think the uh associated with pleasure. I think the uh associated with pleasure. I think the uh the term dopamine hits like I'm getting the term dopamine hits like I'm getting the term dopamine hits like I'm getting a dopamine hit from this from Instagram a dopamine hit from this from Instagram a dopamine hit from this from Instagram or from likes or from praise or from or from likes or from praise or from or from likes or from praise or from whatever is now um commonly heard. whatever is now um commonly heard. whatever is now um commonly heard. What is dopamine? And what are maybe What is dopamine? And what are maybe What is dopamine? And what are maybe some things about dopamine that most some things about dopamine that most some things about dopamine that most people don't know and probably that I people don't know and probably that I people don't know and probably that I don't know either. don't know either. don't know either. So dopamine is a neurotransmitter and So dopamine is a neurotransmitter and So dopamine is a neurotransmitter and neurotransmitters are those molecules neurotransmitters are those molecules neurotransmitters are those molecules that bridge the gap between two neurons. that bridge the gap between two neurons. that bridge the gap between two neurons. So they essentially allow one neuron, So they essentially allow one neuron, So they essentially allow one neuron, the presinaptic neuron to communicate the presinaptic neuron to communicate the presinaptic neuron to communicate with the postsaptic neuron. Um, dopamine with the postsaptic neuron. Um, dopamine with the postsaptic neuron. Um, dopamine is intimately uh associated with the is intimately uh associated with the is intimately uh associated with the experience of reward but also with experience of reward but also with experience of reward but also with movement which I think is really movement which I think is really movement which I think is really interesting because movement and reward interesting because movement and reward interesting because movement and reward are linked, right? If you think about are linked, right? If you think about are linked, right? If you think about you know um early humans, you had to you know um early humans, you had to you know um early humans, you had to move in order to go seek out the water move in order to go seek out the water move in order to go seek out the water or the meat or whatever it was. Um or the meat or whatever it was. Um or the meat or whatever it was. Um and even in the most primitive and even in the most primitive and even in the most primitive organisms, dopamine is released when organisms, dopamine is released when organisms, dopamine is released when food is sensed in the environment. for food is sensed in the environment. for food is sensed in the environment. for example, sea elegance, a very um example, sea elegance, a very um example, sea elegance, a very um primitive worm. primitive worm. primitive worm. So um dopamine is this really um So um dopamine is this really um So um dopamine is this really um powerful important molecule in the brain powerful important molecule in the brain powerful important molecule in the brain that helps us um experience pleasure. that helps us um experience pleasure. that helps us um experience pleasure. It's not the only neurotransmitter It's not the only neurotransmitter It's not the only neurotransmitter involved in pleasure, but it's a really involved in pleasure, but it's a really involved in pleasure, but it's a really important one. And if you want really important one. And if you want really important one. And if you want to think about something that most to think about something that most to think about something that most people don't know about dopamine, which people don't know about dopamine, which people don't know about dopamine, which I think is really interesting, is which I think is really interesting, is which I think is really interesting, is that we are always releasing dopamine that we are always releasing dopamine that we are always releasing dopamine at a kind of tonic baseline rate. And at a kind of tonic baseline rate. And at a kind of tonic baseline rate. And it's really the deviation from that it's really the deviation from that it's really the deviation from that baseline rather than like hits of baseline rather than like hits of baseline rather than like hits of dopamine in a vacuum that make a dopamine in a vacuum that make a dopamine in a vacuum that make a difference. So when we experience difference. So when we experience difference. So when we experience pleasure, our dopamine release goes pleasure, our dopamine release goes pleasure, our dopamine release goes above baseline. And likewise, dopamine above baseline. And likewise, dopamine above baseline. And likewise, dopamine can go below that tonic baseline and can go below that tonic baseline and can go below that tonic baseline and then we experience a kind of pain. then we experience a kind of pain. then we experience a kind of pain. Interesting. So, is it fair to say that Interesting. So, is it fair to say that Interesting. So, is it fair to say that one's baseline levels of dopamine, how one's baseline levels of dopamine, how one's baseline levels of dopamine, how frequently we are releasing dopamine in frequently we are releasing dopamine in frequently we are releasing dopamine in the absence of some uh I don't know drug the absence of some uh I don't know drug the absence of some uh I don't know drug or food or experience just sitting being or food or experience just sitting being or food or experience just sitting being uh is that associated with how happy uh is that associated with how happy uh is that associated with how happy somebody is their kind of baseline of somebody is their kind of baseline of somebody is their kind of baseline of happiness or level of depression? There happiness or level of depression? There happiness or level of depression? There is evidence that shows that people who is evidence that shows that people who is evidence that shows that people who are depressed may indeed have lower are depressed may indeed have lower are depressed may indeed have lower tonic levels of dopamine. So that's a tonic levels of dopamine. So that's a tonic levels of dopamine. So that's a really reasonable thought and there is really reasonable thought and there is really reasonable thought and there is some evidence to suggest that may some evidence to suggest that may some evidence to suggest that may be true. The other thing that we know, be true. The other thing that we know, be true. The other thing that we know, and this is, you know, really kind of and this is, you know, really kind of and this is, you know, really kind of what the book is about, is that if what the book is about, is that if what the book is about, is that if we um expose ourselves chronically to we um expose ourselves chronically to we um expose ourselves chronically to substances or behaviors that repeatedly substances or behaviors that repeatedly substances or behaviors that repeatedly release large amounts of dopamine in our release large amounts of dopamine in our release large amounts of dopamine in our brain's reward pathway that we can brain's reward pathway that we can brain's reward pathway that we can change our tonic baseline and actually change our tonic baseline and actually change our tonic baseline and actually lower it over time as our brain tries to lower it over time as our brain tries to lower it over time as our brain tries to compensate for all of that dopamine, compensate for all of that dopamine, compensate for all of that dopamine, which is more really than we were which is more really than we were which is more really than we were designed to experience. designed to experience. designed to experience. Interesting. And is would is it um the Interesting. And is would is it um the Interesting. And is would is it um the case that our baseline levels of case that our baseline levels of case that our baseline levels of dopamine are set by our genetics, by our dopamine are set by our genetics, by our dopamine are set by our genetics, by our heredity? Well, I think, you know, if you think Well, I think, you know, if you think Well, I think, you know, if you think about sort of, you know, the early about sort of, you know, the early about sort of, you know, the early stages of development in infancy, stages of development in infancy, stages of development in infancy, certainly that is true. you're kind of, certainly that is true. you're kind of, certainly that is true. you're kind of, you know, born with probably whatever is you know, born with probably whatever is you know, born with probably whatever is your baseline level, but obviously your baseline level, but obviously your baseline level, but obviously your experiences can have a huge impact on experiences can have a huge impact on experiences can have a huge impact on where your dopamine level where your dopamine level where your dopamine level ultimately settles out. ultimately settles out. ultimately settles out. So, um if somebody's disposition is one So, um if somebody's disposition is one So, um if somebody's disposition is one of um constant excitement and of um constant excitement and of um constant excitement and anticipation or easily excited, uh these anticipation or easily excited, uh these anticipation or easily excited, uh these are I think about the kind of people are I think about the kind of people are I think about the kind of people where you say, "Hey, do you want to where you say, "Hey, do you want to where you say, "Hey, do you want to check out this new place for tacos?" And check out this new place for tacos?" And check out this new place for tacos?" And they're like, "Yeah, that'd be great." they're like, "Yeah, that'd be great." they're like, "Yeah, that'd be great." And other people are um a little more And other people are um a little more And other people are um a little more cynical, harder to budge like my bulldog cynical, harder to budge like my bulldog cynical, harder to budge like my bulldog Costello. Um very stable, low Costello. Um very stable, low Costello. Um very stable, low levels of dopamine with big inflections levels of dopamine with big inflections levels of dopamine with big inflections in his case. Um in his case. Um in his case. Um is that do you think that's uh set in is that do you think that's uh set in is that do you think that's uh set in terms of um our parents and obviously terms of um our parents and obviously terms of um our parents and obviously nature and nurture interact, but is that nature and nurture interact, but is that nature and nurture interact, but is that is dopamine at the core of our is dopamine at the core of our is dopamine at the core of our temperament? I don't really think we know the answer I don't really think we know the answer I don't really think we know the answer to that. But I will say that people are to that. But I will say that people are to that. But I will say that people are definitely born with different definitely born with different definitely born with different temperaments and those temperaments do temperaments and those temperaments do temperaments and those temperaments do affect their ability to experience joy. affect their ability to experience joy. affect their ability to experience joy. Um and you know we've known that for Um and you know we've known that for Um and you know we've known that for a long time and we describe that in many a long time and we describe that in many a long time and we describe that in many different ways. One of the ways that we different ways. One of the ways that we different ways. One of the ways that we describe that in the modern era is to describe that in the modern era is to describe that in the modern era is to use psychiatric nomenclature like this use psychiatric nomenclature like this use psychiatric nomenclature like this person has a dishyic temperament or you person has a dishyic temperament or you person has a dishyic temperament or you know this person has chronic major know this person has chronic major know this person has chronic major depressive disorder. Um in terms of depressive disorder. Um in terms of depressive disorder. Um in terms of looking specifically at who's vulnerable looking specifically at who's vulnerable looking specifically at who's vulnerable to addiction, um that's an interesting to addiction, um that's an interesting to addiction, um that's an interesting sort of mixed bag because when you look sort of mixed bag because when you look sort of mixed bag because when you look at uh the research on risk factors for at uh the research on risk factors for at uh the research on risk factors for addiction. So what kind of temperament addiction. So what kind of temperament addiction. So what kind of temperament uh of a person makes them more uh of a person makes them more uh of a person makes them more vulnerable to addiction, you see um some vulnerable to addiction, you see um some vulnerable to addiction, you see um some interesting findings. First you see that interesting findings. First you see that interesting findings. First you see that people who are more impulsive are more people who are more impulsive are more people who are more impulsive are more vulnerable to addiction. So what is vulnerable to addiction. So what is vulnerable to addiction. So what is impulsivity? That means having impulsivity? That means having impulsivity? That means having difficulty um putting space between the difficulty um putting space between the difficulty um putting space between the thought or desire to do something and thought or desire to do something and thought or desire to do something and actually doing it. And people who have actually doing it. And people who have actually doing it. And people who have difficulty putting a space there who are difficulty putting a space there who are difficulty putting a space there who are who have a thought to do something and who have a thought to do something and who have a thought to do something and just do it impulsively just do it impulsively just do it impulsively are people who are more vulnerable to are people who are more vulnerable to are people who are more vulnerable to addiction. Interesting. Could I in terms of Interesting. Could I in terms of Interesting. Could I in terms of impulsivity, is this something that impulsivity, is this something that impulsivity, is this something that relates literally to um the startle relates literally to um the startle relates literally to um the startle reflex? Like I for instance, as a uh lab reflex? Like I for instance, as a uh lab reflex? Like I for instance, as a uh lab director, I'm familiar with walking director, I'm familiar with walking director, I'm familiar with walking around my lab and um when I decide around my lab and um when I decide around my lab and um when I decide deciding I'm going to talk to my people. deciding I'm going to talk to my people. deciding I'm going to talk to my people. Of course, when they knock on my door, Of course, when they knock on my door, Of course, when they knock on my door, it's always like, "Wait, why am I being it's always like, "Wait, why am I being it's always like, "Wait, why am I being bothered right now?" Even though I love bothered right now?" Even though I love bothered right now?" Even though I love to talk to them, but I walk around my to talk to them, but I walk around my to talk to them, but I walk around my lab from time to time and some people I lab from time to time and some people I lab from time to time and some people I notice I'll say, "Um, do you have a notice I'll say, "Um, do you have a notice I'll say, "Um, do you have a moment?" And they'll slowly turn around moment?" And they'll slowly turn around moment?" And they'll slowly turn around and say, "Yeah," or no in some cases. Um and say, "Yeah," or no in some cases. Um and say, "Yeah," or no in some cases. Um and other people will jump the moment I and other people will jump the moment I and other people will jump the moment I say their name. they actually have a say their name. they actually have a say their name. they actually have a kind of a heightened um startle reflex. kind of a heightened um startle reflex. kind of a heightened um startle reflex. Is that related to impulsivity or is Is that related to impulsivity or is Is that related to impulsivity or is what you're referring to um an attempt what you're referring to um an attempt what you're referring to um an attempt to uh withhold behavior that's very to uh withhold behavior that's very to uh withhold behavior that's very deliberate under very deliberate under very deliberate under very deliberate conditions? Yeah. So, I don't think that Yeah. So, I don't think that Yeah. So, I don't think that startle reflex is necessarily related startle reflex is necessarily related startle reflex is necessarily related to impulsivity. That that can be related to impulsivity. That that can be related to impulsivity. That that can be related to anxiety. So, people who are high to anxiety. So, people who are high to anxiety. So, people who are high anxiety people will tend to have more of anxiety people will tend to have more of anxiety people will tend to have more of a startle reflex. Impulsivity is a startle reflex. Impulsivity is a startle reflex. Impulsivity is a little bit different. And by the way, little bit different. And by the way, little bit different. And by the way, impulsivity is not always bad, right? Um impulsivity is not always bad, right? Um impulsivity is not always bad, right? Um impulsivity is that thing where impulsivity is that thing where impulsivity is that thing where there's not a lot of self-editing or there's not a lot of self-editing or there's not a lot of self-editing or worrying about future consequences. You worrying about future consequences. You worrying about future consequences. You know, you have the idea to do something know, you have the idea to do something know, you have the idea to do something and you do it. And of course, we can and you do it. And of course, we can and you do it. And of course, we can imagine many scenarios where that's imagine many scenarios where that's imagine many scenarios where that's absolutely wonderful. um you know there absolutely wonderful. um you know there absolutely wonderful. um you know there can be a sort of uh let's say intimate can be a sort of uh let's say intimate can be a sort of uh let's say intimate um interactions between people where you um interactions between people where you um interactions between people where you wouldn't really want to be super wouldn't really want to be super wouldn't really want to be super inhibited about it right you would want inhibited about it right you would want inhibited about it right you would want to be disinhibited and impulsive um to be disinhibited and impulsive um to be disinhibited and impulsive um there I can also like imagine like sort there I can also like imagine like sort there I can also like imagine like sort of um fightor-flight scenarios like of um fightor-flight scenarios like of um fightor-flight scenarios like battle scenarios right where it battle scenarios right where it battle scenarios right where it would really be good to be impulsive and would really be good to be impulsive and would really be good to be impulsive and just go you know just go you know just go you know just where hesitation can cost you your life where hesitation can cost you your life where hesitation can cost you your life yes that's right that's right but you yes that's right that's right but you yes that's right that's right but you know and I think this brings up a really know and I think this brings up a really know and I think this brings up a really something that I've come to believe something that I've come to believe something that I've come to believe after 25 years of practicing psychiatry after 25 years of practicing psychiatry after 25 years of practicing psychiatry is that what we now conceptualize in our is that what we now conceptualize in our is that what we now conceptualize in our current ecosystem as mental illness are current ecosystem as mental illness are current ecosystem as mental illness are actually traits that in another actually traits that in another actually traits that in another ecosystem might be very advantageous. ecosystem might be very advantageous. ecosystem might be very advantageous. They're just not advantageous right now They're just not advantageous right now They're just not advantageous right now because of the world that we live in. because of the world that we live in. because of the world that we live in. And and I think, you know, impulsivity And and I think, you know, impulsivity And and I think, you know, impulsivity is potentially one of those, right? is potentially one of those, right? is potentially one of those, right? Because we live in this world that's Because we live in this world that's Because we live in this world that's sort of like you have to um constantly sort of like you have to um constantly sort of like you have to um constantly be thinking sort of rationally about the be thinking sort of rationally about the be thinking sort of rationally about the consequences of X, Y, or Z. And it's consequences of X, Y, or Z. And it's consequences of X, Y, or Z. And it's such a sensory rich environment, right, such a sensory rich environment, right, such a sensory rich environment, right, that we're being bombarded with all that we're being bombarded with all that we're being bombarded with all these opportunities, these sensory these opportunities, these sensory these opportunities, these sensory opportunities, and we have to constantly opportunities, and we have to constantly opportunities, and we have to constantly check ourselves. And so check ourselves. And so check ourselves. And so impulsivity is something that right now impulsivity is something that right now impulsivity is something that right now um can be a difficult trait but isn't in um can be a difficult trait but isn't in um can be a difficult trait but isn't in and of itself a bad thing. and of itself a bad thing. and of itself a bad thing. I see. Yeah. I see. Yeah. I see. Yeah. And it's I I'm beginning to Yeah. And it's I I'm beginning to Yeah. And it's I I'm beginning to realize it's a fine line between realize it's a fine line between realize it's a fine line between spontaneity and impulsivity. Uh spontaneity and impulsivity. Uh spontaneity and impulsivity. Uh what is pleasure and how does it work at what is pleasure and how does it work at what is pleasure and how does it work at the biological level and um if it the biological level and um if it the biological level and um if it feels right at the psychological level. feels right at the psychological level. feels right at the psychological level. I think we and um if you don't mind u I think we and um if you don't mind u I think we and um if you don't mind u painting a picture of sort of the painting a picture of sort of the painting a picture of sort of the range of things that you have observed range of things that you have observed range of things that you have observed in your clinic or in life that people in your clinic or in life that people in your clinic or in life that people can become addicted to but just to start can become addicted to but just to start can become addicted to but just to start off really simply what is this thing off really simply what is this thing off really simply what is this thing that we call pleasure? Well, I think that we call pleasure? Well, I think that we call pleasure? Well, I think it's actually really hard to define it's actually really hard to define it's actually really hard to define pleasure in any kind of succinct way pleasure in any kind of succinct way pleasure in any kind of succinct way because certainly there is the seeking because certainly there is the seeking because certainly there is the seeking out of um a high or a euphoria or I out of um a high or a euphoria or I out of um a high or a euphoria or I think you know the kind of experience think you know the kind of experience think you know the kind of experience that most anybody would associate with that most anybody would associate with that most anybody would associate with the word pleasure. But but also um the word pleasure. But but also um the word pleasure. But but also um the seeking out of those same substances seeking out of those same substances seeking out of those same substances and behaviors is often a way to escape and behaviors is often a way to escape and behaviors is often a way to escape pain. So, for example, when I when I pain. So, for example, when I when I pain. So, for example, when I when I talk to people with addiction, um talk to people with addiction, um talk to people with addiction, um sometimes their initial foray into using sometimes their initial foray into using sometimes their initial foray into using a drug is to get pleasure. But very a drug is to get pleasure. But very a drug is to get pleasure. But very often it's a way to escape their often it's a way to escape their often it's a way to escape their suffering, whatever their suffering may suffering, whatever their suffering may suffering, whatever their suffering may be. And certainly as people become be. And certainly as people become be. And certainly as people become addicted, even those who initially were addicted, even those who initially were addicted, even those who initially were seeking out pleasure are ultimately just seeking out pleasure are ultimately just seeking out pleasure are ultimately just trying to avoid the pain of withdrawal trying to avoid the pain of withdrawal trying to avoid the pain of withdrawal or the pain of the consequences of their or the pain of the consequences of their or the pain of the consequences of their drug use. So I think it's, you know, drug use. So I think it's, you know, drug use. So I think it's, you know, very hard to actually, you know, define very hard to actually, you know, define very hard to actually, you know, define it as this unitary thing. And it's it as this unitary thing. And it's it as this unitary thing. And it's certainly not just getting a high. There certainly not just getting a high. There certainly not just getting a high. There are so many ways in which people sort of are so many ways in which people sort of are so many ways in which people sort of want to escape which is not the same want to escape which is not the same want to escape which is not the same thing as sort of this hydonic you know thing as sort of this hydonic you know thing as sort of this hydonic you know wanting to feel pleasure. wanting to feel pleasure. wanting to feel pleasure. So someone could decide that they want So someone could decide that they want So someone could decide that they want to go out and dance or get up and dance to go out and dance or get up and dance to go out and dance or get up and dance because of the pleasure of dancing. I because of the pleasure of dancing. I because of the pleasure of dancing. I can imagine that. Um can imagine that. Um can imagine that. Um but uh and maybe it's very difficult for but uh and maybe it's very difficult for but uh and maybe it's very difficult for them to stay seated when a particular them to stay seated when a particular them to stay seated when a particular song comes on for instance. But um song comes on for instance. But um song comes on for instance. But um seeking what we would call pleasure in seeking what we would call pleasure in seeking what we would call pleasure in order to eliminate pain. That evokes a order to eliminate pain. That evokes a order to eliminate pain. That evokes a different picture in my mind. That different picture in my mind. That different picture in my mind. That evokes a picture of somebody that um evokes a picture of somebody that um evokes a picture of somebody that um feels lost or depressed or underwhelmed. feels lost or depressed or underwhelmed. feels lost or depressed or underwhelmed. Um I definitely want to get into the Um I definitely want to get into the Um I definitely want to get into the precise and general description of precise and general description of precise and general description of addiction and what that is. But in a addiction and what that is. But in a addiction and what that is. But in a previous conversation we had, you said previous conversation we had, you said previous conversation we had, you said something that really rung in my mind, something that really rung in my mind, something that really rung in my mind, which is that many people who become which is that many people who become which is that many people who become addicted to things, let's call them addicted to things, let's call them addicted to things, let's call them addicts, um have this feeling that addicts, um have this feeling that addicts, um have this feeling that normal life isn't interesting enough, normal life isn't interesting enough, normal life isn't interesting enough, that they are seeking a supernormal that they are seeking a supernormal that they are seeking a supernormal experience and that the day-to-day experience and that the day-to-day experience and that the day-to-day routine um balance, which is actually in routine um balance, which is actually in routine um balance, which is actually in the title of your book, uh Dopamine the title of your book, uh Dopamine the title of your book, uh Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence, that the word balance itself Indulgence, that the word balance itself Indulgence, that the word balance itself can sometimes be a bit of a an can sometimes be a bit of a an can sometimes be a bit of a an aversive term for people. And um aversive term for people. And um aversive term for people. And um I I'm struck by this idea and the reason I I'm struck by this idea and the reason I I'm struck by this idea and the reason I want to explore it is because so much I want to explore it is because so much I want to explore it is because so much of what I see online is about generating of what I see online is about generating of what I see online is about generating a lack of balance about being tilted a lack of balance about being tilted a lack of balance about being tilted forward at all times really leaning into forward at all times really leaning into forward at all times really leaning into life hard experiencing life you know life hard experiencing life you know life hard experiencing life you know living a full life. uh even the living a full life. uh even the living a full life. uh even the commencement speech given by Steve Jobs commencement speech given by Steve Jobs commencement speech given by Steve Jobs on this campus was really about finding on this campus was really about finding on this campus was really about finding passion digging you know that's so much passion digging you know that's so much passion digging you know that's so much in the narrative now um so maybe you in the narrative now um so maybe you in the narrative now um so maybe you could just tell us a little bit about could just tell us a little bit about could just tell us a little bit about your experience with this assoc your experience with this assoc your experience with this assoc association if it really exists between association if it really exists between association if it really exists between uh people's sense of the normaly or uh people's sense of the normaly or uh people's sense of the normaly or maybe even how boring life can be and maybe even how boring life can be and maybe even how boring life can be and their tendency to become addicts of some their tendency to become addicts of some their tendency to become addicts of some sort. Yeah. Well, I mean, I think that life Yeah. Well, I mean, I think that life Yeah. Well, I mean, I think that life for humans has always been hard, but I for humans has always been hard, but I for humans has always been hard, but I think that now it's harder in think that now it's harder in think that now it's harder in unprecedented ways. And I think that the unprecedented ways. And I think that the unprecedented ways. And I think that the way that life is really hard now is way that life is really hard now is way that life is really hard now is that it actually is really boring. Um, that it actually is really boring. Um, that it actually is really boring. Um, and the reason that it's boring is and the reason that it's boring is and the reason that it's boring is because all of our survival needs are because all of our survival needs are because all of our survival needs are met, right? I mean, we don't even have met, right? I mean, we don't even have met, right? I mean, we don't even have to leave our homes to meet every single to leave our homes to meet every single to leave our homes to meet every single physical need, you know, as long as physical need, you know, as long as physical need, you know, as long as you're of a certain level of financial you're of a certain level of financial you're of a certain level of financial well-being, which frankly, um, you know, well-being, which frankly, um, you know, well-being, which frankly, um, you know, that we talk so much about, you know, that we talk so much about, you know, that we talk so much about, you know, the income gap, and certainly there the income gap, and certainly there the income gap, and certainly there is this enormous gap between rich and is this enormous gap between rich and is this enormous gap between rich and poor, but that gap is smaller than it's poor, but that gap is smaller than it's poor, but that gap is smaller than it's ever been in like the history of humans. ever been in like the history of humans. ever been in like the history of humans. Um even the poorest of the poor have Um even the poorest of the poor have Um even the poorest of the poor have more um excess income to spend on more um excess income to spend on more um excess income to spend on leisure goods than they ever have before leisure goods than they ever have before leisure goods than they ever have before in human history. Um if you look at in human history. Um if you look at in human history. Um if you look at leisure time for example, so people leisure time for example, so people leisure time for example, so people without a high school education have 42% without a high school education have 42% without a high school education have 42% more leisure time than people with um a more leisure time than people with um a more leisure time than people with um a college degree. Um, so, so what my college degree. Um, so, so what my college degree. Um, so, so what my point here is that point here is that point here is that life is hard now in this really weird life is hard now in this really weird life is hard now in this really weird way in that we don't really have way in that we don't really have way in that we don't really have anything that we have to do. So, we're anything that we have to do. So, we're anything that we have to do. So, we're all forced to make stuff up, you know, all forced to make stuff up, you know, all forced to make stuff up, you know, whether it's being a scientist or being whether it's being a scientist or being whether it's being a scientist or being a doctor or being an Olympic athlete or, a doctor or being an Olympic athlete or, a doctor or being an Olympic athlete or, you know, climbing Mount Everest. you know, climbing Mount Everest. you know, climbing Mount Everest. And people really vary in their need for And people really vary in their need for And people really vary in their need for friction. And some people need a lot friction. And some people need a lot friction. And some people need a lot more than others. And if they don't have more than others. And if they don't have more than others. And if they don't have it, they're really, really unhappy. And it, they're really, really unhappy. And it, they're really, really unhappy. And I do think that a lot of the people that I do think that a lot of the people that I do think that a lot of the people that I see with addiction and other forms of I see with addiction and other forms of I see with addiction and other forms of mental illness are people who need more mental illness are people who need more mental illness are people who need more friction. Like they're unhappy, not friction. Like they're unhappy, not friction. Like they're unhappy, not necessarily because there's something necessarily because there's something necessarily because there's something wrong with their brain, but because wrong with their brain, but because wrong with their brain, but because their brain is not suited to this world. their brain is not suited to this world. their brain is not suited to this world. And do you think they have that sense my And do you think they have that sense my And do you think they have that sense my brain isn't suited to this world or they brain isn't suited to this world or they brain isn't suited to this world or they simply feel um a restlessness and simply feel um a restlessness and simply feel um a restlessness and they're constantly seeking stimulation? they're constantly seeking stimulation? they're constantly seeking stimulation? I think that's right. Yeah. I think it's I think that's right. Yeah. I think it's I think that's right. Yeah. I think it's not really knowing what's wrong it's not really knowing what's wrong it's not really knowing what's wrong with me. Um why am I unhappy? Um how can with me. Um why am I unhappy? Um how can with me. Um why am I unhappy? Um how can I be happier? And of course, as you talk I be happier? And of course, as you talk I be happier? And of course, as you talk about what what's so pervasive in our about what what's so pervasive in our about what what's so pervasive in our narrative now is like find your passion, narrative now is like find your passion, narrative now is like find your passion, you know, um you know, find your you know, um you know, find your you know, um you know, find your you know, whatever it is to save the world. know, whatever it is to save the world. know, whatever it is to save the world. And in a way that's good because it has And in a way that's good because it has And in a way that's good because it has people out in the world and seeking. Um people out in the world and seeking. Um people out in the world and seeking. Um but in a way it can also be but in a way it can also be but in a way it can also be misleading in the sense that um I think misleading in the sense that um I think misleading in the sense that um I think people aren't entirely aware that people aren't entirely aware that people aren't entirely aware that the world is a hard place and that and the world is a hard place and that and the world is a hard place and that and that life is hard and that you know like that life is hard and that you know like that life is hard and that you know like we're all kind of making it up. Do you we're all kind of making it up. Do you we're all kind of making it up. Do you know what I mean? know what I mean? know what I mean? Yeah. Well, there's a book by Cal Yeah. Well, there's a book by Cal Yeah. Well, there's a book by Cal Newport. I don't know if you know Cal Newport. I don't know if you know Cal Newport. I don't know if you know Cal Newport's work, but you guys are um very Newport's work, but you guys are um very Newport's work, but you guys are um very symbiotic in your messages, but uh he's symbiotic in your messages, but uh he's symbiotic in your messages, but uh he's a professor of computer science at a professor of computer science at a professor of computer science at Georgetown. uh yes at Georgetown and Georgetown. uh yes at Georgetown and Georgetown. uh yes at Georgetown and wrote a book some years ago really ahead wrote a book some years ago really ahead wrote a book some years ago really ahead of its time called so good they can't of its time called so good they can't of its time called so good they can't ignore you which is about not um ignore you which is about not um ignore you which is about not um meditating or uh doing much work to try meditating or uh doing much work to try meditating or uh doing much work to try and figure out what one's passion is by and figure out what one's passion is by and figure out what one's passion is by thinking but rather go out and acquire thinking but rather go out and acquire thinking but rather go out and acquire skills and get develop a sense of passion and get develop a sense of passion and get develop a sense of passion for something by your experience of hard for something by your experience of hard for something by your experience of hard work and getting better and feedback work and getting better and feedback work and getting better and feedback a little bit of the growth mindset thing a little bit of the growth mindset thing a little bit of the growth mindset thing of our colleague Carol Dwek but he's of our colleague Carol Dwek but he's of our colleague Carol Dwek but he's gone on to write books um deep work and gone on to write books um deep work and gone on to write books um deep work and which is all about removing yourself which is all about removing yourself which is all about removing yourself from technology and doing deep work. from technology and doing deep work. from technology and doing deep work. Yes. Right. Yes. Right. Yes. Right. And he's been a big proponent of the And he's been a big proponent of the And he's been a big proponent of the evils of context switching too often evils of context switching too often evils of context switching too often throughout the day. throughout the day. throughout the day. Yeah. For sake of productivity mostly. His new For sake of productivity mostly. His new For sake of productivity mostly. His new book is called um a world without email. book is called um a world without email. book is called um a world without email. I'm beginning to realize as I site off I'm beginning to realize as I site off I'm beginning to realize as I site off these books and your book, Dopamine these books and your book, Dopamine these books and your book, Dopamine Nation, uh finding balance in the age of Nation, uh finding balance in the age of Nation, uh finding balance in the age of indulgence, that um maybe the reason why indulgence, that um maybe the reason why indulgence, that um maybe the reason why you two don't know about one another is you two don't know about one another is you two don't know about one another is because neither of you are on social because neither of you are on social because neither of you are on social media. That's it. Right. And yet you're media. That's it. Right. And yet you're media. That's it. Right. And yet you're two of the most productive people that I two of the most productive people that I two of the most productive people that I know um including productive authors. So know um including productive authors. So know um including productive authors. So that's a discussion into itself. But I that's a discussion into itself. But I that's a discussion into itself. But I find this fascinating. So um let's talk find this fascinating. So um let's talk find this fascinating. So um let's talk about the pleasure pain balance and about the pleasure pain balance and about the pleasure pain balance and addiction. And I've heard you use this addiction. And I've heard you use this addiction. And I've heard you use this uh seessaw or balance scale um analogy uh seessaw or balance scale um analogy uh seessaw or balance scale um analogy before and I think it's a wonderful one before and I think it's a wonderful one before and I think it's a wonderful one uh that really for me clarified what uh that really for me clarified what uh that really for me clarified what addiction is at least at the mechanistic addiction is at least at the mechanistic addiction is at least at the mechanistic level. Yeah. So to me, one of the most Yeah. So to me, one of the most Yeah. So to me, one of the most significant findings in neuroscience in significant findings in neuroscience in significant findings in neuroscience in the last 75 years is that pleasure and the last 75 years is that pleasure and the last 75 years is that pleasure and pain are colllocated. Which means the pain are colllocated. Which means the pain are colllocated. Which means the same parts of the brain that process same parts of the brain that process same parts of the brain that process pleasure also process pain. And they pleasure also process pain. And they pleasure also process pain. And they work like a balance. So when we feel work like a balance. So when we feel work like a balance. So when we feel pleasure, our balance tips one way. When pleasure, our balance tips one way. When pleasure, our balance tips one way. When we feel pain, it tips in the opposite we feel pain, it tips in the opposite we feel pain, it tips in the opposite direction. And one of the overriding direction. And one of the overriding direction. And one of the overriding rules governing this balance is that it rules governing this balance is that it rules governing this balance is that it wants to stay level. So it doesn't want wants to stay level. So it doesn't want wants to stay level. So it doesn't want to remain tipped very long to pleasure to remain tipped very long to pleasure to remain tipped very long to pleasure or to pain. And with any deviation from or to pain. And with any deviation from or to pain. And with any deviation from neutrality, the brain will work very neutrality, the brain will work very neutrality, the brain will work very hard to restore a level balance or what hard to restore a level balance or what hard to restore a level balance or what scientists call homeostasis. And the way scientists call homeostasis. And the way scientists call homeostasis. And the way the brain does that is with any stimulus the brain does that is with any stimulus the brain does that is with any stimulus to one side, there will be a tip an to one side, there will be a tip an to one side, there will be a tip an equal and opposite amount to the other equal and opposite amount to the other equal and opposite amount to the other side. It's like they have principal laws of It's like they have principal laws of It's like they have principal laws of physics. Yes. Right. So like I like to Yes. Right. So like I like to Yes. Right. So like I like to watch YouTube videos. When I watch YouTube videos. When I watch YouTube videos. When I watch YouTube videos of American Idol, you YouTube videos of American Idol, you YouTube videos of American Idol, you know, it tips to the side of pleasure. know, it tips to the side of pleasure. know, it tips to the side of pleasure. And then when I stop watching it, um, I And then when I stop watching it, um, I And then when I stop watching it, um, I have a comedown, right, which is a tip have a comedown, right, which is a tip have a comedown, right, which is a tip to the equal and opposite amount, um, on to the equal and opposite amount, um, on to the equal and opposite amount, um, on the other side. And that's that moment the other side. And that's that moment the other side. And that's that moment of wanting to watch one more YouTube of wanting to watch one more YouTube of wanting to watch one more YouTube video, right? video, right? video, right? Yeah. And I just want to um interject Yeah. And I just want to um interject Yeah. And I just want to um interject there. So this moment of wanting to there. So this moment of wanting to there. So this moment of wanting to watch another that is associated with watch another that is associated with watch another that is associated with pain. I think is are we always aware pain. I think is are we always aware pain. I think is are we always aware of that happening? because you just of that happening? because you just of that happening? because you just described it in a very conscious way, described it in a very conscious way, described it in a very conscious way, right? But when I um indulge in something I But when I um indulge in something I But when I um indulge in something I enjoy, I'm usually thinking about just wanting I'm usually thinking about just wanting I'm usually thinking about just wanting more of that thing. I don't think about more of that thing. I don't think about more of that thing. I don't think about the pain. I just think about more. the pain. I just think about more. the pain. I just think about more. Right? So, really excellent point Right? So, really excellent point Right? So, really excellent point because we're mostly not aware of it and because we're mostly not aware of it and because we're mostly not aware of it and it's also reflexive. So, we it's not it's also reflexive. So, we it's not it's also reflexive. So, we it's not something that consciously happens or something that consciously happens or something that consciously happens or that we're aware of unless we really that we're aware of unless we really that we're aware of unless we really begin to pay attention. And and when we begin to pay attention. And and when we begin to pay attention. And and when we begin to pay attention, we really can begin to pay attention, we really can begin to pay attention, we really can become very aware of it in the moment. become very aware of it in the moment. become very aware of it in the moment. Again, it's like a falling away like Again, it's like a falling away like Again, it's like a falling away like that. You know, you're on social media that. You know, you're on social media that. You know, you're on social media and you know, you get a good tweet of and you know, you get a good tweet of and you know, you get a good tweet of something and then you can't stop something and then you can't stop something and then you can't stop yourself because there's this awareness, yourself because there's this awareness, yourself because there's this awareness, a latent awareness that as soon as I a latent awareness that as soon as I a latent awareness that as soon as I disengage from this behavior, I'm going disengage from this behavior, I'm going disengage from this behavior, I'm going to experience a kind of a pain, right? to experience a kind of a pain, right? to experience a kind of a pain, right? falling away, a missing that feeling, a falling away, a missing that feeling, a falling away, a missing that feeling, a wanting more of it. And of course, one wanting more of it. And of course, one wanting more of it. And of course, one way to combat that is to do it more, way to combat that is to do it more, way to combat that is to do it more, right? And more and more and more. So, I right? And more and more and more. So, I right? And more and more and more. So, I think I think that is really what I want think I think that is really what I want think I think that is really what I want people to tune into and get an people to tune into and get an people to tune into and get an awareness around because once you tune awareness around because once you tune awareness around because once you tune into it, you can see it a lot. And then into it, you can see it a lot. And then into it, you can see it a lot. And then when you begin to see it, you have and when you begin to see it, you have and when you begin to see it, you have and if you, you know, keep the model of the if you, you know, keep the model of the if you, you know, keep the model of the balance in mind, I think it gives balance in mind, I think it gives balance in mind, I think it gives people kind of a way to imagine what people kind of a way to imagine what people kind of a way to imagine what they're experiencing on a they're experiencing on a they're experiencing on a neurobiological level and understand it neurobiological level and understand it neurobiological level and understand it and in that understanding get some and in that understanding get some and in that understanding get some mastery over it, which is really what mastery over it, which is really what mastery over it, which is really what this is all about because ultimately we this is all about because ultimately we this is all about because ultimately we do need to disengage, right? We can't do need to disengage, right? We can't do need to disengage, right? We can't live in that space all the time, right? live in that space all the time, right? live in that space all the time, right? we have other things we need to do and we have other things we need to do and we have other things we need to do and there are also serious consequences that there are also serious consequences that there are also serious consequences that come with trying to repeat and continue come with trying to repeat and continue come with trying to repeat and continue that experience or that feeling. that experience or that feeling. that experience or that feeling. Yeah. So if I understand this correctly, Yeah. So if I understand this correctly, Yeah. So if I understand this correctly, uh when we find something or when uh when we find something or when uh when we find something or when something finds us that we enjoy that something finds us that we enjoy that something finds us that we enjoy that feels pleasure, uh social media, food, feels pleasure, uh social media, food, feels pleasure, uh social media, food, sex, gambling, whatever happens to be gambling, whatever happens to be gambling, whatever happens to be we will explore the full range of these we will explore the full range of these we will explore the full range of these there's a some dopamine release when we there's a some dopamine release when we there's a some dopamine release when we engage in that behavior. engage in that behavior. engage in that behavior. And then what you're telling me is that And then what you're telling me is that And then what you're telling me is that very quickly very quickly very quickly Yes. And beneath my conscious awareness, Yes. And beneath my conscious awareness, Yes. And beneath my conscious awareness, there's a tilting back of the scale there's a tilting back of the scale there's a tilting back of the scale where pleasure is reduced by way of where pleasure is reduced by way of where pleasure is reduced by way of increasing pain. increasing pain. increasing pain. Right. And I've heard you say before that the And I've heard you say before that the And I've heard you say before that the pain mechanism pain mechanism pain mechanism has some competitive advantages over the has some competitive advantages over the has some competitive advantages over the pleasure mechanism such that it doesn't pleasure mechanism such that it doesn't pleasure mechanism such that it doesn't just bring the scale back to level. It just bring the scale back to level. It just bring the scale back to level. It actually brings pain higher than actually brings pain higher than actually brings pain higher than pleasure. Mhm. Could you tell us a little bit more Could you tell us a little bit more Could you tell us a little bit more about that? Yeah. So, so what about that? Yeah. So, so what about that? Yeah. So, so what happens again? So, the hallmark happens again? So, the hallmark happens again? So, the hallmark of any addictive substance or behavior of any addictive substance or behavior of any addictive substance or behavior is that it releases a lot of dopamine in is that it releases a lot of dopamine in is that it releases a lot of dopamine in our brain's reward pathway like right our brain's reward pathway like right our brain's reward pathway like right like broccoli just doesn't release a lot like broccoli just doesn't release a lot like broccoli just doesn't release a lot of dopamine. Just doesn't. Right. of dopamine. Just doesn't. Right. of dopamine. Just doesn't. Right. I'm trying to imagine I was about to say I'm trying to imagine I was about to say I'm trying to imagine I was about to say maybe the and I stopped myself because maybe the and I stopped myself because maybe the and I stopped myself because no broccoli is good. It can be really no broccoli is good. It can be really no broccoli is good. It can be really good, but broccoli is never amazing, good, but broccoli is never amazing, good, but broccoli is never amazing, right? Broccoli's never amazing. right? Broccoli's never amazing. right? Broccoli's never amazing. Honestly, we can probably find somebody Honestly, we can probably find somebody Honestly, we can probably find somebody on the planet for whom broccoli is on the planet for whom broccoli is on the planet for whom broccoli is amazing. And of course, if I'm starving, amazing. And of course, if I'm starving, amazing. And of course, if I'm starving, broccoli is amazing. broccoli is amazing. broccoli is amazing. Rich roll. Rich Roll is big on plants Rich roll. Rich Roll is big on plants Rich roll. Rich Roll is big on plants and he has a good relationship to and he has a good relationship to and he has a good relationship to plants. Rich I tell us how to make plants. Rich I tell us how to make plants. Rich I tell us how to make broccoli amazing. If anyone could do it, broccoli amazing. If anyone could do it, broccoli amazing. If anyone could do it, it' be Rich. it' be Rich. it' be Rich. Um but what happens right after I do Um but what happens right after I do Um but what happens right after I do something that is really pleasurable and something that is really pleasurable and something that is really pleasurable and releases a lot of dopamine is again my releases a lot of dopamine is again my releases a lot of dopamine is again my brain is going to immediately compensate brain is going to immediately compensate brain is going to immediately compensate by downregulating my own dopamine by downregulating my own dopamine by downregulating my own dopamine receptors my own dopamine transmission receptors my own dopamine transmission receptors my own dopamine transmission to compensate for that. Okay. And that's to compensate for that. Okay. And that's to compensate for that. Okay. And that's that come down or the hangover that come down or the hangover that come down or the hangover that after effect that moment of wanting to after effect that moment of wanting to after effect that moment of wanting to do it more. Now if I just wait for that do it more. Now if I just wait for that do it more. Now if I just wait for that feeling to pass then my dopamine will feeling to pass then my dopamine will feeling to pass then my dopamine will reeregulate itself and I'll go back to reeregulate itself and I'll go back to reeregulate itself and I'll go back to whatever my chronic baseline is. But if whatever my chronic baseline is. But if whatever my chronic baseline is. But if I don't wait, and here's really the key. I don't wait, and here's really the key. I don't wait, and here's really the key. If I keep indulging again and again and If I keep indulging again and again and If I keep indulging again and again and again, ultimately I have I have so much again, ultimately I have I have so much again, ultimately I have I have so much on the pain side, right, that I've on the pain side, right, that I've on the pain side, right, that I've essentially reset my brain to what we essentially reset my brain to what we essentially reset my brain to what we call like an anhidonic or lacking in joy call like an anhidonic or lacking in joy call like an anhidonic or lacking in joy type of state, which is a dopamine type of state, which is a dopamine type of state, which is a dopamine deficit state. So that's really the deficit state. So that's really the deficit state. So that's really the way in which pain can become the way in which pain can become the way in which pain can become the main driver is because I've indulged so main driver is because I've indulged so main driver is because I've indulged so much in these high reward behaviors or much in these high reward behaviors or much in these high reward behaviors or substances that my brain has had to substances that my brain has had to substances that my brain has had to compensate by way downregulating my own compensate by way downregulating my own compensate by way downregulating my own dopamine such that even when I'm not dopamine such that even when I'm not dopamine such that even when I'm not doing that drug I'm in a dopamine doing that drug I'm in a dopamine doing that drug I'm in a dopamine deficit state which is akin to a deficit state which is akin to a deficit state which is akin to a clinical depression I have anxiety clinical depression I have anxiety clinical depression I have anxiety irritability insomnia dysphoria and a irritability insomnia dysphoria and a irritability insomnia dysphoria and a lot of mental preoccupation with using lot of mental preoccupation with using lot of mental preoccupation with using again or getting the drug and so that again or getting the drug and so that again or getting the drug and so that that's the piece there. There's the that's the piece there. There's the that's the piece there. There's the single use which easily passes, but it's single use which easily passes, but it's single use which easily passes, but it's the chronic use that can then reset the chronic use that can then reset the chronic use that can then reset really our dopamine thresholds and then really our dopamine thresholds and then really our dopamine thresholds and then nothing is enjoyable, nothing is enjoyable, nothing is enjoyable, right? That then everything sort of right? That then everything sort of right? That then everything sort of pales in comparison to this one drug pales in comparison to this one drug pales in comparison to this one drug that I want to keep doing that I want to keep doing that I want to keep doing and that one drug could be a person, and that one drug could be a person, and that one drug could be a person, right? I mean, I know people in my right? I mean, I know people in my right? I mean, I know people in my life that are still talking about this life that are still talking about this life that are still talking about this one relationship, this one person that one relationship, this one person that one relationship, this one person that was just so great despite all the was just so great despite all the was just so great despite all the challenges of that thing that it's challenges of that thing that it's challenges of that thing that it's almost like they're addicted to the almost like they're addicted to the almost like they're addicted to the narrative. Yeah. Uh they were maybe still are addicted to Uh they were maybe still are addicted to Uh they were maybe still are addicted to the person. So it could be to any number the person. So it could be to any number the person. So it could be to any number of things, video game, sex, gambling, a of things, video game, sex, gambling, a of things, video game, sex, gambling, a person, a narrative. Yeah. person, a narrative. Yeah. person, a narrative. Yeah. To me and because of the way you To me and because of the way you To me and because of the way you describe this mechanism, this pleasure describe this mechanism, this pleasure describe this mechanism, this pleasure pain balance pain balance pain balance that all speaks to the kind of that all speaks to the kind of that all speaks to the kind of generalizability of our brain circuitry. generalizability of our brain circuitry. generalizability of our brain circuitry. And this is something that fascinates me And this is something that fascinates me And this is something that fascinates me uh and I know it fascinates you as well, uh and I know it fascinates you as well, uh and I know it fascinates you as well, which is that um nature did not evolve which is that um nature did not evolve which is that um nature did not evolve 20 different mechanisms for 20 different 20 different mechanisms for 20 different 20 different mechanisms for 20 different types of addiction. Just like anxiety is types of addiction. Just like anxiety is types of addiction. Just like anxiety is a couple of core sets of hormones and a couple of core sets of hormones and a couple of core sets of hormones and neurotransmitters and pathways and one neurotransmitters and pathways and one neurotransmitters and pathways and one person is triggered by social person is triggered by social person is triggered by social interactions, another person is interactions, another person is interactions, another person is triggered by uh spiders, but the triggered by uh spiders, but the triggered by uh spiders, but the underlying response is identical. It underlying response is identical. It underlying response is identical. It sounds like with addiction as well, sounds like with addiction as well, sounds like with addiction as well, there may be some nuance, but that there may be some nuance, but that there may be some nuance, but that there sort of a core set of processes. there sort of a core set of processes. there sort of a core set of processes. So, it doesn't really matter if it's So, it doesn't really matter if it's So, it doesn't really matter if it's gambling or video games or sex or a gambling or video games or sex or a gambling or video games or sex or a narrative about a previous lover or narrative about a previous lover or narrative about a previous lover or partner, whatever. partner, whatever. partner, whatever. It's the same addictive process It's the same addictive process It's the same addictive process underneath that. Is that correct? underneath that. Is that correct? underneath that. Is that correct? Yes. Exactly. And that's where this Yes. Exactly. And that's where this Yes. Exactly. And that's where this whole idea of cross addiction comes in. whole idea of cross addiction comes in. whole idea of cross addiction comes in. So once you've been addicted to a So once you've been addicted to a So once you've been addicted to a substance, severely addicted, that makes substance, severely addicted, that makes substance, severely addicted, that makes you more vulnerable to addiction to any you more vulnerable to addiction to any you more vulnerable to addiction to any substance. And when you say substance, does the And when you say substance, does the And when you say substance, does the same is what you just said also true for same is what you just said also true for same is what you just said also true for behaviors? Yes. So when I when I use the word drug, Yes. So when I when I use the word drug, Yes. So when I when I use the word drug, I'm talking about substances and I'm talking about substances and I'm talking about substances and behaviors really. And I'm talking about behaviors really. And I'm talking about behaviors really. And I'm talking about behaviors like gambling, sex, um you behaviors like gambling, sex, um you behaviors like gambling, sex, um you know, gaming, porn, absolutely shocking know, gaming, porn, absolutely shocking know, gaming, porn, absolutely shocking work. You've accused me, I'll just for the You've accused me, I'll just for the You've accused me, I'll just for the record, uh Anna, Dr. Love Gay has accused me, uh Anna, Dr. Love Gay has accused me, uh Anna, Dr. Love Gay has accused me, not accused me, has um diagnosed me not accused me, has um diagnosed me not accused me, has um diagnosed me outside the clinic uh in a playful way outside the clinic uh in a playful way outside the clinic uh in a playful way of being work addicted. You're probably of being work addicted. You're probably of being work addicted. You're probably right. I The first thoughts I have when right. I The first thoughts I have when right. I The first thoughts I have when I wake up are typically about work, I wake up are typically about work, I wake up are typically about work, certainly within 50 milliseconds or so certainly within 50 milliseconds or so certainly within 50 milliseconds or so of waking. And um probably the last of waking. And um probably the last of waking. And um probably the last thoughts I have I would hope are not thoughts I have I would hope are not thoughts I have I would hope are not about work, but yeah, I work constantly. about work, but yeah, I work constantly. about work, but yeah, I work constantly. I don't I do other things, but I have I don't I do other things, but I have I don't I do other things, but I have to actively turn that off. to actively turn that off. to actively turn that off. Yes, that's exactly right. And you're Yes, that's exactly right. And you're Yes, that's exactly right. And you're certainly not alone in that. And of certainly not alone in that. And of certainly not alone in that. And of course at Stanford. No, at Stanford. No, at Stanford. No, I mean here in Silicon Valley, right, I mean here in Silicon Valley, right, I mean here in Silicon Valley, right, it's highly rewarded, right? So that it's highly rewarded, right? So that it's highly rewarded, right? So that kind of that kind of embedded in the kind of that kind of embedded in the kind of that kind of embedded in the culture. Absolutely. Yeah. And and culture. Absolutely. Yeah. And and culture. Absolutely. Yeah. And and there's this other city, I think it's there's this other city, I think it's there's this other city, I think it's called New York, where they also work a called New York, where they also work a called New York, where they also work a lot out here and it's heavily rewarded. lot out here and it's heavily rewarded. lot out here and it's heavily rewarded. Um, I once said, and I'm sure that I'm not I once said, and I'm sure that I'm not I once said, and I'm sure that I'm not the first person to say it, but um, I the first person to say it, but um, I the first person to say it, but um, I was thinking about addiction and I was thinking about addiction and I was thinking about addiction and I was thinking about the underlying circuits thinking about the underlying circuits thinking about the underlying circuits and it and I posted something to the uh, and it and I posted something to the uh, and it and I posted something to the uh, to the to social media which said that to the to social media which said that to the to social media which said that addiction is a progressive narrowing of addiction is a progressive narrowing of addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. That the things that bring you pleasure. That the things that bring you pleasure. That was the way that I kind of crystallized was the way that I kind of crystallized was the way that I kind of crystallized the literature in my mind. And then we the literature in my mind. And then we the literature in my mind. And then we met and you and you of course came and met and you and you of course came and met and you and you of course came and uh gave these amazing lectures in the uh gave these amazing lectures in the uh gave these amazing lectures in the neuro anatomy course for the medical neuro anatomy course for the medical neuro anatomy course for the medical students and the rest is history. students and the rest is history. students and the rest is history. But I uh I But I uh I But I uh I tossed out a kind of mirroring statement tossed out a kind of mirroring statement tossed out a kind of mirroring statement for that as well which was a bit um for that as well which was a bit um for that as well which was a bit um overstepping I admit which I said overstepping I admit which I said overstepping I admit which I said addiction is a progressive narrowing of addiction is a progressive narrowing of addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. And the things that bring you pleasure. And the things that bring you pleasure. And I said, dare I say, enlightenment is a I said, dare I say, enlightenment is a I said, dare I say, enlightenment is a progressive expansion of the things that progressive expansion of the things that progressive expansion of the things that bring you pleasure. Not that anybody bring you pleasure. Not that anybody bring you pleasure. Not that anybody knows what enlightenment is, but it was knows what enlightenment is, but it was knows what enlightenment is, but it was my attempt to take a little bit of a jab my attempt to take a little bit of a jab my attempt to take a little bit of a jab at the fact that nobody knows. And so, at the fact that nobody knows. And so, at the fact that nobody knows. And so, why not why wouldn't I throw in a why not why wouldn't I throw in a why not why wouldn't I throw in a biological explanation just to just kind biological explanation just to just kind biological explanation just to just kind of sample the waters? of sample the waters? of sample the waters? Um, and people had varying levels of Um, and people had varying levels of Um, and people had varying levels of response. But I would, the reason I response. But I would, the reason I response. But I would, the reason I bring that up is that I would imagine bring that up is that I would imagine bring that up is that I would imagine that being able to derive pleasure from that being able to derive pleasure from that being able to derive pleasure from many things would be a wonderful many things would be a wonderful many things would be a wonderful attribute. We know people like this that attribute. We know people like this that attribute. We know people like this that um can experience pleasure in little um can experience pleasure in little um can experience pleasure in little things and in big events. Uh not just, things and in big events. Uh not just, things and in big events. Uh not just, you know, the big milestones of life, you know, the big milestones of life, you know, the big milestones of life, but also the subtle, you know, as but also the subtle, you know, as but also the subtle, you know, as the like the yogis would say, the like the yogis would say, the like the yogis would say, the subtle ripples of life. Uh I if such an subtle ripples of life. Uh I if such an subtle ripples of life. Uh I if such an ability exists, would do you think that ability exists, would do you think that ability exists, would do you think that reflects a healthfully tuned that reflects a healthfully tuned that reflects a healthfully tuned dopamine system? One that can engage and dopamine system? One that can engage and dopamine system? One that can engage and enjoy but then disengage. Is that what enjoy but then disengage. Is that what enjoy but then disengage. Is that what we should be seeking? And and to we should be seeking? And and to we should be seeking? And and to underscore I know nothing about underscore I know nothing about underscore I know nothing about enlightenment meditation or the or any enlightenment meditation or the or any enlightenment meditation or the or any of it. I just I use these as of it. I just I use these as of it. I just I use these as opportunities to explore. opportunities to explore. opportunities to explore. Yeah. So it's a great question. Um I Yeah. So it's a great question. Um I Yeah. So it's a great question. Um I mean and I understand the question as mean and I understand the question as mean and I understand the question as so where what should we be striving for so where what should we be striving for so where what should we be striving for right where should we settle out right where should we settle out right where should we settle out and you know in my book I really hold and you know in my book I really hold and you know in my book I really hold out people in recovery from severe out people in recovery from severe out people in recovery from severe addiction as sort of modern-day prophets addiction as sort of modern-day prophets addiction as sort of modern-day prophets for the rest of us because I do think for the rest of us because I do think for the rest of us because I do think that people who have been addicted and that people who have been addicted and that people who have been addicted and then go get into recovery do have a hard then go get into recovery do have a hard then go get into recovery do have a hard one wisdom um that we can all benefit one wisdom um that we can all benefit one wisdom um that we can all benefit from and the wisdom from and the wisdom from and the wisdom I guess you know to distill it down I guess you know to distill it down I guess you know to distill it down I mean it's many things but in terms mean it's many things but in terms mean it's many things but in terms of you know dopamine the wisdom is there you know dopamine the wisdom is there you know dopamine the wisdom is there are adaptive ways to get your dopamine are adaptive ways to get your dopamine are adaptive ways to get your dopamine and there are less than adaptive ways and there are less than adaptive ways and there are less than adaptive ways and in general um you could describe the and in general um you could describe the and in general um you could describe the adaptive ways as not too potent so not adaptive ways as not too potent so not adaptive ways as not too potent so not tipping that balance tipping that balance tipping that balance too hard or too fast to the side of too hard or too fast to the side of too hard or too fast to the side of pleasure. So, does that mean never allowing myself So, does that mean never allowing myself So, does that mean never allowing myself to be absolutely in complete bliss or to be absolutely in complete bliss or to be absolutely in complete bliss or does it mean not allowing myself to stay does it mean not allowing myself to stay does it mean not allowing myself to stay in that state too long? in that state too long? in that state too long? The latter. I think the latter. So, and The latter. I think the latter. So, and The latter. I think the latter. So, and then that gets to temperament. So, I'm then that gets to temperament. So, I'm then that gets to temperament. So, I'm going to get that to a second. So, so in going to get that to a second. So, so in going to get that to a second. So, so in general, what we want is some kind of general, what we want is some kind of general, what we want is some kind of flexibility in that balance and the flexibility in that balance and the flexibility in that balance and the ability to re easily reassert ability to re easily reassert ability to re easily reassert homeostasis. We don't want to break our homeostasis. We don't want to break our homeostasis. We don't want to break our balance, which is possible if we balance, which is possible if we balance, which is possible if we overindulge for enough period of time overindulge for enough period of time overindulge for enough period of time and end up with a balance tipped to the and end up with a balance tipped to the and end up with a balance tipped to the side of pain. This dopamine deficit side of pain. This dopamine deficit side of pain. This dopamine deficit state we've been talking about. We want state we've been talking about. We want state we've been talking about. We want to we want a flexible, resilient to we want a flexible, resilient to we want a flexible, resilient balance, right? Which can be sensitive balance, right? Which can be sensitive balance, right? Which can be sensitive to things going on in the environment, to things going on in the environment, to things going on in the environment, which can experience pleasure and which can experience pleasure and which can experience pleasure and approach, which can experience pain and approach, which can experience pain and approach, which can experience pain and recoil, right? This is all adaptive and recoil, right? This is all adaptive and recoil, right? This is all adaptive and healthy and necessary and good. We would healthy and necessary and good. We would healthy and necessary and good. We would never want a balance that doesn't tilt. never want a balance that doesn't tilt. never want a balance that doesn't tilt. that would be a disaster. We wouldn't be that would be a disaster. We wouldn't be that would be a disaster. We wouldn't be human. Um, and we wouldn't want that. It would Um, and we wouldn't want that. It would Um, and we wouldn't want that. It would be really, really boring. be really, really boring. be really, really boring. On the other hand, what people in On the other hand, what people in On the other hand, what people in recovery from addiction talk about is to recovery from addiction talk about is to recovery from addiction talk about is to some extent having to learn to live with some extent having to learn to live with some extent having to learn to live with things being a little boring a lot of things being a little boring a lot of things being a little boring a lot of the time, right? So, trying to avoid the time, right? So, trying to avoid the time, right? So, trying to avoid some of this intensity and thrillseeking some of this intensity and thrillseeking some of this intensity and thrillseeking and escapism that really is at the core and escapism that really is at the core and escapism that really is at the core of addictive tendencies. Sorry to of addictive tendencies. Sorry to of addictive tendencies. Sorry to interrupt, but when you say boring, um, interrupt, but when you say boring, um, interrupt, but when you say boring, um, can we add stressful and boring? can we add stressful and boring? can we add stressful and boring? Yes. Because there are days where I'm not ex Because there are days where I'm not ex Because there are days where I'm not ex I have to I'm one of these people have I have to I'm one of these people have I have to I'm one of these people have to remind myself to have fun because I to remind myself to have fun because I to remind myself to have fun because I sort of forgot what the term means sort of forgot what the term means sort of forgot what the term means because I've I like to think that I because I've I like to think that I because I've I like to think that I experience a lot of pleasure in little experience a lot of pleasure in little experience a lot of pleasure in little things, but I I'm pretty hard driving things, but I I'm pretty hard driving things, but I I'm pretty hard driving guy. I like goals and big milestones, guy. I like goals and big milestones, guy. I like goals and big milestones, all that stuff. Anyway, um all that stuff. Anyway, um all that stuff. Anyway, um the point being that many days I'm not the point being that many days I'm not the point being that many days I'm not bored thinking, "Ah, there's nothing to bored thinking, "Ah, there's nothing to bored thinking, "Ah, there's nothing to do." But I am kind of overwhelmed by the do." But I am kind of overwhelmed by the do." But I am kind of overwhelmed by the number of things that are really not number of things that are really not number of things that are really not pleasureful that I have to do, pleasureful that I have to do, pleasureful that I have to do, right? I won't mention what they are cuz I won't mention what they are cuz I won't mention what they are cuz I don't want my I don't want my colleagues don't want my I don't want my colleagues don't want my I don't want my colleagues to be like, "So that's why you don't to be like, "So that's why you don't to be like, "So that's why you don't respond to emails." Um, no, just your respond to emails." Um, no, just your respond to emails." Um, no, just your emails. Um, not yours, Anna, but theirs. emails. Um, not yours, Anna, but theirs. emails. Um, not yours, Anna, but theirs. Um, in any event, um, so anxiety and Um, in any event, um, so anxiety and Um, in any event, um, so anxiety and boredom can hang out together, right? Am boredom can hang out together, right? Am boredom can hang out together, right? Am I correct in I correct in I correct in Oh, for sure. I mean, actually, boredom Oh, for sure. I mean, actually, boredom Oh, for sure. I mean, actually, boredom is highly anxietyprovoking. is highly anxietyprovoking. is highly anxietyprovoking. Okay. That's good to know cuz I think Okay. That's good to know cuz I think Okay. That's good to know cuz I think people hear boredom and they think people hear boredom and they think people hear boredom and they think like, "Oh, there's nothing to do here. like, "Oh, there's nothing to do here. like, "Oh, there's nothing to do here. There's not." It's I feel like we have a There's not." It's I feel like we have a There's not." It's I feel like we have a ton to do. We just don't really want to ton to do. We just don't really want to ton to do. We just don't really want to do it do it do it as opposed to something that we're as opposed to something that we're as opposed to something that we're excited to do. excited to do. excited to do. Right. Okay. So, so this gets to sort of Right. Okay. So, so this gets to sort of Right. Okay. So, so this gets to sort of some of the core things also we were some of the core things also we were some of the core things also we were talking about earlier about finding your talking about earlier about finding your talking about earlier about finding your passion. So, I'm going to try to link it passion. So, I'm going to try to link it passion. So, I'm going to try to link it all together. Um, but basically is all together. Um, but basically is all together. Um, but basically is boredom. First of all, boredom is a rare boredom. First of all, boredom is a rare boredom. First of all, boredom is a rare experience for modern humans because experience for modern humans because experience for modern humans because we're constantly distracting ourselves we're constantly distracting ourselves we're constantly distracting ourselves from the present moment and we have an from the present moment and we have an from the present moment and we have an infinite number of ways to do that, infinite number of ways to do that, infinite number of ways to do that, right? Um, but boredom is really, I right? Um, but boredom is really, I right? Um, but boredom is really, I think, an important and necessary think, an important and necessary think, an important and necessary experience, but it is scary because when you allow but it is scary because when you allow but it is scary because when you allow yourself to be bored, um, let's say you yourself to be bored, um, let's say you yourself to be bored, um, let's say you were had that list of all the things you were had that list of all the things you were had that list of all the things you hate to do, but you actually got them hate to do, but you actually got them hate to do, but you actually got them all done. Imagine that. and you got your all done. Imagine that. and you got your all done. Imagine that. and you got your forthcoming book done and you did all forthcoming book done and you did all forthcoming book done and you did all your interviews and your interviews and your interviews and it could happen. Lightning could it could happen. Lightning could it could happen. Lightning could and you walked your dog and you cleaned and you walked your dog and you cleaned and you walked your dog and you cleaned your house and you went shopping. your house and you went shopping. your house and you went shopping. Imagine that for a moment. You would be Imagine that for a moment. You would be Imagine that for a moment. You would be sitting in your house and my guess is sitting in your house and my guess is sitting in your house and my guess is you would be terrified you would be terrified you would be terrified because wow, what am I supposed to do because wow, what am I supposed to do because wow, what am I supposed to do now? Right? There's nothing I really now? Right? There's nothing I really now? Right? There's nothing I really have to do. And that is really have to do. And that is really have to do. And that is really scary. that can feel like freef fall and scary. that can feel like freef fall and scary. that can feel like freef fall and yet that's really an important and good yet that's really an important and good yet that's really an important and good experience to have and I think that is experience to have and I think that is experience to have and I think that is an experience out of which we can have a an experience out of which we can have a an experience out of which we can have a lot of creative um initiative but also lot of creative um initiative but also lot of creative um initiative but also really consider our priorities and really consider our priorities and really consider our priorities and values okay here I am on planet earth values okay here I am on planet earth values okay here I am on planet earth what the hehaw am I going to do with my what the hehaw am I going to do with my what the hehaw am I going to do with my life what do I really care about how do life what do I really care about how do life what do I really care about how do I really want to spend my time when I'm I really want to spend my time when I'm I really want to spend my time when I'm not distracting myself you know in order not distracting myself you know in order not distracting myself you know in order to spend it and the you know Then to spend it and the you know Then to spend it and the you know Then this gets back to our conversation a this gets back to our conversation a this gets back to our conversation a little bit earlier about finding your little bit earlier about finding your little bit earlier about finding your passion. So I think that one of the big passion. So I think that one of the big passion. So I think that one of the big problems now that's very misguided about problems now that's very misguided about problems now that's very misguided about this idea of finding your passion. It's this idea of finding your passion. It's this idea of finding your passion. It's almost as if people are looking to fit almost as if people are looking to fit almost as if people are looking to fit the key into the lock of the thing that the key into the lock of the thing that the key into the lock of the thing that was meant for them to do was meant for them to do was meant for them to do and then everything will feel like a and then everything will feel like a and then everything will feel like a natural progression, natural progression, natural progression, right? And then everything will be right? And then everything will be right? And then everything will be wonderful. I can attest to the fact that is not how I can attest to the fact that is not how I can attest to the fact that is not how it works in any endeavor, it works in any endeavor, it works in any endeavor, right? and that you'll have all this right? and that you'll have all this right? and that you'll have all this great success or you know but and here great success or you know but and here great success or you know but and here here's where I really think the answer here's where I really think the answer here's where I really think the answer lies and I really believe this. lies and I really believe this. lies and I really believe this. Stop looking for your passion and Stop looking for your passion and Stop looking for your passion and instead look around right where you are. instead look around right where you are. instead look around right where you are. Stop distracting yourself. Look around Stop distracting yourself. Look around Stop distracting yourself. Look around right where you are and see what needs right where you are and see what needs right where you are and see what needs to be done. So, not what do I want to be done. So, not what do I want to be done. So, not what do I want to do, but what is the work that needs to do, but what is the work that needs to do, but what is the work that needs to be done? And more importantly, it be done? And more importantly, it be done? And more importantly, it doesn't have to be some grandiose work doesn't have to be some grandiose work doesn't have to be some grandiose work like does the garbage need to be taken like does the garbage need to be taken like does the garbage need to be taken out, right? Is there some garbage on out, right? Is there some garbage on out, right? Is there some garbage on your neighbor's lawn that someone threw your neighbor's lawn that someone threw your neighbor's lawn that someone threw there that you could actually bend over there that you could actually bend over there that you could actually bend over and pick up and put into the garbage and pick up and put into the garbage and pick up and put into the garbage can? Look around you. There is so much can? Look around you. There is so much can? Look around you. There is so much work that needs to be done that nobody work that needs to be done that nobody work that needs to be done that nobody wants to do. That is really, really wants to do. That is really, really wants to do. That is really, really important. And if we all did that, I important. And if we all did that, I important. And if we all did that, I really think the world would be a much really think the world would be a much really think the world would be a much better place. And this is what people better place. And this is what people better place. And this is what people who have severe addiction who get into who have severe addiction who get into who have severe addiction who get into recovery realize. They're like, it's not recovery realize. They're like, it's not recovery realize. They're like, it's not about me and my will and what I'm going about me and my will and what I'm going about me and my will and what I'm going to will in my life or in the world. It's to will in my life or in the world. It's to will in my life or in the world. It's about looking around what needs to be about looking around what needs to be about looking around what needs to be done. What is the work that I am called done. What is the work that I am called done. What is the work that I am called to do in this moment? which also is to do in this moment? which also is to do in this moment? which also is incredibly freeing because I don't have incredibly freeing because I don't have incredibly freeing because I don't have to search for the perfect thing. There's to search for the perfect thing. There's to search for the perfect thing. There's a lot of burden now on young people that a lot of burden now on young people that a lot of burden now on young people that they have to find that perfect thing and they have to find that perfect thing and they have to find that perfect thing and until they found that perfect thing, until they found that perfect thing, until they found that perfect thing, they're going to be miserable. You don't they're going to be miserable. You don't they're going to be miserable. You don't have to do that. Look at the life you have to do that. Look at the life you have to do that. Look at the life you were given. Look at the people around were given. Look at the people around were given. Look at the people around you. Look at the jobs that present you. Look at the jobs that present you. Look at the jobs that present themselves to you and do that job simply themselves to you and do that job simply themselves to you and do that job simply and honorably, one day at a time in a and honorably, one day at a time in a and honorably, one day at a time in a with a kind of humility. I think this is with a kind of humility. I think this is with a kind of humility. I think this is really what what's so striking to me really what what's so striking to me really what what's so striking to me about the wisdom of people in recovery. about the wisdom of people in recovery. about the wisdom of people in recovery. There's this incredible humility that There's this incredible humility that There's this incredible humility that comes out of that experience. You feel comes out of that experience. You feel comes out of that experience. You feel so broken, so ashamed, but you pick so broken, so ashamed, but you pick so broken, so ashamed, but you pick yourself up one day at a time, and you yourself up one day at a time, and you yourself up one day at a time, and you build a life that's around what can I do build a life that's around what can I do build a life that's around what can I do right in this moment that might benefit right in this moment that might benefit right in this moment that might benefit another person and thereby benefit me. another person and thereby benefit me. another person and thereby benefit me. Yeah, it's um a really important point Yeah, it's um a really important point Yeah, it's um a really important point and um and if you're willing, I'd like and um and if you're willing, I'd like and um and if you're willing, I'd like to actually stay on this issue of to actually stay on this issue of to actually stay on this issue of passion. Um because uh I think the passion. Um because uh I think the passion. Um because uh I think the dopamine systems, if I understand them dopamine systems, if I understand them dopamine systems, if I understand them correctly, the dopamine systems merge with this the dopamine systems merge with this the dopamine systems merge with this work that you're referring to, this work that you're referring to, this work that you're referring to, this immediacy of things calling to us, like immediacy of things calling to us, like immediacy of things calling to us, like taking out the trash, which sounds taking out the trash, which sounds taking out the trash, which sounds frankly really boring. Um, to be honest, frankly really boring. Um, to be honest, frankly really boring. Um, to be honest, I hate taking out the trash, but I do I hate taking out the trash, but I do I hate taking out the trash, but I do it cuz I like a clean home and I like a cuz I like a clean home and I like a cuz I like a clean home and I like a home that the home that smells good. home that the home that smells good. home that the home that smells good. Um, or at least doesn't smell bad. Uh, Um, or at least doesn't smell bad. Uh, Um, or at least doesn't smell bad. Uh, so we do these things and um, not that so we do these things and um, not that so we do these things and um, not that we want to offer some larger carrot as a we want to offer some larger carrot as a we want to offer some larger carrot as a consequence of doing those things. But consequence of doing those things. But consequence of doing those things. But if I understand correctly, what you're if I understand correctly, what you're if I understand correctly, what you're saying is in the act of looking at one's saying is in the act of looking at one's saying is in the act of looking at one's immediate environment, acting on that immediate environment, acting on that immediate environment, acting on that immediate environment, we cultivate a immediate environment, we cultivate a immediate environment, we cultivate a relationship to these circuits in our relationship to these circuits in our relationship to these circuits in our brain about action and reward that, at brain about action and reward that, at brain about action and reward that, at least to my mind, spin the range of least to my mind, spin the range of least to my mind, spin the range of small things being rewarding and then small things being rewarding and then small things being rewarding and then lead us to bigger things being lead us to bigger things being lead us to bigger things being rewarding. It's not like all we're going rewarding. It's not like all we're going rewarding. It's not like all we're going to do is take out trash and tend to do is take out trash and tend to do is take out trash and tend to house. we eventually will venture out house. we eventually will venture out house. we eventually will venture out and we eventually will find careers and we eventually will find careers and we eventually will find careers and work on those. But if I understand and work on those. But if I understand and work on those. But if I understand correctly, you're talking about getting correctly, you're talking about getting correctly, you're talking about getting into a sort of functional or adaptive into a sort of functional or adaptive into a sort of functional or adaptive action step and it's the action step action step and it's the action step action step and it's the action step that these days we tend to overlook that these days we tend to overlook that these days we tend to overlook because most of our mindset is in things because most of our mindset is in things because most of our mindset is in things that are truly in outside of the our that are truly in outside of the our that are truly in outside of the our immediate reality. Do I have that immediate reality. Do I have that immediate reality. Do I have that correct? Yeah, that was beautifully said and I Yeah, that was beautifully said and I Yeah, that was beautifully said and I would just add to that. I see a lot of would just add to that. I see a lot of would just add to that. I see a lot of young people who, for example, spend young people who, for example, spend young people who, for example, spend most of their waking hours playing video most of their waking hours playing video most of their waking hours playing video games and they come to me and they say, games and they come to me and they say, games and they come to me and they say, "I'm anxious and depressed. I'm majoring "I'm anxious and depressed. I'm majoring "I'm anxious and depressed. I'm majoring in computer science. I hate it. I in computer science. I hate it. I in computer science. I hate it. I thought I would like it. You know, if I thought I would like it. You know, if I thought I would like it. You know, if I could only find that thing that I was could only find that thing that I was could only find that thing that I was really meant to do, my life would be really meant to do, my life would be really meant to do, my life would be better." And my first intervention for better." And my first intervention for better." And my first intervention for the many, many people like that I the many, many people like that I the many, many people like that I see in clinical care is you have it see in clinical care is you have it see in clinical care is you have it backwards. I don't say it quite like backwards. I don't say it quite like backwards. I don't say it quite like that. You were waiting for that thing to that. You were waiting for that thing to that. You were waiting for that thing to pull you out of the video game world and pull you out of the video game world and pull you out of the video game world and you're never going to find it as long as you're never going to find it as long as you're never going to find it as long as you're playing video games because video you're playing video games because video you're playing video games because video games are so powerfully dopamineeric games are so powerfully dopamineeric games are so powerfully dopamineeric that you have this distorted sense of that you have this distorted sense of that you have this distorted sense of really pleasure and pain and you really pleasure and pain and you really pleasure and pain and you will not be able to find that thing that will not be able to find that thing that will not be able to find that thing that you enjoy. And so, of course, the you enjoy. And so, of course, the you enjoy. And so, of course, the intervention is abstain from video intervention is abstain from video intervention is abstain from video games, reset your reward pathways, start games, reset your reward pathways, start games, reset your reward pathways, start with a level balance, and what with a level balance, and what with a level balance, and what invariably happens, and I've just seen invariably happens, and I've just seen invariably happens, and I've just seen it over 20 years so many times, I've it over 20 years so many times, I've it over 20 years so many times, I've become really a believer in this. Um, become really a believer in this. Um, become really a believer in this. Um, all of a sudden, it's like, oh, wow, my all of a sudden, it's like, oh, wow, my all of a sudden, it's like, oh, wow, my computer science class is interesting computer science class is interesting computer science class is interesting this quarter. It's like, okay, you know, this quarter. It's like, okay, you know, this quarter. It's like, okay, you know, you have a receptivity then to you have a receptivity then to you have a receptivity then to experiencing pleasure and reward in a experiencing pleasure and reward in a experiencing pleasure and reward in a way you just don't have when you're way you just don't have when you're way you just don't have when you're bombarding your reward pathways with bombarding your reward pathways with bombarding your reward pathways with these high dopamine drugs. these high dopamine drugs. these high dopamine drugs. Very interesting. Um, and just to Very interesting. Um, and just to Very interesting. Um, and just to underscore this notion that tending to underscore this notion that tending to underscore this notion that tending to the immediate things can lead to super the immediate things can lead to super the immediate things can lead to super performance. Um, uh, I may have performance. Um, uh, I may have performance. Um, uh, I may have mentioned it earlier this episode, um, mentioned it earlier this episode, um, mentioned it earlier this episode, um, but if I didn't, I'll mention it now, but if I didn't, I'll mention it now, but if I didn't, I'll mention it now, which is I have the great privilege which is I have the great privilege which is I have the great privilege of having some close friends that were of having some close friends that were of having some close friends that were in the SEAL teams and doing some work in the SEAL teams and doing some work in the SEAL teams and doing some work with those communities. And it's a with those communities. And it's a with those communities. And it's a remarkable community for reasons that I remarkable community for reasons that I remarkable community for reasons that I think most people don't understand. think most people don't understand. think most people don't understand. People think they see the images People think they see the images People think they see the images carrying logs down the beach and all the carrying logs down the beach and all the carrying logs down the beach and all the blowing stuff, all the all the stuff blowing stuff, all the all the stuff blowing stuff, all the all the stuff that's fun for guys like that, that's fun for guys like that, that's fun for guys like that, but uh, all of the guys I know who are but uh, all of the guys I know who are but uh, all of the guys I know who are in the SEAL teams have this sense of in the SEAL teams have this sense of in the SEAL teams have this sense of duty about immediate things. M duty about immediate things. M duty about immediate things. M um and not just holding the door and um and not just holding the door and um and not just holding the door and doing the helping with the dishes and doing the helping with the dishes and doing the helping with the dishes and moving things around. They are moving things around. They are moving things around. They are constantly scanning their environment constantly scanning their environment constantly scanning their environment for what can be done. for what can be done. for what can be done. They essentially conquer every They essentially conquer every They essentially conquer every environment they're in. They are also environment they're in. They are also environment they're in. They are also some of the most competitive human some of the most competitive human some of the most competitive human beings, but they do it in the world. And beings, but they do it in the world. And beings, but they do it in the world. And they do it unless they're in the they do it unless they're in the they do it unless they're in the act of war fighting, which is their act of war fighting, which is their act of war fighting, which is their real job. Uh they do it in every their real job. Uh they do it in every their real job. Uh they do it in every environment in a very benevolent way. environment in a very benevolent way. environment in a very benevolent way. And it's a remarkable thing because it I And it's a remarkable thing because it I And it's a remarkable thing because it I think it's what is part of what they're think it's what is part of what they're think it's what is part of what they're selected for. selected for. selected for. And um and you know that there's a range And um and you know that there's a range And um and you know that there's a range there, but I think when we hear about there, but I think when we hear about there, but I think when we hear about tending to the immediate things tending to the immediate things tending to the immediate things or this phrase uh you know how you do or this phrase uh you know how you do or this phrase uh you know how you do one thing is how you do anything. That's one thing is how you do anything. That's one thing is how you do anything. That's a tricky one for me because there are a tricky one for me because there are a tricky one for me because there are certain things I just don't do well. Um certain things I just don't do well. Um certain things I just don't do well. Um but should we always be trying? I but should we always be trying? I but should we always be trying? I think that the tending to setting the think that the tending to setting the think that the tending to setting the horizon in closely um and tending to horizon in closely um and tending to horizon in closely um and tending to things in one's immediate environment I things in one's immediate environment I things in one's immediate environment I think it is very powerful and translates think it is very powerful and translates think it is very powerful and translates because again I think the nervous system because again I think the nervous system because again I think the nervous system it performs algorithms. It has action it performs algorithms. It has action it performs algorithms. It has action steps. The brain doesn't steps. The brain doesn't steps. The brain doesn't evolve to do one thing. It evolves to be evolve to do one thing. It evolves to be evolve to do one thing. It evolves to be able to use the same approach to doing able to use the same approach to doing able to use the same approach to doing lots of different things. Yes. lots of different things. Yes. lots of different things. Yes. Um I just want to add so even beyond that I just want to add so even beyond that I just want to add so even beyond that cuz that totally resonates for me cuz that totally resonates for me cuz that totally resonates for me and is very consistent with people in and is very consistent with people in and is very consistent with people in recovery from addiction who learn to recovery from addiction who learn to recovery from addiction who learn to take it one day at a time which is one take it one day at a time which is one take it one day at a time which is one of the you know standard lingo from of the you know standard lingo from of the you know standard lingo from Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12step Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12step Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12step groups. But but I think also as you say groups. But but I think also as you say groups. But but I think also as you say you know our brain is really wired for you know our brain is really wired for you know our brain is really wired for the 24hour period. We're not very good the 24hour period. We're not very good the 24hour period. We're not very good at sort of the you know 10 year 20 I at sort of the you know 10 year 20 I at sort of the you know 10 year 20 I mean we have these huge frontal loes and mean we have these huge frontal loes and mean we have these huge frontal loes and yes we're great planners and we can but yes we're great planners and we can but yes we're great planners and we can but if we live too much in that space we can if we live too much in that space we can if we live too much in that space we can really get very anxious and depressed really get very anxious and depressed really get very anxious and depressed and lost and either catastrophize or get and lost and either catastrophize or get and lost and either catastrophize or get grandiose but if you can chunk it down grandiose but if you can chunk it down grandiose but if you can chunk it down to a day what people in recovery talk to a day what people in recovery talk to a day what people in recovery talk about is how if I can just do today about is how if I can just do today about is how if I can just do today right then I will get a chain of days right then I will get a chain of days right then I will get a chain of days that seem ins significant in their that seem ins significant in their that seem ins significant in their individual units, but after six months individual units, but after six months individual units, but after six months or a year or two years of those good or a year or two years of those good or a year or two years of those good days, I've got two very good years, days, I've got two very good years, days, I've got two very good years, right? And I look back, it's like, oh, right? And I look back, it's like, oh, right? And I look back, it's like, oh, wow. Well, I guess I did all that. wow. Well, I guess I did all that. wow. Well, I guess I did all that. But I think that's really, you know, one But I think that's really, you know, one But I think that's really, you know, one of the keys is really taking it one of the keys is really taking it one of the keys is really taking it one day at a time, which your seals day at a time, which your seals day at a time, which your seals and also this connecting with the and also this connecting with the and also this connecting with the environment, right? So, being awake and environment, right? So, being awake and environment, right? So, being awake and alert to your environment and connecting alert to your environment and connecting alert to your environment and connecting with your environment, not trying to with your environment, not trying to with your environment, not trying to escape it. And of course, escapism is escape it. And of course, escapism is escape it. And of course, escapism is what we all want and desire, that what we all want and desire, that what we all want and desire, that experience of non-being. And we get it experience of non-being. And we get it experience of non-being. And we get it from the internet or from drugs or from the internet or from drugs or from the internet or from drugs or whatever it is. But it is it's the booby whatever it is. But it is it's the booby whatever it is. But it is it's the booby prize. We because ultimately it takes prize. We because ultimately it takes prize. We because ultimately it takes you further and further away from your you further and further away from your you further and further away from your immediate environment, which is where we immediate environment, which is where we immediate environment, which is where we really have to connect to get that sense really have to connect to get that sense really have to connect to get that sense of groundedness and authenticity and of groundedness and authenticity and of groundedness and authenticity and like of being in our own lives. Well, I like of being in our own lives. Well, I like of being in our own lives. Well, I think the unit of the day is something think the unit of the day is something think the unit of the day is something that comes up again and again of in my that comes up again and again of in my that comes up again and again of in my discussions with colleagues who are discussions with colleagues who are discussions with colleagues who are extremely uh successful and who also extremely uh successful and who also extremely uh successful and who also have balanced lives, right? have balanced lives, right? have balanced lives, right? Uh this actually came up in the Uh this actually came up in the Uh this actually came up in the discussion with Carl Dyeroth who is also discussion with Carl Dyeroth who is also discussion with Carl Dyeroth who is also a successful scientist and clinician and a successful scientist and clinician and a successful scientist and clinician and you know manages a family etc. So and you know manages a family etc. So and you know manages a family etc. So the unit of the day I think is the unit of the day I think is the unit of the day I think is fundamental and those stack up as you fundamental and those stack up as you fundamental and those stack up as you mentioned. So along those lines, I've mentioned. So along those lines, I've mentioned. So along those lines, I've heard you say that in order to reset the heard you say that in order to reset the heard you say that in order to reset the dopamine system, essentially in order to dopamine system, essentially in order to dopamine system, essentially in order to break an addictive pattern, to become break an addictive pattern, to become break an addictive pattern, to become unaddicted, 30 days of zero interaction with that 30 days of zero interaction with that 30 days of zero interaction with that substance, that person, etc. Is that substance, that person, etc. Is that substance, that person, etc. Is that correct? Yeah. and 30 days is in my clinical Yeah. and 30 days is in my clinical Yeah. and 30 days is in my clinical experience the average amount of time experience the average amount of time experience the average amount of time it takes for the brain to reset reward it takes for the brain to reset reward it takes for the brain to reset reward pathways for dopamine transmission to pathways for dopamine transmission to pathways for dopamine transmission to regenerate itself. There's also a little regenerate itself. There's also a little regenerate itself. There's also a little bit of science that suggests that that's bit of science that suggests that that's bit of science that suggests that that's true. Some imaging studies showing that true. Some imaging studies showing that true. Some imaging studies showing that um our brains are still in a dopamine um our brains are still in a dopamine um our brains are still in a dopamine deficit state 2 weeks um after we've deficit state 2 weeks um after we've deficit state 2 weeks um after we've been using our drug. And then a study been using our drug. And then a study been using our drug. And then a study by Shucket and Brown which took a group by Shucket and Brown which took a group by Shucket and Brown which took a group of um depressed men who also were of um depressed men who also were of um depressed men who also were addicted to alcohol put them in a addicted to alcohol put them in a addicted to alcohol put them in a hospital where the they had received no hospital where the they had received no hospital where the they had received no treatment for depression but they had no treatment for depression but they had no treatment for depression but they had no access to alcohol in that time and no access to alcohol in that time and no access to alcohol in that time and after 4 weeks 80% of them no longer met after 4 weeks 80% of them no longer met after 4 weeks 80% of them no longer met criteria for major depression. So again, criteria for major depression. So again, criteria for major depression. So again, this idea that by depriving ourselves of this idea that by depriving ourselves of this idea that by depriving ourselves of this high dopamine, high reward this high dopamine, high reward this high dopamine, high reward substance or behavior, we allow our substance or behavior, we allow our substance or behavior, we allow our brains to regenerate its own dopamine to brains to regenerate its own dopamine to brains to regenerate its own dopamine to for the balance to really equilibrate for the balance to really equilibrate for the balance to really equilibrate and then we're in a place where we can and then we're in a place where we can and then we're in a place where we can sort of enjoy other things. sort of enjoy other things. sort of enjoy other things. So that progressive narrowing So that progressive narrowing So that progressive narrowing of what brings one pleasure eventually of what brings one pleasure eventually of what brings one pleasure eventually expands. So I'd like to um dissect out expands. So I'd like to um dissect out expands. So I'd like to um dissect out that 30 days a little more finely. Um, that 30 days a little more finely. Um, that 30 days a little more finely. Um, and I also want to address how does one and I also want to address how does one and I also want to address how does one stop doing something for 30 days if the stop doing something for 30 days if the stop doing something for 30 days if the thing is a thought. thing is a thought. thing is a thought. So, we'll kind of put that on the shelf So, we'll kind of put that on the shelf So, we'll kind of put that on the shelf for a moment. for a moment. for a moment. So, days 1 through 10 So, days 1 through 10 So, days 1 through 10 I would imagine will be very I would imagine will be very I would imagine will be very uncomfortable. Yes, uncomfortable. Yes, uncomfortable. Yes, they're going to suck basically to be they're going to suck basically to be they're going to suck basically to be quite honest because what if the way you quite honest because what if the way you quite honest because what if the way you describe this pleasure pain balance describe this pleasure pain balance describe this pleasure pain balance to my mind says that if you remove what to my mind says that if you remove what to my mind says that if you remove what little pleasure one is getting or a lot little pleasure one is getting or a lot little pleasure one is getting or a lot of pleasure from engaging in some of pleasure from engaging in some of pleasure from engaging in some behavior that's gone the pain system is really that's gone the pain system is really that's gone the pain system is really ramped up and nothing is making me feel ramped up and nothing is making me feel ramped up and nothing is making me feel good. I'll just use myself as an good. I'll just use myself as an good. I'll just use myself as an example. I'm not in recovery, example. I'm not in recovery, example. I'm not in recovery, but you know that 10 days is going to be but you know that 10 days is going to be but you know that 10 days is going to be miserable, right? Anxiety, trouble sleeping, Anxiety, trouble sleeping, Anxiety, trouble sleeping, um physical agitation to the point where um physical agitation to the point where um physical agitation to the point where you know um maybe impulsive, angry, you know um maybe impulsive, angry, you know um maybe impulsive, angry, should one expect all of that? should one expect all of that? should one expect all of that? Should the family members of people Should the family members of people Should the family members of people expect all of that? expect all of that? expect all of that? Yeah. So, what I say to patients, and Yeah. So, what I say to patients, and Yeah. So, what I say to patients, and it's a really important piece of this it's a really important piece of this it's a really important piece of this intervention, is that you will feel intervention, is that you will feel intervention, is that you will feel worse before you feel better. worse before you feel better. worse before you feel better. For how long? This is probably the first For how long? This is probably the first For how long? This is probably the first question they ask, right? question they ask, right? question they ask, right? And and I say usually in my clinical And and I say usually in my clinical And and I say usually in my clinical experience, you'll feel worse for 2 experience, you'll feel worse for 2 experience, you'll feel worse for 2 weeks. But if you can make it through weeks. But if you can make it through weeks. But if you can make it through those first two weeks, the sun will those first two weeks, the sun will those first two weeks, the sun will start to come out in week three. And by start to come out in week three. And by start to come out in week three. And by week four, most people are feeling a week four, most people are feeling a week four, most people are feeling a whole lot better than they were before whole lot better than they were before whole lot better than they were before they stopped using their sub substance. they stopped using their sub substance. they stopped using their sub substance. So, um yeah, you have to it's a So, um yeah, you have to it's a So, um yeah, you have to it's a hard thing. Like you have to sign up for hard thing. Like you have to sign up for hard thing. Like you have to sign up for it. And I will say obviously there are it. And I will say obviously there are it. And I will say obviously there are people with addictions that are so people with addictions that are so people with addictions that are so severe that as long as they have access severe that as long as they have access severe that as long as they have access to their drug or behavior, they're not to their drug or behavior, they're not to their drug or behavior, they're not able to stop themselves. And that's why able to stop themselves. And that's why able to stop themselves. And that's why we have, you know, higher levels of care we have, you know, higher levels of care we have, you know, higher levels of care or residential treatment. So this is not or residential treatment. So this is not or residential treatment. So this is not going to be for everybody, this going to be for everybody, this going to be for everybody, this intervention. But it's amazing how many intervention. But it's amazing how many intervention. But it's amazing how many people with really severe addictions to people with really severe addictions to people with really severe addictions to things like heroin, cocaine, you know, things like heroin, cocaine, you know, things like heroin, cocaine, you know, very severe pornography addictions. I very severe pornography addictions. I very severe pornography addictions. I posit this and I do it as an experiment. posit this and I do it as an experiment. posit this and I do it as an experiment. And I said, you know, let let's try this And I said, you know, let let's try this And I said, you know, let let's try this experiment. I'm always amazed, number experiment. I'm always amazed, number experiment. I'm always amazed, number one, how many of them are willing, and one, how many of them are willing, and one, how many of them are willing, and number two, how many of them are number two, how many of them are number two, how many of them are actually able to do it. They are able to actually able to do it. They are able to actually able to do it. They are able to do it. And and so that little nudge is do it. And and so that little nudge is do it. And and so that little nudge is sort of just what they need. And the sort of just what they need. And the sort of just what they need. And the carrot is, carrot is, carrot is, you know, there's a better life out you know, there's a better life out you know, there's a better life out there for you. And you'll be able to there for you. And you'll be able to there for you. And you'll be able to taste it in a month. You really will be taste it in a month. You really will be taste it in a month. You really will be able to begin to see that you can feel able to begin to see that you can feel able to begin to see that you can feel better and that there's another way. better and that there's another way. better and that there's another way. So, the way you describe it, um, seems So, the way you describe it, um, seems So, the way you describe it, um, seems like it's hard, like it's hard, like it's hard, but it's doable for most people, not but it's doable for most people, not but it's doable for most people, not everybody, right? And we'll return to the that category of And we'll return to the that category of And we'll return to the that category of people who can't do that on their own. people who can't do that on their own. people who can't do that on their own. Um, well then days 21 through 30, well then days 21 through 30, well then days 21 through 30, uh, people are feeling better. The sun uh, people are feeling better. The sun uh, people are feeling better. The sun is starting to come out as you is starting to come out as you is starting to come out as you mentioned. They which translates in the mentioned. They which translates in the mentioned. They which translates in the narrative we've created here in support narrative we've created here in support narrative we've created here in support by biology that dopamine is starting to by biology that dopamine is starting to by biology that dopamine is starting to be released in response to the taste of be released in response to the taste of be released in response to the taste of a really good cup of coffee for a really good cup of coffee for a really good cup of coffee for instance. Exactly. Whereas before it was only to Whereas before it was only to Whereas before it was only to insert you know addictive behavior. insert you know addictive behavior. insert you know addictive behavior. Whichever it is. Whichever it is. Whichever it is. Of course coffee can be addictive too Of course coffee can be addictive too Of course coffee can be addictive too but we'll leave that aside. but we'll leave that aside. but we'll leave that aside. Yeah. I feel like coffee has a kind of Yeah. I feel like coffee has a kind of Yeah. I feel like coffee has a kind of um consumption limiting mechanism built um consumption limiting mechanism built um consumption limiting mechanism built in where at some point you just can't in where at some point you just can't in where at some point you just can't ingest anymore. Yeah. Um but maybe ingest anymore. Yeah. Um but maybe ingest anymore. Yeah. Um but maybe that's wrong. Sorry to give lift to the that's wrong. Sorry to give lift to the that's wrong. Sorry to give lift to the caffeine addicts out there as I as I caffeine addicts out there as I as I caffeine addicts out there as I as I clutch my mug. Um so days 21 through clutch my mug. Um so days 21 through clutch my mug. Um so days 21 through 30. Um I've seen a lot of people go 30. Um I've seen a lot of people go 30. Um I've seen a lot of people go through addiction and addiction through addiction and addiction through addiction and addiction treatment. I've spent a lot of time in treatment. I've spent a lot of time in treatment. I've spent a lot of time in those places actually um looking at it, those places actually um looking at it, those places actually um looking at it, researching, I've got friends in that researching, I've got friends in that researching, I've got friends in that community. I I'm close with that community. I I'm close with that community. I I'm close with that community. One thing I've seen over and over again, One thing I've seen over and over again, One thing I've seen over and over again, sadly, often in the same individuals, is sadly, often in the same individuals, is sadly, often in the same individuals, is they get sober from whatever they're they get sober from whatever they're they get sober from whatever they're doing great. These are people with doing great. These are people with doing great. These are people with families. These are people that you families. These are people that you families. These are people that you discard your normal image of an addict discard your normal image of an addict discard your normal image of an addict and insert the most normal typical and insert the most normal typical and insert the most normal typical whatever healthy person you can imagine whatever healthy person you can imagine whatever healthy person you can imagine because a lot of these people you because a lot of these people you because a lot of these people you wouldn't know were addicts. wouldn't know were addicts. wouldn't know were addicts. And then all of a sudden you get this And then all of a sudden you get this And then all of a sudden you get this call. So and so's back in jail. So and call. So and so's back in jail. So and call. So and so's back in jail. So and so's wife is going to leave him because so's wife is going to leave him because so's wife is going to leave him because he drank two bottles of wine and took he drank two bottles of wine and took he drank two bottles of wine and took a Xanax at 7:00 a.m. crashed his truck a Xanax at 7:00 a.m. crashed his truck a Xanax at 7:00 a.m. crashed his truck into a pole. has got two beautiful kids. into a pole. has got two beautiful kids. into a pole. has got two beautiful kids. Like, how did this happen again? To the Like, how did this happen again? To the Like, how did this happen again? To the point where by the fourth and fifth point where by the fourth and fifth point where by the fourth and fifth time, people are just done. I mean, time, people are just done. I mean, time, people are just done. I mean, maybe people, you might be able to maybe people, you might be able to maybe people, you might be able to detect the frustration in my voice. I'm detect the frustration in my voice. I'm detect the frustration in my voice. I'm dealing with this with somebody that's dealing with this with somebody that's dealing with this with somebody that's like, I don't even know that I want to like, I don't even know that I want to like, I don't even know that I want to help this time. help this time. help this time. It's been so many times to the point It's been so many times to the point It's been so many times to the point where I'm starting to wonder, is this where I'm starting to wonder, is this where I'm starting to wonder, is this person just an addict? This is just kind person just an addict? This is just kind person just an addict? This is just kind of what they do and who they are. And I of what they do and who they are. And I of what they do and who they are. And I and you never want to give up on people, and you never want to give up on people, and you never want to give up on people, but um and I'm hanging in there for but um and I'm hanging in there for but um and I'm hanging in there for them, but I will say that um many people them, but I will say that um many people them, but I will say that um many people have given up on them. And so what I'd have given up on them. And so what I'd have given up on them. And so what I'd like to talk about in this context is like to talk about in this context is like to talk about in this context is what sorts of things help other people what sorts of things help other people what sorts of things help other people that we know that are addicted. What that we know that are addicted. What that we know that are addicted. What really helps, really helps, really helps, right? Not uh not what could help, but right? Not uh not what could help, but right? Not uh not what could help, but what really helps? And are there certain what really helps? And are there certain what really helps? And are there certain people for whom it's hopeless? I mean, I people for whom it's hopeless? I mean, I people for whom it's hopeless? I mean, I don't like to hold the conversation that don't like to hold the conversation that don't like to hold the conversation that way, but I wouldn't be close to the real way, but I wouldn't be close to the real way, but I wouldn't be close to the real life data if I didn't ask, is it is life data if I didn't ask, is it is life data if I didn't ask, is it is it hopeless? Are there people who just it hopeless? Are there people who just it hopeless? Are there people who just will not be able to quit their substance will not be able to quit their substance will not be able to quit their substance use or their addictive behavior despite, use or their addictive behavior despite, use or their addictive behavior despite, I have to assume, really wanting to. I have to assume, really wanting to. I have to assume, really wanting to. Yeah. So, there are people who Yeah. So, there are people who Yeah. So, there are people who will die of their disease of addiction, will die of their disease of addiction, will die of their disease of addiction, you know, and I think conceptualizing it you know, and I think conceptualizing it you know, and I think conceptualizing it as a disease is a helpful frame. There as a disease is a helpful frame. There as a disease is a helpful frame. There are other frames that we could use, but are other frames that we could use, but are other frames that we could use, but I do think given the brain physiologic I do think given the brain physiologic I do think given the brain physiologic changes that occur with sustained heavy changes that occur with sustained heavy changes that occur with sustained heavy drug use and what we know happens to the drug use and what we know happens to the drug use and what we know happens to the brain, it is really reasonable to brain, it is really reasonable to brain, it is really reasonable to think of it as a brain disease. And and think of it as a brain disease. And and think of it as a brain disease. And and for me, the real window of let's say for me, the real window of let's say for me, the real window of let's say being able to access my compassion being able to access my compassion being able to access my compassion around people who are repeat relapsers around people who are repeat relapsers around people who are repeat relapsers even when their life is so much better even when their life is so much better even when their life is so much better when they're in Yeah. It's like it's when they're in Yeah. It's like it's when they're in Yeah. It's like it's like a no-brainer, right? um is to like a no-brainer, right? um is to like a no-brainer, right? um is to conceptualize this balance and the conceptualize this balance and the conceptualize this balance and the dopamine deficit state and a balance dopamine deficit state and a balance dopamine deficit state and a balance tilt tilted to the side of pain and to tilt tilted to the side of pain and to tilt tilted to the side of pain and to imagine that for some people after a imagine that for some people after a imagine that for some people after a month or 6 months or maybe even 6 years month or 6 months or maybe even 6 years month or 6 months or maybe even 6 years their balance is still tipped to the their balance is still tipped to the their balance is still tipped to the side of pain that on some level that side of pain that on some level that side of pain that on some level that balance has lost its resilience and its balance has lost its resilience and its balance has lost its resilience and its ability to restore homeostasis. ability to restore homeostasis. ability to restore homeostasis. It's almost like the hinge on that It's almost like the hinge on that It's almost like the hinge on that balance is messed up. balance is messed up. balance is messed up. Exactly. And so I mean for someone Exactly. And so I mean for someone Exactly. And so I mean for someone who's never experienced addiction like who's never experienced addiction like who's never experienced addiction like yourself, maybe one way to yourself, maybe one way to yourself, maybe one way to conceptualize it is conceptualize it is conceptualize it is Well, I didn't say that. Well, I didn't say that. Well, I didn't say that. Okay. No, I was not to be clear, I would I was No, I was not to be clear, I would I was No, I was not to be clear, I would I was not referring to myself, but I in not referring to myself, but I in not referring to myself, but I in this example I was given, I if I were, I this example I was given, I if I were, I this example I was given, I if I were, I would I would um come clean. I would I would um come clean. I would I would um come clean. I would reveal that. Um but I think that reveal that. Um but I think that reveal that. Um but I think that especially after hearing some of your especially after hearing some of your especially after hearing some of your lectures and descriptions of the range lectures and descriptions of the range lectures and descriptions of the range of things that are addictive, I think um of things that are addictive, I think um of things that are addictive, I think um I I've been fortunate. I don't have a I I've been fortunate. I don't have a I I've been fortunate. I don't have a propensity for drugs or alcohol, right? propensity for drugs or alcohol, right? propensity for drugs or alcohol, right? I'm lucky in that way that I'm lucky in that way that I'm lucky in that way that frankly if they remove all the alcohol frankly if they remove all the alcohol frankly if they remove all the alcohol from the planet, I'll just be relieved from the planet, I'll just be relieved from the planet, I'll just be relieved because no one will offer it to me because no one will offer it to me because no one will offer it to me anymore. So, don't send me any alcohol. It won't So, don't send me any alcohol. It won't So, don't send me any alcohol. It won't go to me. Um but uh but I don't have go to me. Um but uh but I don't have go to me. Um but uh but I don't have that um I like to think I have the that um I like to think I have the that um I like to think I have the compassion. Um but I don't have that uh compassion. Um but I don't have that uh compassion. Um but I don't have that uh empathy for empathy for empathy for you know taking a really good situation you know taking a really good situation you know taking a really good situation and what from the outside looks to be and what from the outside looks to be and what from the outside looks to be throwing it in the trash. throwing it in the trash. throwing it in the trash. Yeah. So okay. So, so let me and Yeah. So okay. So, so let me and Yeah. So okay. So, so let me and this is really I think important because this is really I think important because this is really I think important because I also had to come to an understanding I also had to come to an understanding I also had to come to an understanding of this and I feel that I have in my 20 of this and I feel that I have in my 20 of this and I feel that I have in my 20 years of seeing these patients and of years of seeing these patients and of years of seeing these patients and of course addiction is a spectrum disease, course addiction is a spectrum disease, course addiction is a spectrum disease, right? And so you've got the severe end right? And so you've got the severe end right? And so you've got the severe end of things. Um imagine that you had an of things. Um imagine that you had an of things. Um imagine that you had an itch somewhere on your body, okay? And itch somewhere on your body, okay? And itch somewhere on your body, okay? And it was I mean we've all had that like it was I mean we've all had that like it was I mean we've all had that like you know whatever the source it was you know whatever the source it was you know whatever the source it was super itchy. You can go for uh you super itchy. You can go for uh you super itchy. You can go for uh you know if you really focus you could go know if you really focus you could go know if you really focus you could go for a pretty good amount of time not for a pretty good amount of time not for a pretty good amount of time not scratching it but the moment you stopped scratching it but the moment you stopped scratching it but the moment you stopped focusing on not scratching it you would focusing on not scratching it you would focusing on not scratching it you would scratch it and maybe you do it while you scratch it and maybe you do it while you scratch it and maybe you do it while you were asleep right that and that is what were asleep right that and that is what were asleep right that and that is what happens to people with severe addiction happens to people with severe addiction happens to people with severe addiction that balance is essentially broken that balance is essentially broken that balance is essentially broken homeostasis does not get restored homeostasis does not get restored homeostasis does not get restored despite sustained abstinence they're despite sustained abstinence they're despite sustained abstinence they're living with that constant spectre of living with that constant spectre of living with that constant spectre of that pull. It never goes away. So let me that pull. It never goes away. So let me that pull. It never goes away. So let me say there are lots of people with say there are lots of people with say there are lots of people with addiction for whom that does go away and addiction for whom that does go away and addiction for whom that does go away and it goes away at 4 weeks for many of it goes away at 4 weeks for many of it goes away at 4 weeks for many of them. But in severe cases that's always them. But in severe cases that's always them. But in severe cases that's always there and it's lingering and it's the there and it's lingering and it's the there and it's lingering and it's the moment when they're not focusing on not moment when they're not focusing on not moment when they're not focusing on not using. It's like a reflex. They fall using. It's like a reflex. They fall using. It's like a reflex. They fall back into it. It's not purposeful. It's back into it. It's not purposeful. It's back into it. It's not purposeful. It's not because they want to get high. It's not because they want to get high. It's not because they want to get high. It's not because they value using drugs more not because they value using drugs more not because they value using drugs more than they do their family. none of that. than they do their family. none of that. than they do their family. none of that. It's that really they It's that really they It's that really they cannot not do it when given the cannot not do it when given the cannot not do it when given the opportunity and that moment when they're opportunity and that moment when they're opportunity and that moment when they're not thinking about it. Does that make not thinking about it. Does that make not thinking about it. Does that make sense? That's a great description. And actually That's a great description. And actually That's a great description. And actually in that description, I can feel a bit of in that description, I can feel a bit of in that description, I can feel a bit of empathy because the way you describe empathy because the way you describe empathy because the way you describe scratching an itch in your sleep. scratching an itch in your sleep. scratching an itch in your sleep. Yeah. You know, I've done that with You know, I've done that with You know, I've done that with mosquito bites in summer. You're mosquito bites in summer. You're mosquito bites in summer. You're scratching. You're like, you wake up scratching. You're like, you wake up scratching. You're like, you wake up scratching that mosquito bite. scratching that mosquito bite. scratching that mosquito bite. And I also have to admit that I've And I also have to admit that I've And I also have to admit that I've experienced not feeling like I want to experienced not feeling like I want to experienced not feeling like I want to pick up my phone because it's so pick up my phone because it's so pick up my phone because it's so rewarding, but just finding myself doing rewarding, but just finding myself doing rewarding, but just finding myself doing it. Yes, of course. Yes, of course. Yes, of course. Like I'm not going to use this thing. Like I'm not going to use this thing. Like I'm not going to use this thing. I'm not going to use this thing. And I'm not going to use this thing. And I'm not going to use this thing. And then and then just finding myself doing then and then just finding myself doing then and then just finding myself doing like what am I doing here? like what am I doing here? like what am I doing here? Sort of the how did I get back here Sort of the how did I get back here Sort of the how did I get back here again? And I know enough about brain function And I know enough about brain function And I know enough about brain function to understand that we have to understand that we have to understand that we have circuits that generate deliberate circuits that generate deliberate circuits that generate deliberate behavior and we have circuits that behavior and we have circuits that behavior and we have circuits that generate reflexive behavior. And one of generate reflexive behavior. And one of generate reflexive behavior. And one of the goals of the nervous system is to the goals of the nervous system is to the goals of the nervous system is to make the deliberate stuff reflexive so make the deliberate stuff reflexive so make the deliberate stuff reflexive so you don't have to make the decision you don't have to make the decision you don't have to make the decision because decision- making is a very because decision- making is a very because decision- making is a very costly thing to do. Exactly. Decision costly thing to do. Exactly. Decision costly thing to do. Exactly. Decision making of any kind. making of any kind. making of any kind. Right. So that does really help um So that does really help um So that does really help um the I want to just try and weave the I want to just try and weave the I want to just try and weave together this um this dopamine puzzle. together this um this dopamine puzzle. together this um this dopamine puzzle. However, because if by week, let's so However, because if by week, let's so However, because if by week, let's so first phase of this uh 30 or 40 day um first phase of this uh 30 or 40 day um first phase of this uh 30 or 40 day um detox, it's like a dopamine fast. Right. detox, it's like a dopamine fast. Right. detox, it's like a dopamine fast. Right. Okay. Right. Okay. Right. Okay. First 10 days are miserable. Middle 10 First 10 days are miserable. Middle 10 First 10 days are miserable. Middle 10 days, the clouds are out. There may be days, the clouds are out. There may be days, the clouds are out. There may be some shards of sunlight coming through some shards of sunlight coming through some shards of sunlight coming through and then all of a sudden sun starts to and then all of a sudden sun starts to and then all of a sudden sun starts to come out. It gets brighter and brighter. come out. It gets brighter and brighter. come out. It gets brighter and brighter. Why is it then that people will relapse Why is it then that people will relapse Why is it then that people will relapse not just after getting fired from a job not just after getting fired from a job not just after getting fired from a job or their spouse leaving them, but when or their spouse leaving them, but when or their spouse leaving them, but when things are going really well? Is it this things are going really well? Is it this things are going really well? Is it this unconscious mechanism? Cuz I've seen unconscious mechanism? Cuz I've seen unconscious mechanism? Cuz I've seen this before is uh they have a great win. this before is uh they have a great win. this before is uh they have a great win. I have a friend who's a I have a friend who's a I have a friend who's a really impressive creative um I don't really impressive creative um I don't really impressive creative um I don't want to reveal any more than that, but want to reveal any more than that, but want to reveal any more than that, but uh and relapsed upon getting another uh and relapsed upon getting another uh and relapsed upon getting another really terrific opportunity to create really terrific opportunity to create really terrific opportunity to create for the entire world. And I was like, for the entire world. And I was like, for the entire world. And I was like, how can that happen? But now I'm how can that happen? But now I'm how can that happen? But now I'm beginning to wonder, was it the dopamine beginning to wonder, was it the dopamine beginning to wonder, was it the dopamine associated with that win that opened the associated with that win that opened the associated with that win that opened the spigot on this dopamine system? spigot on this dopamine system? spigot on this dopamine system? Because um it happened in a phase of Because um it happened in a phase of Because um it happened in a phase of a really great stretch of life. a really great stretch of life. a really great stretch of life. Yeah. Right. Yeah. So you raised Yeah. Right. Yeah. So you raised Yeah. Right. Yeah. So you raised that great point about triggers, right? that great point about triggers, right? that great point about triggers, right? And triggers are things that make us And triggers are things that make us And triggers are things that make us want to go back to using our drug. And want to go back to using our drug. And want to go back to using our drug. And the key thing about triggers, whatever the key thing about triggers, whatever the key thing about triggers, whatever they are, is they also release a little they are, is they also release a little they are, is they also release a little bit of dopamine, right? So just thinking bit of dopamine, right? So just thinking bit of dopamine, right? So just thinking about um whatever the trigger is that we about um whatever the trigger is that we about um whatever the trigger is that we associate with drug use or just thinking associate with drug use or just thinking associate with drug use or just thinking about drug use can already release this about drug use can already release this about drug use can already release this anticipatory dopamine, this little mini anticipatory dopamine, this little mini anticipatory dopamine, this little mini spike. But here's the part that I think spike. But here's the part that I think spike. But here's the part that I think is really fascinating. That mini spike is really fascinating. That mini spike is really fascinating. That mini spike is followed by a mini deficit state. So is followed by a mini deficit state. So is followed by a mini deficit state. So it goes up and then it doesn't go back it goes up and then it doesn't go back it goes up and then it doesn't go back down to baseline. It goes below baseline down to baseline. It goes below baseline down to baseline. It goes below baseline tonic levels. And that's craving, right? tonic levels. And that's craving, right? tonic levels. And that's craving, right? So that anticipation So that anticipation So that anticipation is immediately followed by wanting the is immediately followed by wanting the is immediately followed by wanting the drug. And it's that dopamine deficit drug. And it's that dopamine deficit drug. And it's that dopamine deficit state that drives the motivation to go state that drives the motivation to go state that drives the motivation to go and get the drug. So many people talk and get the drug. So many people talk and get the drug. So many people talk about dopamine is not really about dopamine is not really about dopamine is not really about pleasure but about wanting and about pleasure but about wanting and about pleasure but about wanting and about motivation. And so it is that deficit motivation. And so it is that deficit motivation. And so it is that deficit state that then drives the locomotion to state that then drives the locomotion to state that then drives the locomotion to get it. And earlier your description of get it. And earlier your description of get it. And earlier your description of dopamine being involved in the desire dopamine being involved in the desire dopamine being involved in the desire for more, giving the sense of reward, for more, giving the sense of reward, for more, giving the sense of reward, but also movement. but also movement. but also movement. I have to assume that those things are I have to assume that those things are I have to assume that those things are braided together in our nervous system braided together in our nervous system braided together in our nervous system for the specific intention of when you for the specific intention of when you for the specific intention of when you feel something feel something feel something good, then you feel the pain or maybe good, then you feel the pain or maybe good, then you feel the pain or maybe you don't notice it and then the next you don't notice it and then the next you don't notice it and then the next thing you know, you're pursuing more of thing you know, you're pursuing more of thing you know, you're pursuing more of the thing that the thing that the thing that and I love the way you use the word and I love the way you use the word and I love the way you use the word braided together. That's beautiful. And braided together. That's beautiful. And braided together. That's beautiful. And let me also just say something that I let me also just say something that I let me also just say something that I find also fascinating in my work with find also fascinating in my work with find also fascinating in my work with patients and I see this all the time. patients and I see this all the time. patients and I see this all the time. There are people for whom bad life There are people for whom bad life There are people for whom bad life experiences, loss, you know, in any experiences, loss, you know, in any experiences, loss, you know, in any form, stress in many different forms, form, stress in many different forms, form, stress in many different forms, that's a trigger. But there are that's a trigger. But there are that's a trigger. But there are absolutely people for whom the trigger absolutely people for whom the trigger absolutely people for whom the trigger is things going well. And the things is things going well. And the things is things going well. And the things going well can be like the reward of the going well can be like the reward of the going well can be like the reward of the things going well. But very often what things going well. But very often what things going well. But very often what it is the removal of the it is the removal of the it is the removal of the hypervigilant state that's required to hypervigilant state that's required to hypervigilant state that's required to keep their use in check. So, it's this keep their use in check. So, it's this keep their use in check. So, it's this sense of I want to celebrate, you know, sense of I want to celebrate, you know, sense of I want to celebrate, you know, or I want to this reward happened. I or I want to this reward happened. I or I want to this reward happened. I want to put more reward on there. And want to put more reward on there. And want to put more reward on there. And it's really fascinating because it's really fascinating because it's really fascinating because when people come to that realization when people come to that realization when people come to that realization about themselves that they're most about themselves that they're most about themselves that they're most vulnerable when things are going well, vulnerable when things are going well, vulnerable when things are going well, um that's really a valuable insight um that's really a valuable insight um that's really a valuable insight because then they can put some, you because then they can put some, you because then they can put some, you know, things in place or barriers in know, things in place or barriers in know, things in place or barriers in place or go to more meetings or whatever place or go to more meetings or whatever place or go to more meetings or whatever it is that they do, you know, to protect it is that they do, you know, to protect it is that they do, you know, to protect themselves. Along those lines, I have a friend uh 40 Along those lines, I have a friend uh 40 Along those lines, I have a friend uh 40 years sober, was a severe drug and years sober, was a severe drug and years sober, was a severe drug and alcohol addict from a very young age, a alcohol addict from a very young age, a alcohol addict from a very young age, a really impressive person, does a lot of really impressive person, does a lot of really impressive person, does a lot of important work in the um kind of at risk important work in the um kind of at risk important work in the um kind of at risk youth community out in Hawaii. And he youth community out in Hawaii. And he youth community out in Hawaii. And he said something to me. He said, uh, as said something to me. He said, uh, as said something to me. He said, uh, as former addicts often do, they got these former addicts often do, they got these former addicts often do, they got these great sayings. Um, but I think it fits great sayings. Um, but I think it fits great sayings. Um, but I think it fits very well with what you're describing. very well with what you're describing. very well with what you're describing. He said, you know, no matter how far you He said, you know, no matter how far you He said, you know, no matter how far you drive, you're always the same distance drive, you're always the same distance drive, you're always the same distance from the ditch. And I and I said, from the ditch. And I and I said, from the ditch. And I and I said, "Well, that's kind of depressing." And "Well, that's kind of depressing." And "Well, that's kind of depressing." And he said, "No, that's actually what gives he said, "No, that's actually what gives he said, "No, that's actually what gives me peace." me peace." me peace." Yeah. Because what would happen is for so many Because what would happen is for so many Because what would happen is for so many years of relapsing and relapsing, years of relapsing and relapsing, years of relapsing and relapsing, getting recovering and relapsing, getting recovering and relapsing, getting recovering and relapsing, he felt like it was hopeless. he felt like it was hopeless. he felt like it was hopeless. And then somehow conceptualizing that And then somehow conceptualizing that And then somehow conceptualizing that the vigilance can never go away. the vigilance can never go away. the vigilance can never go away. Instead of making him feel burdened, Instead of making him feel burdened, Instead of making him feel burdened, yeah, it made him feel relieved. So, I often it made him feel relieved. So, I often it made him feel relieved. So, I often think about that statement, you think about that statement, you think about that statement, you know, no matter how far you drive, know, no matter how far you drive, know, no matter how far you drive, you're always the same distance from the you're always the same distance from the you're always the same distance from the ditch. Because in my mind, I ditch. Because in my mind, I ditch. Because in my mind, I conceptualize that as gosh, that's a conceptualize that as gosh, that's a conceptualize that as gosh, that's a that's a tough way to drive down the that's a tough way to drive down the that's a tough way to drive down the road. But actually, on a road where you road. But actually, on a road where you road. But actually, on a road where you know where the ditch is and where you know where the ditch is and where you know where the ditch is and where you know where the lane lines are, it's know where the lane lines are, it's know where the lane lines are, it's actually a pretty nice drive. It's when actually a pretty nice drive. It's when actually a pretty nice drive. It's when you don't know where the shoulder is you don't know where the shoulder is you don't know where the shoulder is that you constantly have to be looking that you constantly have to be looking that you constantly have to be looking around. So there's this we're around. So there's this we're around. So there's this we're speaking now in analogies and speaking now in analogies and speaking now in analogies and imagery uh and science. But I one of the imagery uh and science. But I one of the imagery uh and science. But I one of the things I find so incredible about this things I find so incredible about this things I find so incredible about this community of 12step and there are a community of 12step and there are a community of 12step and there are a variety of them are the um the variety of them are the um the variety of them are the um the communities that they create for communities that they create for communities that they create for themselves um and some of these things themselves um and some of these things themselves um and some of these things which I do believe link back to really which I do believe link back to really which I do believe link back to really core biological mechanisms. core biological mechanisms. core biological mechanisms. Yes. I do want to ask about those I do want to ask about those I do want to ask about those communities. Uh I have a question which communities. Uh I have a question which communities. Uh I have a question which might be a little bit um controversial might be a little bit um controversial might be a little bit um controversial uh for uh for uh for which is which is which is it possible that people who were is it possible that people who were is it possible that people who were addicted to drugs or alcohol or some addicted to drugs or alcohol or some addicted to drugs or alcohol or some gambling or some other behavior get gambling or some other behavior get gambling or some other behavior get addicted to the addiction community? addicted to the addiction community? addicted to the addiction community? Because one thing that I think I observe Because one thing that I think I observe Because one thing that I think I observe over and over is that there's some over and over is that there's some over and over is that there's some circuit in the brain of human beings circuit in the brain of human beings circuit in the brain of human beings that has to tell you about the dream that has to tell you about the dream that has to tell you about the dream they had the night before for whatever they had the night before for whatever they had the night before for whatever reason. Um, there's another circuit that leads Um, there's another circuit that leads Um, there's another circuit that leads people to uh wake you up if they people to uh wake you up if they people to uh wake you up if they themselves can't sleep. I don't know themselves can't sleep. I don't know themselves can't sleep. I don't know what circuit is. I'm being physicious what circuit is. I'm being physicious what circuit is. I'm being physicious here. But there does seem to also be a here. But there does seem to also be a here. But there does seem to also be a circuit in the brain of addicts to circuit in the brain of addicts to circuit in the brain of addicts to discuss and want to and want to and want to kind of talk about their recovery a lot. kind of talk about their recovery a lot. kind of talk about their recovery a lot. And I mention this not to poke at them, And I mention this not to poke at them, And I mention this not to poke at them, but rather the opposite because I think but rather the opposite because I think but rather the opposite because I think that one thing that is challenging, at that one thing that is challenging, at that one thing that is challenging, at least for me and having friends that least for me and having friends that least for me and having friends that have a propensity for drug or that have a propensity for drug or that have a propensity for drug or alcohol addiction, not all of them, but alcohol addiction, not all of them, but alcohol addiction, not all of them, but certainly some of them is when they're certainly some of them is when they're certainly some of them is when they're talking about their recovery, I feel talking about their recovery, I feel talking about their recovery, I feel like it's all they talk about. this like it's all they talk about. this like it's all they talk about. this meeting, that meeting, that meeting. Um, meeting, that meeting, that meeting. Um, meeting, that meeting, that meeting. Um, how are we? So, what I'm really asking how are we? So, what I'm really asking how are we? So, what I'm really asking here is, um, is that some can we become here is, um, is that some can we become here is, um, is that some can we become addicted to sobriety, addicted to sobriety, addicted to sobriety, right? So, this is a great question and right? So, this is a great question and right? So, this is a great question and it links into some of the other things it links into some of the other things it links into some of the other things we've been talking about having to do we've been talking about having to do we've been talking about having to do with where do we settle out, you with where do we settle out, you with where do we settle out, you know, what is the way to live between know, what is the way to live between know, what is the way to live between pleasure and pain? And I implied earlier pleasure and pain? And I implied earlier pleasure and pain? And I implied earlier that ultimately we want a resilient that ultimately we want a resilient that ultimately we want a resilient balance that's sensitive to pleasure and balance that's sensitive to pleasure and balance that's sensitive to pleasure and pain, but that can easily restore pain, but that can easily restore pain, but that can easily restore homeostasis after we indulge, even when homeostasis after we indulge, even when homeostasis after we indulge, even when we indulge greatly. Um, but the truth of we indulge greatly. Um, but the truth of we indulge greatly. Um, but the truth of the matter is that people with severe the matter is that people with severe the matter is that people with severe addiction, I believe, temperamentally addiction, I believe, temperamentally addiction, I believe, temperamentally want those extremes and they're wired want those extremes and they're wired want those extremes and they're wired for that kind of intensity that is more for that kind of intensity that is more for that kind of intensity that is more than just these slight adjustments than just these slight adjustments than just these slight adjustments around the fulcrum, right? It's like around the fulcrum, right? It's like around the fulcrum, right? It's like they want the big highs and the big they want the big highs and the big they want the big highs and the big lows. They'll say, "Great meeting." They're They'll say, "Great meeting." They're They'll say, "Great meeting." They're like, "That was such an amazing like, "That was such an amazing like, "That was such an amazing meeting." Or they find a group. They meeting." Or they find a group. They meeting." Or they find a group. They find a group in a location. find a group in a location. find a group in a location. Like we see I this is almost an inside Like we see I this is almost an inside Like we see I this is almost an inside joke in those communities. Again, I'm joke in those communities. Again, I'm joke in those communities. Again, I'm not reporting. I'm not talking about a not reporting. I'm not talking about a not reporting. I'm not talking about a friend in quotes. This isn't me friend in quotes. This isn't me friend in quotes. This isn't me reporting. Well, they'll um they'll talk reporting. Well, they'll um they'll talk reporting. Well, they'll um they'll talk about how attractive people are at a about how attractive people are at a about how attractive people are at a given meeting or how bonded they given meeting or how bonded they given meeting or how bonded they feel to people at a given meeting that feel to people at a given meeting that feel to people at a given meeting that the meetings themselves become their own the meetings themselves become their own the meetings themselves become their own form of dopamine. form of dopamine. form of dopamine. Yes. And and again, I'm not being Yes. And and again, I'm not being Yes. And and again, I'm not being disparaging. I just I want to disparaging. I just I want to disparaging. I just I want to understand this, understand this, understand this, right? So, yes. So, so a lot of times right? So, yes. So, so a lot of times right? So, yes. So, so a lot of times patients will say to me, "Oh, you know, patients will say to me, "Oh, you know, patients will say to me, "Oh, you know, I don't want to go to AA. It's a cult." I don't want to go to AA. It's a cult." I don't want to go to AA. It's a cult." And my response to that is And my response to that is And my response to that is because it's a cult is exactly why it because it's a cult is exactly why it because it's a cult is exactly why it works. Okay? Because yes, it is much works. Okay? Because yes, it is much works. Okay? Because yes, it is much better for you to be addicted to AA and better for you to be addicted to AA and better for you to be addicted to AA and to recovery than almost any other to recovery than almost any other to recovery than almost any other addiction I could think of. And we know addiction I could think of. And we know addiction I could think of. And we know from Rob Malanka's work who's here at from Rob Malanka's work who's here at from Rob Malanka's work who's here at Stanford that oxytocin um you know is Stanford that oxytocin um you know is Stanford that oxytocin um you know is the hormone that's involved in human the hormone that's involved in human the hormone that's involved in human pair bonding and relationships and love pair bonding and relationships and love pair bonding and relationships and love and it directly links to dopamine and it directly links to dopamine and it directly links to dopamine neurons and causes the release of neurons and causes the release of neurons and causes the release of dopamine. So yes, when we connect with dopamine. So yes, when we connect with dopamine. So yes, when we connect with other humans, especially in a kind of other humans, especially in a kind of other humans, especially in a kind of transcendent spiritual way, that's a transcendent spiritual way, that's a transcendent spiritual way, that's a huge dopamine hit and it does replace huge dopamine hit and it does replace huge dopamine hit and it does replace the dopamine that people get from drugs. the dopamine that people get from drugs. the dopamine that people get from drugs. And for people who have this uh And for people who have this uh And for people who have this uh addiction temperament, they need it on a addiction temperament, they need it on a addiction temperament, they need it on a more intense level. They're not going to more intense level. They're not going to more intense level. They're not going to be generally satisfied with kind of, you be generally satisfied with kind of, you be generally satisfied with kind of, you know, an a sort of acquaintance ship, know, an a sort of acquaintance ship, know, an a sort of acquaintance ship, right? They they want that right? They they want that right? They they want that intensity of the intimacy that you get intensity of the intimacy that you get intensity of the intimacy that you get with people when you're cathartically with people when you're cathartically with people when you're cathartically exposing, you know, warts and all. So, exposing, you know, warts and all. So, exposing, you know, warts and all. So, yes, people can get addicted to recovery yes, people can get addicted to recovery yes, people can get addicted to recovery and good for them. go for it. You know, and good for them. go for it. You know, and good for them. go for it. You know, and of course, this can be disruptive and of course, this can be disruptive and of course, this can be disruptive for friendships and relationships for friendships and relationships for friendships and relationships where the one person is not in recovery, where the one person is not in recovery, where the one person is not in recovery, like you're going to so many meetings, like you're going to so many meetings, like you're going to so many meetings, you're always talking about recovery, you're always talking about recovery, you're always talking about recovery, but you know what? Much better than them but you know what? Much better than them but you know what? Much better than them being intoxicated, right? I mean, so being intoxicated, right? I mean, so being intoxicated, right? I mean, so although you may tire of your friends although you may tire of your friends although you may tire of your friends talking about their their, you know, talking about their their, you know, talking about their their, you know, meetings all the time, I'm sure you meetings all the time, I'm sure you meetings all the time, I'm sure you would rather have them do that than would rather have them do that than would rather have them do that than than, you know, be in their addiction. than, you know, be in their addiction. than, you know, be in their addiction. So, absolutely. And um this is now the absolutely. And um this is now the absolutely. And um this is now the second time you've done this during this second time you've done this during this second time you've done this during this discussion. But now I have empathy discussion. But now I have empathy discussion. But now I have empathy because the way you describe their because the way you describe their because the way you describe their enthusiasm about meetings. Yes. Is enthusiasm about meetings. Yes. Is enthusiasm about meetings. Yes. Is probably the way that people feel about probably the way that people feel about probably the way that people feel about me and your work me and your work me and your work and my in neuroscience. I mean I've been and my in neuroscience. I mean I've been and my in neuroscience. I mean I've been getting up in front of the class since I getting up in front of the class since I getting up in front of the class since I was 8 years old and talking about things was 8 years old and talking about things was 8 years old and talking about things I read over the weekend. Now I just I read over the weekend. Now I just I read over the weekend. Now I just happen to have this thing called a happen to have this thing called a happen to have this thing called a podcast. I've been doing it since I was podcast. I've been doing it since I was podcast. I've been doing it since I was little and it annoys a lot of people, little and it annoys a lot of people, little and it annoys a lot of people, right? I've learned to suppress it a right? I've learned to suppress it a right? I've learned to suppress it a little bit. Some people like it, but I little bit. Some people like it, but I little bit. Some people like it, but I I'm poking fun at myself just to say I'm poking fun at myself just to say I'm poking fun at myself just to say that I now can uh understand that the that I now can uh understand that the that I now can uh understand that the way I feel about their reports about yet way I feel about their reports about yet way I feel about their reports about yet another amazing meeting or another amazing meeting or another amazing meeting or and or for this is a different form of and or for this is a different form of and or for this is a different form of this, but there are some people for this, but there are some people for this, but there are some people for which they just love intense which they just love intense which they just love intense experiences. They're always like trying experiences. They're always like trying experiences. They're always like trying to pull me off to Bali because they're to pull me off to Bali because they're to pull me off to Bali because they're talking about how sensual it is all the talking about how sensual it is all the talking about how sensual it is all the time. I'm sure Bali is wonderful, but time. I'm sure Bali is wonderful, but time. I'm sure Bali is wonderful, but there's this kind of ratcheting up. It's there's this kind of ratcheting up. It's there's this kind of ratcheting up. It's like seeking Burning Man all year long. like seeking Burning Man all year long. like seeking Burning Man all year long. I've never been to Burning Man. No I've never been to Burning Man. No I've never been to Burning Man. No desire to go to Burning Man. desire to go to Burning Man. desire to go to Burning Man. Um, but inside of academia, I mean, if I but inside of academia, I mean, if I but inside of academia, I mean, if I were to just turn the mirror at myself, were to just turn the mirror at myself, were to just turn the mirror at myself, inside of academia or here in Silicon inside of academia or here in Silicon inside of academia or here in Silicon Valley, work and the pursuit of more Valley, work and the pursuit of more Valley, work and the pursuit of more success, even if money is kind of success, even if money is kind of success, even if money is kind of divorced from that, sometimes it is, divorced from that, sometimes it is, divorced from that, sometimes it is, sometimes it isn't, academic work is, sometimes it isn't, academic work is, sometimes it isn't, academic work is, you know, for sake of pursuit of you know, for sake of pursuit of you know, for sake of pursuit of knowledge. It sounds to me like the same knowledge. It sounds to me like the same knowledge. It sounds to me like the same mechanism. In fact, it feels to me very mechanism. In fact, it feels to me very mechanism. In fact, it feels to me very much like the same mechanism. much like the same mechanism. much like the same mechanism. So, Andrew, here's what I love about So, Andrew, here's what I love about So, Andrew, here's what I love about you. First of all, you're willing to you. First of all, you're willing to you. First of all, you're willing to bring your own flaws and foibless to bring your own flaws and foibless to bring your own flaws and foibless to this conversation. this conversation. this conversation. They're everywhere. They're everywhere. They're everywhere. Well, you know what? It's wonderful. And Well, you know what? It's wonderful. And Well, you know what? It's wonderful. And then you're really open and curious and then you're really open and curious and then you're really open and curious and wanting to understand because I can't wanting to understand because I can't wanting to understand because I can't tell you how many people I have met who tell you how many people I have met who tell you how many people I have met who really see addiction as some kind of really see addiction as some kind of really see addiction as some kind of otherness. But the truth is, we're all otherness. But the truth is, we're all otherness. But the truth is, we're all wired for addiction. And if you're not wired for addiction. And if you're not wired for addiction. And if you're not addicted yet, it's just it's right addicted yet, it's just it's right addicted yet, it's just it's right around the corner. Do you know what I around the corner. Do you know what I around the corner. Do you know what I mean? Especially with the incredible mean? Especially with the incredible mean? Especially with the incredible paniply of new drugs and behaviors that paniply of new drugs and behaviors that paniply of new drugs and behaviors that are out there. So, I love that you're are out there. So, I love that you're are out there. So, I love that you're willing to take a moment and really try willing to take a moment and really try willing to take a moment and really try to understand this because it is it is to understand this because it is it is to understand this because it is it is we can all relate and you're relating it we can all relate and you're relating it we can all relate and you're relating it to your essentially your work addiction to your essentially your work addiction to your essentially your work addiction is right and apt. you just happen to is right and apt. you just happen to is right and apt. you just happen to be addicted to something that is really be addicted to something that is really be addicted to something that is really socially rewarded. You know, you figured socially rewarded. You know, you figured socially rewarded. You know, you figured that out at an early age. Oh, when I do that out at an early age. Oh, when I do that out at an early age. Oh, when I do X, Y, and Z, all these people go, "Look X, Y, and Z, all these people go, "Look X, Y, and Z, all these people go, "Look at that smart kid." Or whatever it is, at that smart kid." Or whatever it is, at that smart kid." Or whatever it is, you know? you know? you know? Well, for me, it made me feel safe. Well, for me, it made me feel safe. Well, for me, it made me feel safe. Okay. I felt like um I felt like um I felt like um yeah, I just felt like this. And I pause yeah, I just felt like this. And I pause yeah, I just felt like this. And I pause there cuz it's like it's like peace. I'm there cuz it's like it's like peace. I'm there cuz it's like it's like peace. I'm like, I can relax for a moment. like, I can relax for a moment. like, I can relax for a moment. When you're talking about neuroscience, When you're talking about neuroscience, When you're talking about neuroscience, no. or just when I'm when I've when I no. or just when I'm when I've when I no. or just when I'm when I've when I feel like I'm on the right path feel like I'm on the right path feel like I'm on the right path and I'm on to something or if I see and I'm on to something or if I see and I'm on to something or if I see something that I'm excited about, something that I'm excited about, something that I'm excited about, I'm like I feel um filled with it must I'm like I feel um filled with it must I'm like I feel um filled with it must be dopamine. I feel flooded with be dopamine. I feel flooded with be dopamine. I feel flooded with pleasure literally from head to toe pleasure literally from head to toe pleasure literally from head to toe and then my next thought is more. and then my next thought is more. and then my next thought is more. So true. You're you're really you're a So true. You're you're really you're a So true. You're you're really you're a true addict. you are. You are, but you true addict. you are. You are, but you true addict. you are. You are, but you just got really you really got lucky just got really you really got lucky just got really you really got lucky with the fact that what you know with the fact that what you know with the fact that what you know what you're drawn to what you're drawn to what you're drawn to is adaptive essentially, you know. Um is adaptive essentially, you know. Um is adaptive essentially, you know. Um and then your challenge is going to and then your challenge is going to and then your challenge is going to be that your life doesn't get too out of be that your life doesn't get too out of be that your life doesn't get too out of balance in the sense that your 24/7 work balance in the sense that your 24/7 work balance in the sense that your 24/7 work and you don't stop and do some other and you don't stop and do some other and you don't stop and do some other things or think of other things or think of other things or think of other and my life and my life admittedly is and my life and my life admittedly is and my life and my life admittedly is somewhat asymmetric. I mean it has other somewhat asymmetric. I mean it has other somewhat asymmetric. I mean it has other components of physical health etc but it components of physical health etc but it components of physical health etc but it is um somewhat asymmetric. Um, which is um somewhat asymmetric. Um, which is um somewhat asymmetric. Um, which is why I got a dog, although I talk about why I got a dog, although I talk about why I got a dog, although I talk about him an awful lot. So, um, him an awful lot. So, um, him an awful lot. So, um, but the dog is good because that draws but the dog is good because that draws but the dog is good because that draws you out of yourself and a little bit you out of yourself and a little bit you out of yourself and a little bit away from the work. But again, you know, away from the work. But again, you know, away from the work. But again, you know, I think the key here is for people who I think the key here is for people who I think the key here is for people who feel like they don't they've never feel like they don't they've never feel like they don't they've never experienced addiction or they don't know experienced addiction or they don't know experienced addiction or they don't know anybody with addiction or if they do, anybody with addiction or if they do, anybody with addiction or if they do, they don't get it. Just think of that they don't get it. Just think of that they don't get it. Just think of that one thing that is the most important one thing that is the most important one thing that is the most important thing in your life that you do that thing in your life that you do that thing in your life that you do that gives you pleasure and meaning and gives you pleasure and meaning and gives you pleasure and meaning and purpose. And then imagine if you purpose. And then imagine if you purpose. And then imagine if you couldn't do it. couldn't do it. couldn't do it. Oh yeah, let's not talk about that. Oh yeah, let's not talk about that. Oh yeah, let's not talk about that. Right. Well, I appreciate the feedback and Well, I appreciate the feedback and Well, I appreciate the feedback and uh you can send me a bill at the at the uh you can send me a bill at the at the uh you can send me a bill at the at the end. Um end. Um end. Um what is the most ridiculous sounding what is the most ridiculous sounding what is the most ridiculous sounding addiction that you've ever witnessed addiction that you've ever witnessed addiction that you've ever witnessed that was actually a real addiction along that was actually a real addiction along that was actually a real addiction along these lines? Um because I think we all these lines? Um because I think we all these lines? Um because I think we all know the standard heroin pill. you've know the standard heroin pill. you've know the standard heroin pill. you've been very I should mention um because been very I should mention um because been very I should mention um because it's important your previous book um and it's important your previous book um and it's important your previous book um and we we'll try to link to that as well we we'll try to link to that as well we we'll try to link to that as well focused on the opioid crisis and um what focused on the opioid crisis and um what focused on the opioid crisis and um what we thought was medication turned out to we thought was medication turned out to we thought was medication turned out to be just as bad if not worse than a lot be just as bad if not worse than a lot be just as bad if not worse than a lot of so-called street drugs. Uh so we of so-called street drugs. Uh so we of so-called street drugs. Uh so we understand those you know understand those you know understand those you know gambling, sex addiction, porn addiction. gambling, sex addiction, porn addiction. gambling, sex addiction, porn addiction. Now video games, we'll talk about social Now video games, we'll talk about social Now video games, we'll talk about social media a little bit more in depth, but media a little bit more in depth, but media a little bit more in depth, but what's the most like wow I didn't what's the most like wow I didn't what's the most like wow I didn't realize people could get addicted to realize people could get addicted to realize people could get addicted to that? Water. Really? So, I had a very lovely patient Really? So, I had a very lovely patient Really? So, I had a very lovely patient who was had a severe alcohol addiction who was had a severe alcohol addiction who was had a severe alcohol addiction and she got into recovery from her and she got into recovery from her and she got into recovery from her alcohol addiction um for many years, but alcohol addiction um for many years, but alcohol addiction um for many years, but she kind of had a sort of a polyypsia or she kind of had a sort of a polyypsia or she kind of had a sort of a polyypsia or an urge to be drinking something a lot. an urge to be drinking something a lot. an urge to be drinking something a lot. And so, she drank a lot of water and And so, she drank a lot of water and And so, she drank a lot of water and slowly over time she realized that if slowly over time she realized that if slowly over time she realized that if she drank enough water she could become she drank enough water she could become she drank enough water she could become hyponetriic and delirious and be out of hyponetriic and delirious and be out of hyponetriic and delirious and be out of herself, die from it. Right. die from it. Right. die from it. Right. which is what she just wanted to Right. which is what she just wanted to Right. which is what she just wanted to be out of her own head. And so she would be out of her own head. And so she would be out of her own head. And so she would periodically intentionally overdose on periodically intentionally overdose on periodically intentionally overdose on water in order, you know, to I know water in order, you know, to I know water in order, you know, to I know it was so sad. So sad. it was so sad. So sad. it was so sad. So sad. What happened to her? What happened to her? What happened to her? She eventually to took her own life. She eventually to took her own life. She eventually to took her own life. Wow. Yeah. It was really Wow. Yeah. It was really Wow. Yeah. It was really That's rough. That's rough. That's rough. She was a lovely woman. She was so She was a lovely woman. She was so She was a lovely woman. She was so bright. She had so many interests and bright. She had so many interests and bright. She had so many interests and passions and passions and passions and of course it was very sad when you and of course it was very sad when you and of course it was very sad when you know when she died but I that was a know when she died but I that was a know when she died but I that was a wow to me. It was like wow if you have wow to me. It was like wow if you have wow to me. It was like wow if you have this disease of addiction you can even this disease of addiction you can even this disease of addiction you can even get addicted to water. get addicted to water. get addicted to water. Wow. And I think it just underscores the Wow. And I think it just underscores the Wow. And I think it just underscores the generalizability of these circuits the generalizability of these circuits the generalizability of these circuits right there. There isn't a brain circuit for there. There isn't a brain circuit for there. There isn't a brain circuit for addiction to water that she happened to addiction to water that she happened to addiction to water that she happened to have. There's a brain circuit for have. There's a brain circuit for have. There's a brain circuit for pleasure and pain and addiction and pleasure and pain and addiction and pleasure and pain and addiction and water plugged into that circuit. water plugged into that circuit. water plugged into that circuit. Right. Wow. That's that's intense. Um, in your Wow. That's that's intense. Um, in your Wow. That's that's intense. Um, in your book, uh, Dopamine Nation, you also book, uh, Dopamine Nation, you also book, uh, Dopamine Nation, you also describe some amazing describe some amazing describe some amazing paths to recovery, people that, um, you paths to recovery, people that, um, you paths to recovery, people that, um, you know, from reading it, I would I won't know, from reading it, I would I won't know, from reading it, I would I won't say which ones and who, cuz there's some say which ones and who, cuz there's some say which ones and who, cuz there's some great surprises in the book, too, both great surprises in the book, too, both great surprises in the book, too, both um, tragic and triumphant, as um, tragic and triumphant, as um, tragic and triumphant, as they say. Um, you've often described they say. Um, you've often described they say. Um, you've often described your patients as your heroes. Yeah. your patients as your heroes. Yeah. your patients as your heroes. Yeah. Tell us a little bit more about Yeah. Tell us a little bit more about Yeah. Tell us a little bit more about that. You know, when you think about how hard You know, when you think about how hard You know, when you think about how hard it is to give up a drug or a behavior it is to give up a drug or a behavior it is to give up a drug or a behavior that you're addicted to, how much that you're addicted to, how much that you're addicted to, how much courage that takes and fortitude and courage that takes and fortitude and courage that takes and fortitude and discipline and stick tuitiveness. These discipline and stick tuitiveness. These discipline and stick tuitiveness. These people are really amazing people. I people are really amazing people. I people are really amazing people. I mean, that's I don't know that I could mean, that's I don't know that I could mean, that's I don't know that I could do it what they what they do, you know? do it what they what they do, you know? do it what they what they do, you know? It's and like you know we talked a It's and like you know we talked a It's and like you know we talked a little bit about you know just the little bit about you know just the little bit about you know just the constant everpresent constant everpresent constant everpresent urge to use even after sustained periods urge to use even after sustained periods urge to use even after sustained periods of abstinence for some people that's of abstinence for some people that's of abstinence for some people that's really hard and of course then really hard and of course then really hard and of course then you double down on the shame that you double down on the shame that you double down on the shame that they feel because of that urge even when they feel because of that urge even when they feel because of that urge even when their lives are so much better. I mean their lives are so much better. I mean their lives are so much better. I mean these people are really these people are really these people are really remarkable and you take their remark remarkable and you take their remark remarkable and you take their remark remarkable accomplishment and then you remarkable accomplishment and then you remarkable accomplishment and then you imagine the world that we live in now imagine the world that we live in now imagine the world that we live in now where we are constantly invited and where we are constantly invited and where we are constantly invited and tempted and really bombarded with tempted and really bombarded with tempted and really bombarded with opportunities to become addicted at opportunities to become addicted at opportunities to become addicted at killing an itch everywhere. killing an itch everywhere. killing an itch everywhere. Oh yeah. I mean, you can't escape it, Oh yeah. I mean, you can't escape it, Oh yeah. I mean, you can't escape it, you know? You cannot escape it that you know? You cannot escape it that you know? You cannot escape it that you'll get an email in your inbox you'll get an email in your inbox you'll get an email in your inbox inviting you to do X, Y, or Z. And if inviting you to do X, Y, or Z. And if inviting you to do X, Y, or Z. And if you're addicted to that thing and you you're addicted to that thing and you you're addicted to that thing and you know, you tried to like delete all your know, you tried to like delete all your know, you tried to like delete all your apps and not go here, all of a sudden apps and not go here, all of a sudden apps and not go here, all of a sudden your work inbox, you're, you know, your work inbox, you're, you know, your work inbox, you're, you know, you're getting those images, let's say, you're getting those images, let's say, you're getting those images, let's say, really, really hard. And yet, really, really hard. And yet, really, really hard. And yet, these people find a way to do it. I these people find a way to do it. I these people find a way to do it. I think it's absolutely amazing. And think it's absolutely amazing. And think it's absolutely amazing. And they're really wise people. They have so they're really wise people. They have so they're really wise people. They have so much wisdom to offer. They've taught me much wisdom to offer. They've taught me much wisdom to offer. They've taught me a lot. You know, as I talk about in my a lot. You know, as I talk about in my a lot. You know, as I talk about in my book, I have my own addictions. And I book, I have my own addictions. And I book, I have my own addictions. And I really just like took a page right out really just like took a page right out really just like took a page right out of their book. Okay, what do I do now? of their book. Okay, what do I do now? of their book. Okay, what do I do now? All right, what did this patient do? All right, what did this patient do? All right, what did this patient do? What? Okay, I'm going to try that. What? Okay, I'm going to try that. What? Okay, I'm going to try that. It is it is an amazing community of It is it is an amazing community of It is it is an amazing community of the people that they are very sage. the people that they are very sage. the people that they are very sage. I wanted to um just touch on something I wanted to um just touch on something I wanted to um just touch on something that you mentioned which is uh the that you mentioned which is uh the that you mentioned which is uh the shame. Yeah. Uh you know, you can't go to a meeting Uh you know, you can't go to a meeting Uh you know, you can't go to a meeting uh or talk to addicts without um uh or talk to addicts without um uh or talk to addicts without um detecting or hearing about like lies, detecting or hearing about like lies, detecting or hearing about like lies, shame, etc. I heard you say um in an shame, etc. I heard you say um in an shame, etc. I heard you say um in an interview with somebody else recently interview with somebody else recently interview with somebody else recently that truthtelling and secrets are sort that truthtelling and secrets are sort that truthtelling and secrets are sort of at the core of recovery and um yeah of at the core of recovery and um yeah of at the core of recovery and um yeah tell us more about that. tell us more about that. tell us more about that. Yeah, so one of the things that I found Yeah, so one of the things that I found Yeah, so one of the things that I found really fascinating about working with really fascinating about working with really fascinating about working with people in recovery was how telling the people in recovery was how telling the people in recovery was how telling the truth even about the meest detail of truth even about the meest detail of truth even about the meest detail of their lives was central to their lives was central to their lives was central to their recovery. And I became really curious recovery. And I became really curious recovery. And I became really curious about that. like why would truthtelling about that. like why would truthtelling about that. like why would truthtelling be so important? And of course, there is be so important? And of course, there is be so important? And of course, there is the obvious thing that when people are the obvious thing that when people are the obvious thing that when people are in their addiction, they're lying about in their addiction, they're lying about in their addiction, they're lying about using, you know, so part of getting into using, you know, so part of getting into using, you know, so part of getting into recovery is to stop lying to the people recovery is to stop lying to the people recovery is to stop lying to the people they care about their use. But they care about their use. But they care about their use. But it's really more than that because what it's really more than that because what it's really more than that because what people in recovery have taught me what people in recovery have taught me what people in recovery have taught me is that it's not it's not even just not is that it's not it's not even just not is that it's not it's not even just not lying about using drugs. I have to not lying about using drugs. I have to not lying about using drugs. I have to not lie about anything. I can't lie about lie about anything. I can't lie about lie about anything. I can't lie about why I was late to work this morning, why I was late to work this morning, why I was late to work this morning, which we all do. Oh, I hit traffic. which we all do. Oh, I hit traffic. which we all do. Oh, I hit traffic. know, I didn't hit traffic. I wanted to know, I didn't hit traffic. I wanted to know, I didn't hit traffic. I wanted to spend two more minutes reading the paper spend two more minutes reading the paper spend two more minutes reading the paper and drinking my coffee, right? Um or and drinking my coffee, right? Um or and drinking my coffee, right? Um or just lying about, you know, I don't know just lying about, you know, I don't know just lying about, you know, I don't know where I had dinner. Like, so people with where I had dinner. Like, so people with where I had dinner. Like, so people with addiction will get into, you know, the addiction will get into, you know, the addiction will get into, you know, the lying habit where they're lying about lying habit where they're lying about lying habit where they're lying about random stuff because they're sort of in random stuff because they're sort of in random stuff because they're sort of in the habit of lying and how recovery is the habit of lying and how recovery is the habit of lying and how recovery is really about really about really about telling the truth, you know, in all telling the truth, you know, in all telling the truth, you know, in all ways. And so one of the things that I ways. And so one of the things that I ways. And so one of the things that I had a lot of fun with in writing the had a lot of fun with in writing the had a lot of fun with in writing the book is sort of exploring the book is sort of exploring the book is sort of exploring the neuroscience around why truthtelling is neuroscience around why truthtelling is neuroscience around why truthtelling is important to leading a balanced life. important to leading a balanced life. important to leading a balanced life. And we know like every religion since And we know like every religion since And we know like every religion since the beginning of time is all about the beginning of time is all about the beginning of time is all about telling the truth. Well, why? Right? And telling the truth. Well, why? Right? And telling the truth. Well, why? Right? And there's really interesting neuroscience there's really interesting neuroscience there's really interesting neuroscience behind it that suggests that when we behind it that suggests that when we behind it that suggests that when we tell the truth, we actually potentially tell the truth, we actually potentially tell the truth, we actually potentially strengthen our prefrontal cort cortical strengthen our prefrontal cort cortical strengthen our prefrontal cort cortical circuits and their connections to our circuits and their connections to our circuits and their connections to our limbic brain and our reward brain. And limbic brain and our reward brain. And limbic brain and our reward brain. And of course, these are the circuits that of course, these are the circuits that of course, these are the circuits that get disconnected when we're in our get disconnected when we're in our get disconnected when we're in our addiction, right? Our balance in our addiction, right? Our balance in our addiction, right? Our balance in our reward pathway or limbic brain, our reward pathway or limbic brain, our reward pathway or limbic brain, our emotion brain is doing one thing and our emotion brain is doing one thing and our emotion brain is doing one thing and our cortical circuits are completely cortical circuits are completely cortical circuits are completely disengaged from that, ignoring what's disengaged from that, ignoring what's disengaged from that, ignoring what's happening, which is easy to do because happening, which is easy to do because happening, which is easy to do because it's reflexive. We don't need to think it's reflexive. We don't need to think it's reflexive. We don't need to think about that balance for the balance to be about that balance for the balance to be about that balance for the balance to be happening. But we have to re-engage happening. But we have to re-engage happening. But we have to re-engage those circuits. Anticipate future those circuits. Anticipate future those circuits. Anticipate future consequences. Think through the drink. consequences. Think through the drink. consequences. Think through the drink. You know, not just how am I going to You know, not just how am I going to You know, not just how am I going to feel now if I use, but how am I going to feel now if I use, but how am I going to feel now if I use, but how am I going to feel tomorrow or 6 months from now? And feel tomorrow or 6 months from now? And feel tomorrow or 6 months from now? And that telling the truth is in fact a way that telling the truth is in fact a way that telling the truth is in fact a way to do that to make these connections to do that to make these connections to do that to make these connections stronger. And there I talk about some stronger. And there I talk about some stronger. And there I talk about some studies in my book that kind of studies in my book that kind of studies in my book that kind of indirectly show that. So I find that indirectly show that. So I find that indirectly show that. So I find that really fascinating. Plus that just that really fascinating. Plus that just that really fascinating. Plus that just that like being open and honest with people like being open and honest with people like being open and honest with people really does create very intimate really does create very intimate really does create very intimate connections and those intimate connections and those intimate connections and those intimate connections create dopamine. So we were connections create dopamine. So we were connections create dopamine. So we were talking a little bit about how you talking a little bit about how you talking a little bit about how you know a bunch of people who need know a bunch of people who need know a bunch of people who need like intensity in their lives. For me I like intensity in their lives. For me I like intensity in their lives. For me I need a lot of intensity in my human need a lot of intensity in my human need a lot of intensity in my human connections. like I'm really not connections. like I'm really not connections. like I'm really not interested in and bored by and made interested in and bored by and made interested in and bored by and made anxious by um casual um interactions, anxious by um casual um interactions, anxious by um casual um interactions, but you know like having this kind of but you know like having this kind of but you know like having this kind of discussion with you that's very intense discussion with you that's very intense discussion with you that's very intense and also intimate and self-disclosing and also intimate and self-disclosing and also intimate and self-disclosing is very rewarding for me. So that's an is very rewarding for me. So that's an is very rewarding for me. So that's an important source of dopamine. Thank god important source of dopamine. Thank god important source of dopamine. Thank god I became a psychiatrist. Absolutely I became a psychiatrist. Absolutely I became a psychiatrist. Absolutely right. like I can't disclose all my right. like I can't disclose all my right. like I can't disclose all my stuff, but I am quite transparent with stuff, but I am quite transparent with stuff, but I am quite transparent with my patients, which is a slightly my patients, which is a slightly my patients, which is a slightly unorthodox. Um, but you know, when I unorthodox. Um, but you know, when I unorthodox. Um, but you know, when I think it's right, I'm also transparent think it's right, I'm also transparent think it's right, I'm also transparent with them. So, that that's, you know, with them. So, that that's, you know, with them. So, that that's, you know, that's a source of dopamine, too, when that's a source of dopamine, too, when that's a source of dopamine, too, when we're honest and we disclose and that we're honest and we disclose and that we're honest and we disclose and that you think people are going to run away you think people are going to run away you think people are going to run away from you if you tell them about all like from you if you tell them about all like from you if you tell them about all like your weird neurosis, but really they your weird neurosis, but really they your weird neurosis, but really they don't. What they're like is, "Oh, thank don't. What they're like is, "Oh, thank don't. What they're like is, "Oh, thank God I'm not the only one." Right. God I'm not the only one." Right. God I'm not the only one." Right. Well, what I love about I love many Well, what I love about I love many Well, what I love about I love many things about your book. I read it in things about your book. I read it in things about your book. I read it in one sweep. Thank you. one sweep. Thank you. one sweep. Thank you. And and I was like, "Wow." is um I was And and I was like, "Wow." is um I was And and I was like, "Wow." is um I was a s pleasantly surprised but I was like a s pleasantly surprised but I was like a s pleasantly surprised but I was like wow she's really opening up in this book wow she's really opening up in this book wow she's really opening up in this book from the very beginning. Um, and I don't from the very beginning. Um, and I don't from the very beginning. Um, and I don't want to give uh it away, but it's yeah, want to give uh it away, but it's yeah, want to give uh it away, but it's yeah, you're very open uh where it's you're very open uh where it's you're very open uh where it's appropriate. And um and also I think appropriate. And um and also I think appropriate. And um and also I think that this question about truthtelling. I that this question about truthtelling. I that this question about truthtelling. I always think about like tell the I always think about like tell the I always think about like tell the truth, be, you know, 100% about the truth, be, you know, 100% about the truth, be, you know, 100% about the truth, but there's also this element truth, but there's also this element truth, but there's also this element about do you report previous lies, about do you report previous lies, about do you report previous lies, right? Like what about prior behavior? right? Like what about prior behavior? right? Like what about prior behavior? And and I'm fascinated by this And and I'm fascinated by this And and I'm fascinated by this because to me telling the truth is has because to me telling the truth is has because to me telling the truth is has many facets but the three sides of many facets but the three sides of many facets but the three sides of this thing uh in my mind are one is this thing uh in my mind are one is this thing uh in my mind are one is reporting everything accurately. The reporting everything accurately. The reporting everything accurately. The other is what do you withhold what do other is what do you withhold what do other is what do you withhold what do you not withhold right because some you not withhold right because some you not withhold right because some people say um tell the truth or at least people say um tell the truth or at least people say um tell the truth or at least don't lie. That's sort of a don't lie. That's sort of a don't lie. That's sort of a lies of omission. lies of omission. lies of omission. Yes. Lies of omission. Yes. Lies of omission. Yes. Lies of omission. Uh lies of omission. And then there Uh lies of omission. And then there Uh lies of omission. And then there there's the what I have to assume for there's the what I have to assume for there's the what I have to assume for most people is a small to enormous batch most people is a small to enormous batch most people is a small to enormous batch of things that they lied about in the of things that they lied about in the of things that they lied about in the past that still thread into the future. that still thread into the future. that still thread into the future. So how important is it for the So how important is it for the So how important is it for the addict or the every person really to um addict or the every person really to um addict or the every person really to um cuz it sounds like cultivating the cuz it sounds like cultivating the cuz it sounds like cultivating the circuitry between prefrontal cortex and circuitry between prefrontal cortex and circuitry between prefrontal cortex and the dopamine system would be great for the dopamine system would be great for the dopamine system would be great for anybody. Um since we're all addicts, anybody. Um since we're all addicts, anybody. Um since we're all addicts, everyone should do it. But in all everyone should do it. But in all everyone should do it. But in all seriousness, it sounds like a good thing seriousness, it sounds like a good thing seriousness, it sounds like a good thing for everybody to do. for everybody to do. for everybody to do. how um how much work needs to be done on how um how much work needs to be done on how um how much work needs to be done on all the priors, all the stuff we've all the priors, all the stuff we've all the priors, all the stuff we've hidden and um I mean not me but all the all the and um I mean not me but all the all the and um I mean not me but all the all the stuff that everybody else has been stuff that everybody else has been stuff that everybody else has been Yeah. So the you know the steps of the Yeah. So the you know the steps of the Yeah. So the you know the steps of the 12 steps of Alcoholics Anonymous um a 12 steps of Alcoholics Anonymous um a 12 steps of Alcoholics Anonymous um a good number of those steps are about good number of those steps are about good number of those steps are about that very thing. the past, the ways that very thing. the past, the ways that very thing. the past, the ways that we've harmed people in the past. And one we've harmed people in the past. And one we've harmed people in the past. And one of the fourth step is about making of the fourth step is about making of the fourth step is about making amends. Um, you know, by admitting the amends. Um, you know, by admitting the amends. Um, you know, by admitting the ways in which that we've contributed um ways in which that we've contributed um ways in which that we've contributed um to harming others. Um, and it is a to harming others. Um, and it is a to harming others. Um, and it is a really big piece of recovery. So, you really big piece of recovery. So, you really big piece of recovery. So, you know, how important so, so for people know, how important so, so for people know, how important so, so for people with addiction, it's really with addiction, it's really with addiction, it's really important to go back and make amends. important to go back and make amends. important to go back and make amends. And you know you the key And you know you the key And you know you the key idea there is you just go back and you idea there is you just go back and you idea there is you just go back and you apologize you know and you don't you apologize you know and you don't you apologize you know and you don't you don't have to get any particular kind of don't have to get any particular kind of don't have to get any particular kind of response or you don't need to be response or you don't need to be response or you don't need to be forgiven. It's the act itself of forgiven. It's the act itself of forgiven. It's the act itself of apologizing about the ways in which apologizing about the ways in which apologizing about the ways in which we've harmed or lied to people uh in the we've harmed or lied to people uh in the we've harmed or lied to people uh in the past that is cathartic and renewing and past that is cathartic and renewing and past that is cathartic and renewing and allows us to kind of shed this skin and allows us to kind of shed this skin and allows us to kind of shed this skin and be new in our lives and begin again be new in our lives and begin again be new in our lives and begin again sort of absolved um you know of past sort of absolved um you know of past sort of absolved um you know of past sins so to speak. Um so it is really sins so to speak. Um so it is really sins so to speak. Um so it is really important. Um you know are there important. Um you know are there important. Um you know are there situations when it's maybe not a good situations when it's maybe not a good situations when it's maybe not a good idea because of the that person or the idea because of the that person or the idea because of the that person or the nature. Sure. You know there are always nature. Sure. You know there are always nature. Sure. You know there are always going to be it doesn't have to be like going to be it doesn't have to be like going to be it doesn't have to be like it's not we're talking about like not it's not we're talking about like not it's not we're talking about like not like Kant's idea about like never lie like Kant's idea about like never lie like Kant's idea about like never lie you know robber's in your house and he's you know robber's in your house and he's you know robber's in your house and he's you know you're stow away. You can't lie you know you're stow away. You can't lie you know you're stow away. You can't lie even about that. It's like no there are even about that. It's like no there are even about that. It's like no there are probably situations where absolutely you probably situations where absolutely you probably situations where absolutely you know um know um know um for sake of other people's safety for sake of other people's safety for sake of other people's safety children safety right I mean there safety right I mean there safety right I mean there you can think of a million scenarios but you can think of a million scenarios but you can think of a million scenarios but um but in general you know when um but in general you know when um but in general you know when we're taking stock because I don't know we're taking stock because I don't know we're taking stock because I don't know about you but I have a lot of regrets about you but I have a lot of regrets about you but I have a lot of regrets and guilt about a lot of things in my and guilt about a lot of things in my and guilt about a lot of things in my life and um and they kind of haunt life and um and they kind of haunt life and um and they kind of haunt me you know sometimes I'll have nightmares you know sometimes I'll have nightmares you know sometimes I'll have nightmares right um and I think that's true for right um and I think that's true for right um and I think that's true for most people. I mean I occasionally will most people. I mean I occasionally will most people. I mean I occasionally will meet somebody who's like I don't have meet somebody who's like I don't have meet somebody who's like I don't have any regrets in my life. I'm like wow any regrets in my life. I'm like wow any regrets in my life. I'm like wow like I cannot relate to that at all. like I cannot relate to that at all. like I cannot relate to that at all. Um so you know this idea of like Um so you know this idea of like Um so you know this idea of like catharsis and well I mean in the 12 catharsis and well I mean in the 12 catharsis and well I mean in the 12 steps it's telling God or your steps it's telling God or your steps it's telling God or your higher power telling another human being higher power telling another human being higher power telling another human being the ways in which you've wronged others the ways in which you've wronged others the ways in which you've wronged others considering your own character defects considering your own character defects considering your own character defects and how those have contributed. To me, and how those have contributed. To me, and how those have contributed. To me, that's a really important piece and that's a really important piece and that's a really important piece and something that we don't do enough in our something that we don't do enough in our something that we don't do enough in our current culture, especially in current culture, especially in current culture, especially in psychiatry, frankly, where there's like psychiatry, frankly, where there's like psychiatry, frankly, where there's like a lot of eternally empathizing with a lot of eternally empathizing with a lot of eternally empathizing with patients, but not a whole lot of like patients, but not a whole lot of like patients, but not a whole lot of like going, well, you know, actually, you going, well, you know, actually, you going, well, you know, actually, you kind of messed that up or like that was kind of messed that up or like that was kind of messed that up or like that was really bad on you, you know, and in really bad on you, you know, and in really bad on you, you know, and in my work, I don't necessarily use that my work, I don't necessarily use that my work, I don't necessarily use that language, but, you know, patients might language, but, you know, patients might language, but, you know, patients might say like, I really feel badly about, say like, I really feel badly about, say like, I really feel badly about, you know, this thing. I'll be like, you know, this thing. I'll be like, you know, this thing. I'll be like, yeah, I get it. Mhm. yeah, I get it. Mhm. yeah, I get it. Mhm. I understand that you feel I understand that you feel I understand that you feel well guilt is a is a there's a circuit well guilt is a is a there's a circuit well guilt is a is a there's a circuit for that too, for that too, for that too, right? And it's important, right? And it's important, right? And it's important, right? And it's also important to um recovery And it's also important to um recovery And it's also important to um recovery and to not becoming addicted is you know and to not becoming addicted is you know and to not becoming addicted is you know experiencing a certain amount of experiencing a certain amount of experiencing a certain amount of appropriate shame for things that we appropriate shame for things that we appropriate shame for things that we have done and you know feeling the pain have done and you know feeling the pain have done and you know feeling the pain that comes with shame which is an that comes with shame which is an that comes with shame which is an incredibly painful emotion right and I incredibly painful emotion right and I incredibly painful emotion right and I think that may be the one that we all think that may be the one that we all think that may be the one that we all try to avoid more than any other is like try to avoid more than any other is like try to avoid more than any other is like that shame um of not being liked or not that shame um of not being liked or not that shame um of not being liked or not being accepted or not being accepted or not being accepted or not being celebrated that we did is really celebrated that we did is really celebrated that we did is really despicable right it's really Yeah. Like, oh my god, right it's really Yeah. Like, oh my god, right it's really Yeah. Like, oh my god, I did that horrible thing. Right. I did that horrible thing. Right. I did that horrible thing. Right. And then So, I mean, I've done horrible And then So, I mean, I've done horrible And then So, I mean, I've done horrible things that um I haven't gone back and things that um I haven't gone back and things that um I haven't gone back and said, I did this horrible thing, but I'm said, I did this horrible thing, but I'm said, I did this horrible thing, but I'm maybe I've tried to pay it forward. maybe I've tried to pay it forward. maybe I've tried to pay it forward. Like, I've told my kids, you know, when Like, I've told my kids, you know, when Like, I've told my kids, you know, when I was younger, I did this horrible thing I was younger, I did this horrible thing I was younger, I did this horrible thing and it still haunts me. So, if you're and it still haunts me. So, if you're and it still haunts me. So, if you're ever tempted to do something like what I ever tempted to do something like what I ever tempted to do something like what I did, you might think about my situ. So, did, you might think about my situ. So, did, you might think about my situ. So, you know, some kind of way. But I think you know, some kind of way. But I think you know, some kind of way. But I think wrestling with that is important. wrestling with that is important. wrestling with that is important. I think it's a really important element I think it's a really important element I think it's a really important element to all this. And there's not um I love to all this. And there's not um I love to all this. And there's not um I love that there's neuroscience being done on that there's neuroscience being done on that there's neuroscience being done on truthtelling and the value of truthtelling and the value of truthtelling and the value of truthtelling. I think uh I if I were truthtelling. I think uh I if I were truthtelling. I think uh I if I were to predict a new and truly exciting area to predict a new and truly exciting area to predict a new and truly exciting area that people are going to be really that people are going to be really that people are going to be really curious about and um in this huge sphere curious about and um in this huge sphere curious about and um in this huge sphere we call neuroscience, I hope they'll we call neuroscience, I hope they'll we call neuroscience, I hope they'll continue to do more work. Also speaks to continue to do more work. Also speaks to continue to do more work. Also speaks to I'm so glad to hear that's happening I'm so glad to hear that's happening I'm so glad to hear that's happening here at Stanford. Uh, no that's that here at Stanford. Uh, no that's that here at Stanford. Uh, no that's that the well the literature that the well the literature that the well the literature that I look at isn't Stanford work but that I look at isn't Stanford work but that I look at isn't Stanford work but um but there's work it might be it might um but there's work it might be it might um but there's work it might be it might be people be people be people regardless of where it's happening more regardless of where it's happening more regardless of where it's happening more of that and all the rest please. Um I of that and all the rest please. Um I of that and all the rest please. Um I want to ask you about using drugs to want to ask you about using drugs to want to ask you about using drugs to treat drug addiction. Um these days treat drug addiction. Um these days treat drug addiction. Um these days there's a growing interest or at least there's a growing interest or at least there's a growing interest or at least discussion about Ibagain people going discussion about Ibagain people going discussion about Ibagain people going down going out of country because I down going out of country because I down going out of country because I think it's still illegal here um or is think it's still illegal here um or is think it's still illegal here um or is illegal here going out of country to I illegal here going out of country to I illegal here going out of country to I don't know either um inject it or smoke don't know either um inject it or smoke don't know either um inject it or smoke it or whatever it is or people going and it or whatever it is or people going and it or whatever it is or people going and doing Iaska journeys or um MDMA which is doing Iaska journeys or um MDMA which is doing Iaska journeys or um MDMA which is still an illegal drug in this country still an illegal drug in this country still an illegal drug in this country but there are clinical trials there are but there are clinical trials there are but there are clinical trials there are people on this campus doing experimental people on this campus doing experimental people on this campus doing experimental studies I don't know if clinical trials studies I don't know if clinical trials studies I don't know if clinical trials but at Johns Hopkins there are clinical but at Johns Hopkins there are clinical but at Johns Hopkins there are clinical trials etc. trials etc. trials etc. So this um this is a vast area right So this um this is a vast area right So this um this is a vast area right different chemistries for different chemistries for different chemistries for different drugs and different purposes. But the drugs and different purposes. But the drugs and different purposes. But the rationale as I understand it is take the rationale as I understand it is take the rationale as I understand it is take people who are in a pattern of addiction people who are in a pattern of addiction people who are in a pattern of addiction launch them into a experience that's launch them into a experience that's launch them into a experience that's also chemical and extreme often of the also chemical and extreme often of the also chemical and extreme often of the extreme serotonin andor extreme dopamine extreme serotonin andor extreme dopamine extreme serotonin andor extreme dopamine type. So MDMMA, ecstasy for instance, type. So MDMMA, ecstasy for instance, type. So MDMMA, ecstasy for instance, tons of serotonin dumped, tons of tons of serotonin dumped, tons of tons of serotonin dumped, tons of dopamine dumped, dopamine dumped, dopamine dumped, how neurotoxic, if neurotoxic, how neurotoxic, if neurotoxic, how neurotoxic, if neurotoxic, debatable, etc., not a topic for debatable, etc., not a topic for debatable, etc., not a topic for now, but a lot. And then somehow that extreme but a lot. And then somehow that extreme but a lot. And then somehow that extreme experience wrapped inside of a experience wrapped inside of a experience wrapped inside of a supported network in there, whether or supported network in there, whether or supported network in there, whether or not there's just someone there or not there's just someone there or not there's just someone there or whether or not they're actively working whether or not they're actively working whether or not they're actively working through something with the patient, is through something with the patient, is through something with the patient, is supposed to eject the person into a life supposed to eject the person into a life supposed to eject the person into a life where drug use isn't uh as much of where drug use isn't uh as much of where drug use isn't uh as much of interest. This violates at a at a r interest. This violates at a at a r interest. This violates at a at a r purely rational level, this violates purely rational level, this violates purely rational level, this violates everything that we've talked about in everything that we've talked about in everything that we've talked about in terms of dopamine biology. It would if terms of dopamine biology. It would if terms of dopamine biology. It would if this arrangement is the way I described this arrangement is the way I described this arrangement is the way I described it cause more addiction is anything but a cause more addiction is anything but a cause more addiction is anything but a dopamine fast. It's a dopamine feast. dopamine fast. It's a dopamine feast. dopamine fast. It's a dopamine feast. So we hear about successful transitions So we hear about successful transitions So we hear about successful transitions through this at least anecdotally and through this at least anecdotally and through this at least anecdotally and may um maybe some clinical say what is may um maybe some clinical say what is may um maybe some clinical say what is going on going on going on what is going on doesn't make any sense what is going on doesn't make any sense what is going on doesn't make any sense to me. Uh to me. Uh to me. Uh yeah. Yeah. So I think it's good that you're Yeah. So I think it's good that you're Yeah. So I think it's good that you're skeptical. Um I think we all should be skeptical. Um I think we all should be skeptical. Um I think we all should be skeptical. Having said that, um there skeptical. Having said that, um there skeptical. Having said that, um there are clinical studies showing um you know are clinical studies showing um you know are clinical studies showing um you know and these are small studies and they're and these are small studies and they're and these are small studies and they're short duration, small number of short duration, small number of short duration, small number of subjects. But you know taking people for subjects. But you know taking people for subjects. But you know taking people for example who are addicted to alcohol and example who are addicted to alcohol and example who are addicted to alcohol and then having them have this let's say then having them have this let's say then having them have this let's say psychedelic experience in a very psychedelic experience in a very psychedelic experience in a very controlled setting. controlled setting. controlled setting. So either typically it's a highdosese So either typically it's a highdosese So either typically it's a highdosese psilocybin or three dose as I saw it psilocybin or three dose as I saw it psilocybin or three dose as I saw it for the MAP study of MDMA of ecstasy. for the MAP study of MDMA of ecstasy. for the MAP study of MDMA of ecstasy. Those are sort of the seem to be the Those are sort of the seem to be the Those are sort of the seem to be the kind of the kind of bread and butter of kind of the kind of bread and butter of kind of the kind of bread and butter of this kind of work. Right. But the thing this kind of work. Right. But the thing this kind of work. Right. But the thing to really keep in mind is that this is to really keep in mind is that this is to really keep in mind is that this is completely interwoven with regular completely interwoven with regular completely interwoven with regular psychotherapy and that these are highly psychotherapy and that these are highly psychotherapy and that these are highly selected individuals selected individuals selected individuals and clinical trials. and clinical trials. and clinical trials. Right. And these are individual Right. And these are individual Right. And these are individual clinical trials. Right. And and so clinical trials. Right. And and so clinical trials. Right. And and so you know I want I think the metaphor you know I want I think the metaphor you know I want I think the metaphor that I that helps me think about that I that helps me think about that I that helps me think about this is there are many ways to the top this is there are many ways to the top this is there are many ways to the top of the mountain and these are sort of the mountain and these are sort of the mountain and these are sort of like taking the gondola instead of like taking the gondola instead of like taking the gondola instead of walking up. It's sort of instead of walking up. It's sort of instead of walking up. It's sort of instead of doing like a year of psychoanalysis doing like a year of psychoanalysis doing like a year of psychoanalysis where you're sitting on the couch every where you're sitting on the couch every where you're sitting on the couch every week reflecting on your life, it's a week reflecting on your life, it's a week reflecting on your life, it's a condensed version of psychoanalysis or condensed version of psychoanalysis or condensed version of psychoanalysis or psychotherapy plus you know MDMA which psychotherapy plus you know MDMA which psychotherapy plus you know MDMA which gets you there faster. creates the gets you there faster. creates the gets you there faster. creates the intimacy presumably because of this. I intimacy presumably because of this. I intimacy presumably because of this. I think the main thing that happens when think the main thing that happens when think the main thing that happens when it's beneficial it's beneficial it's beneficial is it just allows the person to get is it just allows the person to get is it just allows the person to get outside of their own head and look at outside of their own head and look at outside of their own head and look at their lives on a much broader sweep and their lives on a much broader sweep and their lives on a much broader sweep and to consider themselves to consider themselves to consider themselves not mired in the you know quotidian sort not mired in the you know quotidian sort not mired in the you know quotidian sort of details of their life but rather as a of details of their life but rather as a of details of their life but rather as a human on a on the large planet Earth in human on a on the large planet Earth in human on a on the large planet Earth in the vast universe. the vast universe. the vast universe. So I think it takes it it's like when it So I think it takes it it's like when it So I think it takes it it's like when it works it's a transformational experience works it's a transformational experience works it's a transformational experience because it gives the person another lens because it gives the person another lens because it gives the person another lens through which to view their life their through which to view their life their through which to view their life their lives which I think for some lives which I think for some lives which I think for some people is positive and powerful because people is positive and powerful because people is positive and powerful because they can come back from that and be like they can come back from that and be like they can come back from that and be like oh my gosh I care about my family and I oh my gosh I care about my family and I oh my gosh I care about my family and I don't I want X Y or Z for them and I don't I want X Y or Z for them and I don't I want X Y or Z for them and I realize that my continuing to drink is realize that my continuing to drink is realize that my continuing to drink is not going to, you know, achieve that. not going to, you know, achieve that. not going to, you know, achieve that. So, it's almost like a spiritual or So, it's almost like a spiritual or So, it's almost like a spiritual or values-based. So, I think it can be very values-based. So, I think it can be very values-based. So, I think it can be very powerful. But, but having said that, I powerful. But, but having said that, I powerful. But, but having said that, I truly am quite skeptical because, you truly am quite skeptical because, you truly am quite skeptical because, you know, addiction is a chronic relapsing know, addiction is a chronic relapsing know, addiction is a chronic relapsing and remitting problem. It's hard for me and remitting problem. It's hard for me and remitting problem. It's hard for me to imagine that there's something that to imagine that there's something that to imagine that there's something that works very quickly, short term, that's works very quickly, short term, that's works very quickly, short term, that's going to work for a disease that's going to work for a disease that's going to work for a disease that's really longlasting. really longlasting. really longlasting. Yeah. The two addicts I know that Yeah. The two addicts I know that Yeah. The two addicts I know that did MDMA MDMMA assisted psychotherapy as did MDMA MDMMA assisted psychotherapy as did MDMA MDMMA assisted psychotherapy as far as part of this um thing both got far as part of this um thing both got far as part of this um thing both got worse. Yeah. Um but the people I know who had severe Um but the people I know who had severe Um but the people I know who had severe trauma Uhhuh. who did this who took this approach seem who did this who took this approach seem who did this who took this approach seem to be doing better. to be doing better. to be doing better. Okay. Interesting. Okay. Interesting. Okay. Interesting. And so I um I think that uh the And so I um I think that uh the And so I um I think that uh the discussion as we hear it now is just discussion as we hear it now is just discussion as we hear it now is just sort of psychedelics which is a huge sort of psychedelics which is a huge sort of psychedelics which is a huge category of that includes many different category of that includes many different category of that includes many different drugs and compounds with different drugs and compounds with different drugs and compounds with different effects. And we hear about trauma and effects. And we hear about trauma and effects. And we hear about trauma and addiction lumped together. addiction lumped together. addiction lumped together. And I think that um I'm a splitter, not And I think that um I'm a splitter, not And I think that um I'm a splitter, not a lumper, a lumper, a lumper, as we say in science. Um as we say in science. Um as we say in science. Um uh and I think it's going to be uh and I think it's going to be uh and I think it's going to be important for people to know that this important for people to know that this important for people to know that this is definitely not a one-sizefits-all is definitely not a one-sizefits-all is definitely not a one-sizefits-all kind of thing, but it sounds like it may kind of thing, but it sounds like it may kind of thing, but it sounds like it may have some utility under certain have some utility under certain have some utility under certain conditions. Yeah, I think so. I think we I'm Yeah, I think so. I think we I'm Yeah, I think so. I think we I'm trying to be very open-minded about its trying to be very open-minded about its trying to be very open-minded about its potential utility for certain potential utility for certain potential utility for certain individuals. But I can tell you in my individuals. But I can tell you in my individuals. But I can tell you in my clinical work, what is a very concerning clinical work, what is a very concerning clinical work, what is a very concerning um unintended consequence of this um unintended consequence of this um unintended consequence of this narrative is I have a lot of people who narrative is I have a lot of people who narrative is I have a lot of people who are looking for some kind of spiritual are looking for some kind of spiritual are looking for some kind of spiritual awakening who on their own not in the awakening who on their own not in the awakening who on their own not in the context of any kind of therapeutic context of any kind of therapeutic context of any kind of therapeutic psychological work, you know, micro dose psychological work, you know, micro dose psychological work, you know, micro dose or want to try, you know, psilocybin or want to try, you know, psilocybin or want to try, you know, psilocybin or MDMA with a friend or wherever. so they MDMA with a friend or wherever. so they MDMA with a friend or wherever. so they can have this, you know, spiritual can have this, you know, spiritual can have this, you know, spiritual experience that they can figure out experience that they can figure out experience that they can figure out their lives. That that's a disaster and their lives. That that's a disaster and their lives. That that's a disaster and almost never works out well. And and almost never works out well. And and almost never works out well. And I've then had people who literally I've then had people who literally I've then had people who literally supposedly you can't get addicted to supposedly you can't get addicted to supposedly you can't get addicted to psychedelics because, you know, psychedelics because, you know, psychedelics because, you know, something with the biochemistry, which I something with the biochemistry, which I something with the biochemistry, which I don't fully understand because it don't fully understand because it don't fully understand because it doesn't make any sense to me, but I have doesn't make any sense to me, but I have doesn't make any sense to me, but I have patients clinically who definitely are patients clinically who definitely are patients clinically who definitely are addicted to, you know, MDMA to micro addicted to, you know, MDMA to micro addicted to, you know, MDMA to micro doing. So that's very concerning for to doing. So that's very concerning for to doing. So that's very concerning for to me cuz like you know Pollins's How to me cuz like you know Pollins's How to me cuz like you know Pollins's How to Change Your Mind that you know I Change Your Mind that you know I Change Your Mind that you know I respect that work but on the other hand respect that work but on the other hand respect that work but on the other hand it's penetrated the it's penetrated the it's penetrated the culture Michael's book. culture Michael's book. culture Michael's book. Yeah. Well and I don't know Yeah. Well and I don't know Yeah. Well and I don't know him and so um I don't have a problem him and so um I don't have a problem him and so um I don't have a problem taking a taking a stance um uh so I'll taking a taking a stance um uh so I'll taking a taking a stance um uh so I'll just say my stance on that is the just say my stance on that is the just say my stance on that is the narrative of popular authors can expand and wick of popular authors can expand and wick of popular authors can expand and wick out so fast. out so fast. out so fast. Yes. that pretty soon people are Yes. that pretty soon people are Yes. that pretty soon people are essentially taking their mental health essentially taking their mental health essentially taking their mental health into their own hands. And I actually I into their own hands. And I actually I into their own hands. And I actually I have great optimism for this uh business have great optimism for this uh business have great optimism for this uh business of clinical use of um psychedelics of clinical use of um psychedelics of clinical use of um psychedelics including MDMA. Matthew Johnson at Johns including MDMA. Matthew Johnson at Johns including MDMA. Matthew Johnson at Johns Hopkins is doing fabulous work on this Hopkins is doing fabulous work on this Hopkins is doing fabulous work on this um and there are others too of um and there are others too of um and there are others too of course but those are controlled settings course but those are controlled settings course but those are controlled settings right and the pharmarmacology is being tuned and the pharmarmacology is being tuned and the pharmarmacology is being tuned up and one thing that I think is coming up and one thing that I think is coming up and one thing that I think is coming uh there are several papers published uh there are several papers published uh there are several papers published recently in great journals like nature recently in great journals like nature recently in great journals like nature and science etc where there are and science etc where there are and science etc where there are scientists who are removing the scientists who are removing the scientists who are removing the hallucinogenic components of these drugs hallucinogenic components of these drugs hallucinogenic components of these drugs and finding that they still have the and finding that they still have the and finding that they still have the anti-depressent cent effects and so the anti-depressent cent effects and so the anti-depressent cent effects and so the experience of a psychedelic experience of a psychedelic experience of a psychedelic and the long-term effects of the and the long-term effects of the and the long-term effects of the psychedelic might actually be psychedelic might actually be psychedelic might actually be dissociable. And so I again I um and I'm dissociable. And so I again I um and I'm dissociable. And so I again I um and I'm always careful to say I'm neither always careful to say I'm neither always careful to say I'm neither for something or against it. I just for something or against it. I just for something or against it. I just think that um treading carefully is think that um treading carefully is think that um treading carefully is what's important. I agree with you what's important. I agree with you what's important. I agree with you and I can just tell you that the and I can just tell you that the and I can just tell you that the downstream effect for the average person downstream effect for the average person downstream effect for the average person um for many of whom present in our um for many of whom present in our um for many of whom present in our clinic is that they've misconstrued the clinic is that they've misconstrued the clinic is that they've misconstrued the data on the use of psychedelics for data on the use of psychedelics for data on the use of psychedelics for mental health conditions um to this idea mental health conditions um to this idea mental health conditions um to this idea that they're safe or that anybody can that they're safe or that anybody can that they're safe or that anybody can take them in any circumstance and have take them in any circumstance and have take them in any circumstance and have this kind of awakening and that this kind of awakening and that this kind of awakening and that that's not what the data show, right? that's not what the data show, right? that's not what the data show, right? the data are these highly controlled the data are these highly controlled the data are these highly controlled settings um you know carefully selected settings um you know carefully selected settings um you know carefully selected patients. So that's my worry you know. patients. So that's my worry you know. patients. So that's my worry you know. Sure. And um I'm going to be sitting Sure. And um I'm going to be sitting Sure. And um I'm going to be sitting down with Matthew Johnson at some point down with Matthew Johnson at some point down with Matthew Johnson at some point and we we'll discuss this and I think and we we'll discuss this and I think and we we'll discuss this and I think that uh that care and that um that uh that care and that um that uh that care and that um that cocoon of real clinical care does cocoon of real clinical care does cocoon of real clinical care does seem to be an important component. Uh seem to be an important component. Uh seem to be an important component. Uh well, I'm glad we could touch on it and well, I'm glad we could touch on it and well, I'm glad we could touch on it and um you know, I'm sure I'll get a bunch um you know, I'm sure I'll get a bunch um you know, I'm sure I'll get a bunch of comments telling me that, you know, of comments telling me that, you know, of comments telling me that, you know, uh you know, but I but I think it is uh you know, but I but I think it is uh you know, but I but I think it is important to explore things from all important to explore things from all important to explore things from all sides and that's what we do as sides and that's what we do as sides and that's what we do as scientists and if Michael Pollen wants scientists and if Michael Pollen wants scientists and if Michael Pollen wants to chat, we can do that too. to chat, we can do that too. to chat, we can do that too. Um that's fine. I very much enjoyed Um that's fine. I very much enjoyed Um that's fine. I very much enjoyed the book actually. Um but I think that the book actually. Um but I think that the book actually. Um but I think that uh people run with ideas. That's right. people run with ideas. That's right. people run with ideas. That's right. They don't walk with them, they sprint. They don't walk with them, they sprint. They don't walk with them, they sprint. Um, yeah, there are a couple other things I just there are a couple other things I just there are a couple other things I just want to touch on. Um, but they all want to touch on. Um, but they all want to touch on. Um, but they all relate to social media. relate to social media. relate to social media. Okay. You were featured in The Social Dilemma. You were featured in The Social Dilemma. You were featured in The Social Dilemma. Um, was a powerful movie. I think many Um, was a powerful movie. I think many Um, was a powerful movie. I think many people avoided seeing that movie because people avoided seeing that movie because people avoided seeing that movie because it reflects back on us just how it reflects back on us just how it reflects back on us just how addicted we all are and how manipulated addicted we all are and how manipulated addicted we all are and how manipulated we all are. we all are. we all are. But it doesn't seem to have changed But it doesn't seem to have changed But it doesn't seem to have changed behavior much. I have to say that behavior much. I have to say that behavior much. I have to say that the movie changed my that the movie changed my that the movie changed my understanding and my perception but not understanding and my perception but not understanding and my perception but not my behavior too much. my behavior too much. my behavior too much. If we look at addiction as a maladaptive If we look at addiction as a maladaptive If we look at addiction as a maladaptive thing, something that's making our lives thing, something that's making our lives thing, something that's making our lives worse or our us less functional at worse or our us less functional at worse or our us less functional at work and in relationships, I could work and in relationships, I could work and in relationships, I could imagine a version of social media where imagine a version of social media where imagine a version of social media where it's making me more connected. I mean, it's making me more connected. I mean, it's making me more connected. I mean, this is a podcast after all. I post this is a podcast after all. I post this is a podcast after all. I post videos. this will show up on YouTube and videos. this will show up on YouTube and videos. this will show up on YouTube and um and elements of it on Instagram as um and elements of it on Instagram as um and elements of it on Instagram as well. So much like uh sugar or um other So much like uh sugar or um other So much like uh sugar or um other things, I have to imagine that we need to I have to imagine that we need to I have to imagine that we need to regulate not necessarily eliminate this regulate not necessarily eliminate this regulate not necessarily eliminate this behavior. So, I want to talk about what behavior. So, I want to talk about what behavior. So, I want to talk about what that looks like and I want to talk about that looks like and I want to talk about that looks like and I want to talk about what you've referred to as this what you've referred to as this what you've referred to as this narcissistic preoccupation narcissistic preoccupation narcissistic preoccupation that social media is creating that we that social media is creating that we that social media is creating that we are all far more keenly aware of how we are all far more keenly aware of how we are all far more keenly aware of how we look and how we sound and how we are look and how we sound and how we are look and how we sound and how we are being perceived than we being perceived than we being perceived than we were 10 years ago. were 10 years ago. were 10 years ago. Right? So, first of all, social media um Right? So, first of all, social media um Right? So, first of all, social media um how addicting is it really and what is how addicting is it really and what is how addicting is it really and what is healthy social media behavior? healthy social media behavior? healthy social media behavior? So, the first message I would want to get the first message I would want to get the first message I would want to get across about social media is that it across about social media is that it across about social media is that it really is a drug and it's engineered to really is a drug and it's engineered to really is a drug and it's engineered to be a drug. Um, and it's based on, you be a drug. Um, and it's based on, you be a drug. Um, and it's based on, you know, potency, quantity, variety, um, know, potency, quantity, variety, um, know, potency, quantity, variety, um, the bottomless bowls, the likes, the way the bottomless bowls, the likes, the way the bottomless bowls, the likes, the way that it's enumerated, all of that, which that it's enumerated, all of that, which that it's enumerated, all of that, which doesn't mean that we can't use it. Um, doesn't mean that we can't use it. Um, doesn't mean that we can't use it. Um, but we need to be very thoughtful about but we need to be very thoughtful about but we need to be very thoughtful about the way you we use it, just like we the way you we use it, just like we the way you we use it, just like we need to be thoughtful about the way we need to be thoughtful about the way we need to be thoughtful about the way we use any drug. Um, and so that means with use any drug. Um, and so that means with use any drug. Um, and so that means with intention and in advance, planning our intention and in advance, planning our intention and in advance, planning our use, right? and trying to use it in as a use, right? and trying to use it in as a use, right? and trying to use it in as a as a as a really awesome tool to as a as a really awesome tool to as a as a really awesome tool to potentially connect with other people potentially connect with other people potentially connect with other people and not to be used by it um or get lost and not to be used by it um or get lost and not to be used by it um or get lost in it. And of course, you know, people in it. And of course, you know, people in it. And of course, you know, people are going to come with different are going to come with different are going to come with different propensities for addiction to any drug. propensities for addiction to any drug. propensities for addiction to any drug. And that's true for social media, too. And that's true for social media, too. And that's true for social media, too. Some people will have no problem using Some people will have no problem using Some people will have no problem using it in moderation or using it in a way it in moderation or using it in a way it in moderation or using it in a way that's adaptive. and other people that's adaptive. and other people that's adaptive. and other people will immediately get sucked in. And will immediately get sucked in. And will immediately get sucked in. And the key thing about getting addicted is the key thing about getting addicted is the key thing about getting addicted is when it's happening, we nobody who's when it's happening, we nobody who's when it's happening, we nobody who's getting addicted thinks they're getting addicted thinks they're getting addicted thinks they're getting addicted, right? Let's face it, it's addicted, right? Let's face it, it's addicted, right? Let's face it, it's only after the fact that we go, only after the fact that we go, only after the fact that we go, "Whoops." You know, what was that about? "Whoops." You know, what was that about? "Whoops." You know, what was that about? Well, remember texting and driving. Well, remember texting and driving. Well, remember texting and driving. There were all these books about texting There were all these books about texting There were all these books about texting and driving, how terrible it was. and driving, how terrible it was. and driving, how terrible it was. Yeah. Even the governments have largely given Even the governments have largely given Even the governments have largely given up. You see these billboards like up. You see these billboards like up. You see these billboards like don't text and drive or any text can don't text and drive or any text can don't text and drive or any text can wait or not worth dying for but wait or not worth dying for but wait or not worth dying for but everybody's texting and driving everybody's texting and driving everybody's texting and driving right and if you look at young people right and if you look at young people right and if you look at young people today teenagers I mean they're basically today teenagers I mean they're basically today teenagers I mean they're basically cybernetically enhanced that the phone cybernetically enhanced that the phone cybernetically enhanced that the phone is there you know it's like they're is there you know it's like they're is there you know it's like they're talking to you and texting 12 friends at talking to you and texting 12 friends at talking to you and texting 12 friends at the same time and there's no stopping the same time and there's no stopping the same time and there's no stopping it. I mean the genie is out of the it. I mean the genie is out of the it. I mean the genie is out of the bottle where you know it's not we're not bottle where you know it's not we're not bottle where you know it's not we're not going back you know. So we do need to going back you know. So we do need to going back you know. So we do need to figure out, you know, how to make this figure out, you know, how to make this figure out, you know, how to make this tool something that's, you know, this tool something that's, you know, this tool something that's, you know, going to be good for us and not going to be good for us and not going to be good for us and not ultimately harmful. And I don't have ultimately harmful. And I don't have ultimately harmful. And I don't have all the answers by any stretch of the all the answers by any stretch of the all the answers by any stretch of the imagination. But I do think you know imagination. But I do think you know imagination. But I do think you know some of the wisdom that we have learned some of the wisdom that we have learned some of the wisdom that we have learned from using other drugs also applies to from using other drugs also applies to from using other drugs also applies to social media which is to say that we social media which is to say that we social media which is to say that we have to again put barriers in place that have to again put barriers in place that have to again put barriers in place that allow us to remain in control of our use allow us to remain in control of our use allow us to remain in control of our use which means not too much you know which means not too much you know which means not too much you know not too often not too potent. Um not too often not too potent. Um not too often not too potent. Um do you think in going back to this idea do you think in going back to this idea do you think in going back to this idea of the unit of the day being a good of the unit of the day being a good of the unit of the day being a good attractable unit a manageable unit of attractable unit a manageable unit of attractable unit a manageable unit of time for most people. Um, so you're time for most people. Um, so you're time for most people. Um, so you're saying in advance, so allocating 2 hours saying in advance, so allocating 2 hours saying in advance, so allocating 2 hours in which you're going to allow yourself in which you're going to allow yourself in which you're going to allow yourself to have free reign use of the phone and to have free reign use of the phone and to have free reign use of the phone and all its apps and all its things or um all its apps and all its things or um all its apps and all its things or um even more restricted than that, meaning even more restricted than that, meaning even more restricted than that, meaning okay, I'm only going to allow myself okay, I'm only going to allow myself okay, I'm only going to allow myself 30 minutes a day to post and comment and 30 minutes a day to post and comment and 30 minutes a day to post and comment and then that's a close out completely. then that's a close out completely. then that's a close out completely. Yeah. So, I think it's it depends Yeah. So, I think it's it depends Yeah. So, I think it's it depends on the person and sort of a combination. on the person and sort of a combination. on the person and sort of a combination. We talked earlier about, you know, We talked earlier about, you know, We talked earlier about, you know, having an itch and scratching yourself having an itch and scratching yourself having an itch and scratching yourself at night. We've gotten to a point with at night. We've gotten to a point with at night. We've gotten to a point with smartphones, people are pulling them out smartphones, people are pulling them out smartphones, people are pulling them out and they are utterly unconscious of and they are utterly unconscious of and they are utterly unconscious of doing so. Pulling them out, you know, a doing so. Pulling them out, you know, a doing so. Pulling them out, you know, a couple texts, a couple swip, they don't couple texts, a couple swip, they don't couple texts, a couple swip, they don't know. I have a friend who works in uh does I have a friend who works in uh does I have a friend who works in uh does delivers babies. delivers babies. delivers babies. Yeah. And um many pregnant mothers won't And um many pregnant mothers won't And um many pregnant mothers won't actually deliver without their phone in actually deliver without their phone in actually deliver without their phone in hand. And this used to be the hand that hand. And this used to be the hand that hand. And this used to be the hand that was connected to their spouse. This may was connected to their spouse. This may was connected to their spouse. This may be a comment on spouses more than be a comment on spouses more than be a comment on spouses more than on phones, but um but uh it sounds like on phones, but um but uh it sounds like on phones, but um but uh it sounds like there's it's a kind of a security there's it's a kind of a security there's it's a kind of a security blanket, right? Like a transitional object. Yeah. right? Like a transitional object. Yeah. right? Like a transitional object. Yeah. Actually, that reminds me, you've Yeah. Actually, that reminds me, you've Yeah. Actually, that reminds me, you've referred to um the phone. I think it's referred to um the phone. I think it's referred to um the phone. I think it's the phone, but maybe it's our online the phone, but maybe it's our online the phone, but maybe it's our online persona or our selves as we've become persona or our selves as we've become persona or our selves as we've become sort of infantile sort of infantile sort of infantile in our need for it's like a baby in a in our need for it's like a baby in a in our need for it's like a baby in a bottle, right? And so I do wonder if bottle, right? And so I do wonder if bottle, right? And so I do wonder if we have regressed and I do think we've we have regressed and I do think we've we have regressed and I do think we've regressed a bit um in terms of our regressed a bit um in terms of our regressed a bit um in terms of our online behavior, our inability to act online behavior, our inability to act online behavior, our inability to act like I thought an adult was somebody like I thought an adult was somebody like I thought an adult was somebody that can control their behavior. That's that can control their behavior. That's that can control their behavior. That's the difference between a baby and adult. the difference between a baby and adult. the difference between a baby and adult. You have to be a developmental You have to be a developmental You have to be a developmental neurobiologist for very long to neurobiologist for very long to neurobiologist for very long to understand that a young organism can't understand that a young organism can't understand that a young organism can't control its behavior, an older one can. control its behavior, an older one can. control its behavior, an older one can. So to me, a mature organism, mature in So to me, a mature organism, mature in So to me, a mature organism, mature in years organism that can't control its years organism that can't control its years organism that can't control its behavior is a baby. It's it's an behavior is a baby. It's it's an behavior is a baby. It's it's an immature version of itself. And there's immature version of itself. And there's immature version of itself. And there's neural there's neuroscience to support neural there's neuroscience to support neural there's neuroscience to support that statement. that statement. that statement. Um I look at my own behavior with the Um I look at my own behavior with the Um I look at my own behavior with the phone sometimes and I think phone sometimes and I think phone sometimes and I think I'm a grown man. Like what is the I'm a grown man. Like what is the I'm a grown man. Like what is the problem here? Right. Um you know I don't problem here? Right. Um you know I don't problem here? Right. Um you know I don't eat baby food but I'm acting like a baby eat baby food but I'm acting like a baby eat baby food but I'm acting like a baby with the phone. with the phone. with the phone. All right. Um in the sense that I'm All right. Um in the sense that I'm All right. Um in the sense that I'm reflexively picking it up. reflexively picking it up. reflexively picking it up. I'm not being intentioned and I'm not being intentioned and I'm not being intentioned and deliberate with it. deliberate with it. deliberate with it. Um do I need a full 30 days, Anna? Um do I need a full 30 days, Anna? Um do I need a full 30 days, Anna? So yes. So, so 30 days away from as So yes. So, so 30 days away from as So yes. So, so 30 days away from as you know that's my recommend the full 30 you know that's my recommend the full 30 you know that's my recommend the full 30 days to reset. I you know if you're if days to reset. I you know if you're if days to reset. I you know if you're if you're severely addicted that I you're severely addicted that I you're severely addicted that I recommend the 30 days but if you're just recommend the 30 days but if you're just recommend the 30 days but if you're just a little bit addicted like most of us a little bit addicted like most of us a little bit addicted like most of us you probably don't need 30 days. In fact you probably don't need 30 days. In fact you probably don't need 30 days. In fact a single day not only would be a single day not only would be a single day not only would be challenging but um but probably maybe challenging but um but probably maybe challenging but um but probably maybe sufficient. My phone is off for substantial segments My phone is off for substantial segments My phone is off for substantial segments of the day. of the day. of the day. Okay, that's great. Okay, that's great. Okay, that's great. And it drives other people crazy. people And it drives other people crazy. people And it drives other people crazy. people expect me to respond. expect me to respond. expect me to respond. Uh but I don't care. Uh but I don't care. Uh but I don't care. I really don't. And I actually take a I really don't. And I actually take a I really don't. And I actually take a little bit of pleasure in the fact that little bit of pleasure in the fact that little bit of pleasure in the fact that well because I think the point I'm well because I think the point I'm well because I think the point I'm trying to make is the right one, which trying to make is the right one, which trying to make is the right one, which is that it's not just right for me, but is that it's not just right for me, but is that it's not just right for me, but like why I don't see a clause on text like why I don't see a clause on text like why I don't see a clause on text messages or emails that say must be messages or emails that say must be messages or emails that say must be responded to within x amount of time or responded to within x amount of time or responded to within x amount of time or else, right? Um or else. Yeah. Um or else. Yeah. Um or else. Yeah. So, I take the liberty of replying when So, I take the liberty of replying when So, I take the liberty of replying when I when I'm able to. I when I'm able to. I when I'm able to. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. That's right. Or want to. Or want to. Or want to. Yeah. Right. But which touches on one of Yeah. Right. But which touches on one of Yeah. Right. But which touches on one of the big challenges about social media is the big challenges about social media is the big challenges about social media is that as more and more of us are spending that as more and more of us are spending that as more and more of us are spending more and more time on social media, more and more time on social media, more and more time on social media, we're divesting our libidness energies we're divesting our libidness energies we're divesting our libidness energies etc. from real life interactions. So etc. from real life interactions. So etc. from real life interactions. So that means even when we want to choose that means even when we want to choose that means even when we want to choose to not be online connecting, we go to not be online connecting, we go to not be online connecting, we go outside and there's no there outside and there's no there outside and there's no there there, right? there's nobody else there. there, right? there's nobody else there. there, right? there's nobody else there. So I think our collective challenge and So I think our collective challenge and So I think our collective challenge and it should be our mission is to make sure it should be our mission is to make sure it should be our mission is to make sure that we are preserving and maintaining that we are preserving and maintaining that we are preserving and maintaining offline ways to connect with each other because ways to connect with each other because ways to connect with each other because if we don't do that then we'll be if we don't do that then we'll be if we don't do that then we'll be very lonely, right? If we were not very lonely, right? If we were not very lonely, right? If we were not online. But if you have a tribe of folks online. But if you have a tribe of folks online. But if you have a tribe of folks that you can be with, none of whom are that you can be with, none of whom are that you can be with, none of whom are on their phones while you're together on their phones while you're together on their phones while you're together for that discreet amount of time, then for that discreet amount of time, then for that discreet amount of time, then it's wonderful and liberating and it's wonderful and liberating and it's wonderful and liberating and nobody's distracted. And I think that's nobody's distracted. And I think that's nobody's distracted. And I think that's really the key. And I think young people really the key. And I think young people really the key. And I think young people are figuring that out. You know, they're are figuring that out. You know, they're are figuring that out. You know, they're trying to create these spaces or try to trying to create these spaces or try to trying to create these spaces or try to let's say instead of doing a dopamine let's say instead of doing a dopamine let's say instead of doing a dopamine fast by yourself, do it with your fast by yourself, do it with your fast by yourself, do it with your friends, right? Then there's the FOMO is friends, right? Then there's the FOMO is friends, right? Then there's the FOMO is less, the fear of missing out because less, the fear of missing out because less, the fear of missing out because Oh, you're all doing the dopamine fast Oh, you're all doing the dopamine fast Oh, you're all doing the dopamine fast together. So, these are some of the together. So, these are some of the together. So, these are some of the tricks that, you know, we can come up tricks that, you know, we can come up tricks that, you know, we can come up with. But with. But with. But I like that. I like that. I like that. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Okay. I like that. I don't allow I have a home I like that. I don't allow I have a home I like that. I don't allow I have a home gym and I love working out. I just gym and I love working out. I just gym and I love working out. I just enjoy it and always have and I don't enjoy it and always have and I don't enjoy it and always have and I don't allow my phone in my gym anymore allow my phone in my gym anymore allow my phone in my gym anymore and I live in an area where I don't get and I live in an area where I don't get and I live in an area where I don't get any reception like 2 m outside my door. any reception like 2 m outside my door. any reception like 2 m outside my door. So, all my dog walks now are just with So, all my dog walks now are just with So, all my dog walks now are just with the dog and they were boring as hell. I the dog and they were boring as hell. I the dog and they were boring as hell. I also have a bulldog. He doesn't like to also have a bulldog. He doesn't like to also have a bulldog. He doesn't like to walk. really slow. Uh, and it was so walk. really slow. Uh, and it was so walk. really slow. Uh, and it was so boring for a while. boring for a while. boring for a while. Yes. Cuz I was so used to taking calls while Cuz I was so used to taking calls while Cuz I was so used to taking calls while I walk and it's super efficient. Why I walk and it's super efficient. Why I walk and it's super efficient. Why wouldn't I do that? wouldn't I do that? wouldn't I do that? Yeah. The walks now are some of my favorite The walks now are some of my favorite The walks now are some of my favorite part of the day because and if the phone part of the day because and if the phone part of the day because and if the phone were if I were to get a call on one of were if I were to get a call on one of were if I were to get a call on one of those or they brought reception to the those or they brought reception to the those or they brought reception to the area, I would be very dismayed. So, I area, I would be very dismayed. So, I area, I would be very dismayed. So, I can attest to this and um I don't can attest to this and um I don't can attest to this and um I don't think I'm a phone addict. Um, but I do think I'm a phone addict. Um, but I do think I'm a phone addict. Um, but I do put work into regulating my put work into regulating my put work into regulating my Yes. So this is the key. You have to Yes. So this is the key. You have to Yes. So this is the key. You have to with intention prior to being in that with intention prior to being in that with intention prior to being in that situation think of literal physical and situation think of literal physical and situation think of literal physical and metacognitive barriers that you can put metacognitive barriers that you can put metacognitive barriers that you can put between yourself and your phone or between yourself and your phone or between yourself and your phone or whatever your drug is to create whatever your drug is to create whatever your drug is to create these intentional spaces where you're these intentional spaces where you're these intentional spaces where you're not constantly interrupting yourself not constantly interrupting yourself not constantly interrupting yourself essentially and distracting yourself essentially and distracting yourself essentially and distracting yourself because I really do think you know I because I really do think you know I because I really do think you know I think we talked just before we think we talked just before we think we talked just before we started with the interview you know started with the interview you know started with the interview you know we're losing the ability to have a we're losing the ability to have a we're losing the ability to have a sustained thought, right? I mean, we sustained thought, right? I mean, we sustained thought, right? I mean, we get so far and then you get to that get so far and then you get to that get so far and then you get to that point in the thought where it's a little point in the thought where it's a little point in the thought where it's a little bit hard to know what's coming next and bit hard to know what's coming next and bit hard to know what's coming next and it's very easy to check your phone or it's very easy to check your phone or it's very easy to check your phone or check your email or look something up check your email or look something up check your email or look something up on, you know, the internet and then you on, you know, the internet and then you on, you know, the internet and then you never get that opportunity to finish never get that opportunity to finish never get that opportunity to finish that thought, which is really the source that thought, which is really the source that thought, which is really the source of creative energy and an original of creative energy and an original of creative energy and an original thought, right? You're not just reacting thought, right? You're not just reacting thought, right? You're not just reacting to, right? and something that could right? and something that could right? and something that could contribute to the world. I'm a big I'm contribute to the world. I'm a big I'm contribute to the world. I'm a big I'm a big believer that you're either I'm a big believer that you're either I'm a big believer that you're either consuming or you are creating. consuming or you are creating. consuming or you are creating. Uh and there is I should mention Uh and there is I should mention Uh and there is I should mention uh it's important. I do believe in uh it's important. I do believe in uh it's important. I do believe in neutral time. I think sleep is great. neutral time. I think sleep is great. neutral time. I think sleep is great. I'm a big proponent of sleep and talked I'm a big proponent of sleep and talked I'm a big proponent of sleep and talked a lot about it on the podcast. I care a lot about it on the podcast. I care a lot about it on the podcast. I care a lot about sleep. Uh and not just for lot about sleep. Uh and not just for lot about sleep. Uh and not just for sake of performance. I actually just sake of performance. I actually just sake of performance. I actually just really like sleep. Um, I think that really like sleep. Um, I think that really like sleep. Um, I think that being a constant consumer of visual being a constant consumer of visual being a constant consumer of visual information and information of all kinds information and information of all kinds information and information of all kinds can be a problem, but there's can be a problem, but there's can be a problem, but there's some really great sources of information some really great sources of information some really great sources of information on the internet and um on the internet and um on the internet and um uh and I certainly benefit from uh and I certainly benefit from uh and I certainly benefit from the fact that those channels exist. the fact that those channels exist. the fact that those channels exist. Um, narcissistic preoccupation. Um, narcissistic preoccupation. Um, narcissistic preoccupation. Am I a narcissist? Am I a narcissist? Am I a narcissist? You know, I first of all, there there's You know, I first of all, there there's You know, I first of all, there there's healthy there's healthy there's healthy or is the fact that I asked does that or is the fact that I asked does that or is the fact that I asked does that take me out of would a narcissist never take me out of would a narcissist never take me out of would a narcissist never ask that question? ask that question? ask that question? Oh, yes. A highly sophisticated Oh, yes. A highly sophisticated Oh, yes. A highly sophisticated narcissist would know to do that. narcissist would know to do that. narcissist would know to do that. I'm not very sophisticated. I'm not very sophisticated. I'm not very sophisticated. So, there's healthy narcissism, which So, there's healthy narcissism, which So, there's healthy narcissism, which means that we all invest our personal means that we all invest our personal means that we all invest our personal energies into things that we care about. energies into things that we care about. energies into things that we care about. And if our competence in that arena is And if our competence in that arena is And if our competence in that arena is threatened, we would all experience a threatened, we would all experience a threatened, we would all experience a narcissistic injury. And that's normal narcissistic injury. And that's normal narcissistic injury. And that's normal and healthy. Um but we are and healthy. Um but we are and healthy. Um but we are living in a narcissistic culture. I mean living in a narcissistic culture. I mean living in a narcissistic culture. I mean that's not news. This preoccupation with that's not news. This preoccupation with that's not news. This preoccupation with individual achievement and individual achievement and individual achievement and individual self-worth and individual self-worth and individual self-worth and individual self-confidence. And I think all of that is just fueled And I think all of that is just fueled And I think all of that is just fueled by social media where we're not just by social media where we're not just by social media where we're not just seeing ourselves but we're seeing ourselves but we're seeing ourselves but we're seeing people's reactions to ourselves and people's reactions to ourselves and people's reactions to ourselves and every single, you know, thing we say or every single, you know, thing we say or every single, you know, thing we say or do, you know, we get likes and this and do, you know, we get likes and this and do, you know, we get likes and this and that. It's really insidious and it that. It's really insidious and it that. It's really insidious and it contributes, I think, ultimately to a contributes, I think, ultimately to a contributes, I think, ultimately to a lot of personal shame because we're not lot of personal shame because we're not lot of personal shame because we're not really meant to be individuals bouncing really meant to be individuals bouncing really meant to be individuals bouncing around in the universe. We're social around in the universe. We're social around in the universe. We're social animals and we've we're probably animals and we've we're probably animals and we've we're probably generally happiest even for natural generally happiest even for natural generally happiest even for natural contrarians among us when we're part of contrarians among us when we're part of contrarians among us when we're part of a tribe, right? And if we do too much to a tribe, right? And if we do too much to a tribe, right? And if we do too much to kind of separate ourselves from kind of separate ourselves from kind of separate ourselves from that tribe, I think that the brain's that tribe, I think that the brain's that tribe, I think that the brain's natural and instinctive corrective natural and instinctive corrective natural and instinctive corrective mechanism against that is self-loathing mechanism against that is self-loathing mechanism against that is self-loathing and shame. So, you know, it's so ironic and shame. So, you know, it's so ironic and shame. So, you know, it's so ironic because the culture tells us if we because the culture tells us if we because the culture tells us if we just achieve more, we'll like ourselves just achieve more, we'll like ourselves just achieve more, we'll like ourselves more. But the truth is actually the more. But the truth is actually the more. But the truth is actually the opposite. that I think when people opposite. that I think when people opposite. that I think when people get these pinnacles of personal get these pinnacles of personal get these pinnacles of personal achievement, you know, you have things achievement, you know, you have things achievement, you know, you have things like the imposttor syndrome or what like the imposttor syndrome or what like the imposttor syndrome or what whatever, you know, whatever, you know, whatever, you know, where you just, you know, we're at where you just, you know, we're at where you just, you know, we're at Stanford after a lot of high achievers Stanford after a lot of high achievers Stanford after a lot of high achievers here, right? Um some phenomenal here, right? Um some phenomenal here, right? Um some phenomenal amazing people like yourself and other amazing people like yourself and other amazing people like yourself and other colleagues of mine that just I'm always colleagues of mine that just I'm always colleagues of mine that just I'm always in awe like it's just amazing like the in awe like it's just amazing like the in awe like it's just amazing like the mean is shifted so high and also people mean is shifted so high and also people mean is shifted so high and also people who have amazing sto paths to get here who have amazing sto paths to get here who have amazing sto paths to get here uh coming from very little accomplishing uh coming from very little accomplishing uh coming from very little accomplishing so much so much so much but it's also the pressure. Yeah. but it's also the pressure. Yeah. but it's also the pressure. Yeah. Right. Um, you know, the way that this Right. Um, you know, the way that this Right. Um, you know, the way that this career was described to me the day I got career was described to me the day I got career was described to me the day I got my job was one colleague of mine, the my job was one colleague of mine, the my job was one colleague of mine, the late Ben Baris said, "Welcome to late Ben Baris said, "Welcome to late Ben Baris said, "Welcome to schizophrenia because you're never going schizophrenia because you're never going schizophrenia because you're never going to be able to complete anything for to be able to complete anything for to be able to complete anything for without getting interrupted." That was without getting interrupted." That was without getting interrupted." That was partially true, although I've created partially true, although I've created partially true, although I've created buffers. And the other one, um, very buffers. And the other one, um, very buffers. And the other one, um, very successful scientist, a member of the successful scientist, a member of the successful scientist, a member of the National Academy, etc., said to me, you National Academy, etc., said to me, you National Academy, etc., said to me, you know, just remember it's pinball. You know, just remember it's pinball. You know, just remember it's pinball. You never win. never win. never win. The best you can do is just keep The best you can do is just keep The best you can do is just keep playing. Yes. playing. Yes. playing. Yes. And I thought, And I thought, And I thought, Wow. Okay. Wow. Okay. Wow. Okay. Mhm. Okay. And then you just go, Okay. And then you just go, Okay. And then you just go, right? But I think that But I think that But I think that as we achieve more, not just academics as we achieve more, not just academics as we achieve more, not just academics of course, but as anyone achieves more, of course, but as anyone achieves more, of course, but as anyone achieves more, there's the relishing and the there's the relishing and the there's the relishing and the accomplishment, there's often the desire for more, but there's often the desire for more, but there's often the desire for more, but there's also the pressure of, well, now there's also the pressure of, well, now there's also the pressure of, well, now I have to do this for the next 30 years, I have to do this for the next 30 years, I have to do this for the next 30 years, even though I love it. It's the pressure even though I love it. It's the pressure even though I love it. It's the pressure of, well, if the mountain is this high, of, well, if the mountain is this high, of, well, if the mountain is this high, then how do I get here and here and here? And how do I get here and here and here? And how do I get here and here and here? And then you start more dirt on so you can then you start more dirt on so you can then you start more dirt on so you can keep climbing and it's a lot of work. keep climbing and it's a lot of work. keep climbing and it's a lot of work. And I think that the And I think that the And I think that the um the perception of success is that um the perception of success is that um the perception of success is that there's a roar of the crowd and you there's a roar of the crowd and you there's a roar of the crowd and you cruise. You don't cruise that they just give you You don't cruise that they just give you You don't cruise that they just give you more to do or you give yourself more to more to do or you give yourself more to more to do or you give yourself more to do. Well, what I think is at least in my Well, what I think is at least in my Well, what I think is at least in my life experience and I've heard this from life experience and I've heard this from life experience and I've heard this from other people as well. You know what? other people as well. You know what? other people as well. You know what? It's that prize that we're going for It's that prize that we're going for It's that prize that we're going for that if we get it is so unsatisfying and that if we get it is so unsatisfying and that if we get it is so unsatisfying and it's the prize that we never imagined it's the prize that we never imagined it's the prize that we never imagined that we kind of go, well, how did that we kind of go, well, how did that we kind of go, well, how did that happen? But gee, you know, that feels happen? But gee, you know, that feels happen? But gee, you know, that feels good. And so I'm very, you c what's the good. And so I'm very, you c what's the good. And so I'm very, you c what's the it's like a mirage in the one case and it's like a mirage in the one case and it's like a mirage in the one case and it's like a um like a Yeah, it's on the it's like a um like a Yeah, it's on the it's like a um like a Yeah, it's on the one. It's almost like dopamine can one. It's almost like dopamine can one. It's almost like dopamine can create these miages. Yes. That there's create these miages. Yes. That there's create these miages. Yes. That there's some place. some place. some place. That's right. And if I just It's that That's right. And if I just It's that That's right. And if I just It's that pot of gold, right? If I just constant pot of gold, right? If I just constant pot of gold, right? If I just constant dopamine, right? That's right. right? That's right. right? That's right. Yeah. And and I think this, you know, this And and I think this, you know, this And and I think this, you know, this really I think is related to our really I think is related to our really I think is related to our talk our discussion earlier about this talk our discussion earlier about this talk our discussion earlier about this taking it one day at a time or paying taking it one day at a time or paying taking it one day at a time or paying attention to that, you know, 24-hour attention to that, you know, 24-hour attention to that, you know, 24-hour period in your environment. I am period in your environment. I am period in your environment. I am absolutely fascinated by the ways in absolutely fascinated by the ways in absolutely fascinated by the ways in which we accumulate success when we do which we accumulate success when we do which we accumulate success when we do that totally independent of the desire that totally independent of the desire that totally independent of the desire for success. It's really for success. It's really for success. It's really processoriented. It's like processoriented. It's like processoriented. It's like where am I today? How can I make today a where am I today? How can I make today a where am I today? How can I make today a good and meaningful day? A little bit good and meaningful day? A little bit good and meaningful day? A little bit better or as good as some other days better or as good as some other days better or as good as some other days I've had. constantly tweaking and I've had. constantly tweaking and I've had. constantly tweaking and experimenting with this experiment that experimenting with this experiment that experimenting with this experiment that we call you know our human existence. we call you know our human existence. we call you know our human existence. And when we do that in a way that's And when we do that in a way that's And when we do that in a way that's authentic and paying attention and authentic and paying attention and authentic and paying attention and valuedriven whatever our you know values valuedriven whatever our you know values valuedriven whatever our you know values are informed by it is very are informed by it is very are informed by it is very interesting how those days again interesting how those days again interesting how those days again accumulate and you find wow I guess I accumulate and you find wow I guess I accumulate and you find wow I guess I contributed something of value there but contributed something of value there but contributed something of value there but I wasn't trying to do that you know I wasn't trying to do that you know I wasn't trying to do that you know I think that's really I mean what I'm think that's really I mean what I'm think that's really I mean what I'm so amazed by is like you know 20 years so amazed by is like you know 20 years so amazed by is like you know 20 years ago when I went to Stanford medical ago when I went to Stanford medical ago when I went to Stanford medical school 25 years ago Um, you know, I just school 25 years ago Um, you know, I just school 25 years ago Um, you know, I just I was happy to just be a good doctor. I was happy to just be a good doctor. I was happy to just be a good doctor. I was like, I guess I'm just going to was like, I guess I'm just going to was like, I guess I'm just going to try to figure out how to be a good try to figure out how to be a good try to figure out how to be a good doctor and I'm here to learn that. And doctor and I'm here to learn that. And doctor and I'm here to learn that. And now I see these medical students and now I see these medical students and now I see these medical students and they're wonderful. They're brilliant and they're wonderful. They're brilliant and they're wonderful. They're brilliant and they're well, they're well intentioned, they're well, they're well intentioned, they're well, they're well intentioned, all that, but they're like, um, how can all that, but they're like, um, how can all that, but they're like, um, how can I, you know, write the great American I, you know, write the great American I, you know, write the great American novel, do my startup, go to Africa, novel, do my startup, go to Africa, novel, do my startup, go to Africa, apply for that grant. You know, it's apply for that grant. You know, it's apply for that grant. You know, it's like really, I was just trying to learn like really, I was just trying to learn like really, I was just trying to learn how to be a doctor. And it's, as you how to be a doctor. And it's, as you how to be a doctor. And it's, as you say, it's a lot of pressure on them say, it's a lot of pressure on them say, it's a lot of pressure on them and it's also kind of a weird and it's also kind of a weird and it's also kind of a weird leaprogging of the real way to leaprogging of the real way to leaprogging of the real way to accomplish something, right? accomplish something, right? accomplish something, right? By which isn't about like, oh, how can I By which isn't about like, oh, how can I By which isn't about like, oh, how can I accomplish something? It's like what can accomplish something? It's like what can accomplish something? It's like what can I do today that would be of service, I do today that would be of service, I do today that would be of service, right? And then finding that of trying right? And then finding that of trying right? And then finding that of trying to be of service, you know, and not to be of service, you know, and not to be of service, you know, and not really going for recognition can really going for recognition can really going for recognition can sometimes lead to what people call sometimes lead to what people call sometimes lead to what people call success, although that wasn't what you success, although that wasn't what you success, although that wasn't what you were aiming for. were aiming for. were aiming for. And it's all the more beautiful when And it's all the more beautiful when And it's all the more beautiful when it's not what you're aiming for. it's not what you're aiming for. it's not what you're aiming for. It's so much better. So much better. It's so much better. So much better. It's so much better. So much better. Yeah. I'm a big believer that when one Yeah. I'm a big believer that when one Yeah. I'm a big believer that when one can um align their compulsion with some can um align their compulsion with some can um align their compulsion with some greater good, greater good, greater good, yes, a service to humanity or the planet or a service to humanity or the planet or a service to humanity or the planet or animals, whatever it is, animals, whatever it is, animals, whatever it is, that um that's the that's where the that um that's the that's where the that um that's the that's where the really good stuff emerges because it really good stuff emerges because it really good stuff emerges because it there's a lot of reciprocity there. The there's a lot of reciprocity there. The there's a lot of reciprocity there. The world starts to you're supporting the world starts to you're supporting the world starts to you're supporting the world and then it starts to support you world and then it starts to support you world and then it starts to support you in a way that feels very forward in a way that feels very forward in a way that feels very forward and it comes back, right? And I mean and it comes back, right? And I mean and it comes back, right? And I mean that speaks to like your generosity to that speaks to like your generosity to that speaks to like your generosity to me visav my book and I have to say me visav my book and I have to say me visav my book and I have to say well I love the book. There's like we're well I love the book. There's like we're well I love the book. There's like we're not in a business deal folks. It's just not in a business deal folks. It's just not in a business deal folks. It's just purely that I heard Anna lecture in my purely that I heard Anna lecture in my purely that I heard Anna lecture in my course. I wanted to learn more about course. I wanted to learn more about course. I wanted to learn more about dopamine. She taught me. I asked her if dopamine. She taught me. I asked her if dopamine. She taught me. I asked her if she would come on the podcast. Turned she would come on the podcast. Turned she would come on the podcast. Turned out she wrote this amazing book. She out she wrote this amazing book. She out she wrote this amazing book. She sent me advanced copy of the book. I sent me advanced copy of the book. I sent me advanced copy of the book. I read it in one sweep. It's incredible read it in one sweep. It's incredible read it in one sweep. It's incredible and I love it. So just like the and I love it. So just like the and I love it. So just like the 8-year-old version of me uh now the 45 8-year-old version of me uh now the 45 8-year-old version of me uh now the 45 version uh of myself. I can't stop version uh of myself. I can't stop version uh of myself. I can't stop blabbing about the things I love. blabbing about the things I love. blabbing about the things I love. Well, it's awesome, but I have to say I Well, it's awesome, but I have to say I Well, it's awesome, but I have to say I have been surprised by your generosity. have been surprised by your generosity. have been surprised by your generosity. It's not something I've encountered It's not something I've encountered It's not something I've encountered frequently at Stanford. at Stanford. at Stanford. Um, which is a wonderful place, but Um, which is a wonderful place, but Um, which is a wonderful place, but there is a general sense that if I there is a general sense that if I there is a general sense that if I give away to somebody else, I've lost give away to somebody else, I've lost give away to somebody else, I've lost I've lost something. I've lost something. I've lost something. um which is not the right way to think um which is not the right way to think um which is not the right way to think about it, not how you are. And also not about it, not how you are. And also not about it, not how you are. And also not how the world works because when we give how the world works because when we give how the world works because when we give away to other people, we get back so away to other people, we get back so away to other people, we get back so much more. But it takes a long time much more. But it takes a long time much more. But it takes a long time and it might not come through that path. and it might not come through that path. and it might not come through that path. I never think about the about I never think about the about I never think about the about reciprocity. Yeah. But I was um weaned by good advisors. But I was um weaned by good advisors. But I was um weaned by good advisors. That's very nice. Yeah. That's very nice. Yeah. That's very nice. Yeah. I think I just sort of got drilled into I think I just sort of got drilled into I think I just sort of got drilled into me that the more the more you give, the me that the more the more you give, the me that the more the more you give, the better your immediate life is. better your immediate life is. better your immediate life is. Yeah. But I also don't have a long-term But I also don't have a long-term But I also don't have a long-term vision, you know. vision, you know. vision, you know. I just I'm just excited about the I just I'm just excited about the I just I'm just excited about the book. I'm excited that people are book. I'm excited that people are book. I'm excited that people are learning about the brain and dopamine. I learning about the brain and dopamine. I learning about the brain and dopamine. I have to admit, having grown up in have to admit, having grown up in have to admit, having grown up in neuroscience essentially, I did not neuroscience essentially, I did not neuroscience essentially, I did not understand that pleasure and pain were understand that pleasure and pain were understand that pleasure and pain were orchestrated the way that they are. I'm orchestrated the way that they are. I'm orchestrated the way that they are. I'm very mindful of it now. very mindful of it now. very mindful of it now. Oh, good. Um, and it's changed a number Oh, good. Um, and it's changed a number Oh, good. Um, and it's changed a number of my behaviors. I know a number of my behaviors. I know a number of my behaviors. I know a number of people are going to have questions and people are going to have questions and people are going to have questions and want to get in contact with you. You are want to get in contact with you. You are want to get in contact with you. You are not on social media. not on social media. not on social media. That's correct. Yes. That's correct. Yes. That's correct. Yes. You are true to your you are true to You are true to your you are true to You are true to your you are true to your ideology. That is that's great. your ideology. That is that's great. your ideology. That is that's great. And and the reason for that is just I And and the reason for that is just I And and the reason for that is just I wouldn't be able to control myself. I wouldn't be able to control myself. I wouldn't be able to control myself. I mean, that really would be my drug. mean, that really would be my drug. mean, that really would be my drug. People are my drug. Intimacy is my drug. People are my drug. Intimacy is my drug. People are my drug. Intimacy is my drug. And and I wouldn't be able to manage it. And and I wouldn't be able to manage it. And and I wouldn't be able to manage it. And so, just it was just easier for me And so, just it was just easier for me And so, just it was just easier for me to not do it at all rather than try to not do it at all rather than try to not do it at all rather than try to moderate it. Well, the book as you um moderate it. Well, the book as you um moderate it. Well, the book as you um mentioned before and as I can attest to mentioned before and as I can attest to mentioned before and as I can attest to is it has a certain intimacy. People get is it has a certain intimacy. People get is it has a certain intimacy. People get to know you through the book. So, to know you through the book. So, to know you through the book. So, definitely check out the book. Um if you definitely check out the book. Um if you definitely check out the book. Um if you have questions about the book, etc. You have questions about the book, etc. You have questions about the book, etc. You welcome to send them my way. I will welcome to send them my way. I will welcome to send them my way. I will buffer you from all those questions. buffer you from all those questions. buffer you from all those questions. I'll filter them. Um I'll filter them. Um I'll filter them. Um Anna, Dr. Lumpky, I should be formal. Anna, Dr. Lumpky, I should be formal. Anna, Dr. Lumpky, I should be formal. Forgive me. I've been referring to you Forgive me. I've been referring to you Forgive me. I've been referring to you the whole way through because we're the whole way through because we're the whole way through because we're colleagues. But thank you so much for colleagues. But thank you so much for colleagues. But thank you so much for sharing this information and um I know I sharing this information and um I know I sharing this information and um I know I learned a ton and I know everyone else learned a ton and I know everyone else learned a ton and I know everyone else is going to learn a lot more about is going to learn a lot more about is going to learn a lot more about addiction and the good side of dopamine. addiction and the good side of dopamine. addiction and the good side of dopamine. That's right. Thank you for having me. That's right. Thank you for having me. That's right. Thank you for having me. It's been really great to talk It's been really great to talk It's been really great to talk with you. with you. with you. Great. Thank you. Thank you for joining Great. Thank you. Thank you for joining Great. Thank you. Thank you for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Anna Leky. me for my discussion with Dr. Anna Leky. me for my discussion with Dr. Anna Leky. I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did. I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did. I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did. Please be sure to check out her new Please be sure to check out her new Please be sure to check out her new book, Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance book, Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance book, Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence. You can in the Age of Indulgence. You can in the Age of Indulgence. You can pre-order it on Amazon or any places pre-order it on Amazon or any places pre-order it on Amazon or any places where books are sold. It's an absolutely where books are sold. It's an absolutely where books are sold. It's an absolutely fascinating and engaging read all about fascinating and engaging read all about fascinating and engaging read all about addiction and dopamine. If you're addiction and dopamine. If you're addiction and dopamine. If you're learning from andor enjoying this learning from andor enjoying this learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please follow us on YouTube by podcast, please follow us on YouTube by podcast, please follow us on YouTube by subscribing to the Hubberman Lab subscribing to the Hubberman Lab subscribing to the Hubberman Lab channel. In addition, you can subscribe channel. In addition, you can subscribe channel. In addition, you can subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify. And to the podcast on Apple and Spotify. And to the podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to on Apple, you have the opportunity to on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. If leave us up to a five-star review. If leave us up to a five-star review. If you have comments or suggestions for you have comments or suggestions for you have comments or suggestions for topics for future podcasts, please put topics for future podcasts, please put topics for future podcasts, please put those in the comments section below this those in the comments section below this those in the comments section below this episode on YouTube. In addition, we have episode on YouTube. In addition, we have episode on YouTube. In addition, we have a Patreon. That's a Patreon. That's a Patreon. That's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support us at any And there you can support us at any And there you can support us at any level that you like. Please also check level that you like. Please also check level that you like. Please also check out our sponsors that we mentioned at out our sponsors that we mentioned at out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the episode. That's a the beginning of the episode. That's a the beginning of the episode. That's a terrific way to support our podcast and terrific way to support our podcast and terrific way to support our podcast and our ability to continue to bring you our ability to continue to bring you our ability to continue to bring you zero cost to consumer information about zero cost to consumer information about zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools. And science and science related tools. And science and science related tools. And last but not least, thank you for your last but not least, thank you for your last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]