Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Christopher Gardner. Dr. Christopher Gardner. Dr. Christopher Gardner. Dr. Christopher Gardner is a professor of medicine and Gardner is a professor of medicine and Gardner is a professor of medicine and director of nutrition studies at director of nutrition studies at director of nutrition studies at Stanford University. Dr. Gardner has Stanford University. Dr. Gardner has Stanford University. Dr. Gardner has conducted groundbreaking research on conducted groundbreaking research on conducted groundbreaking research on dietary interventions for over 25 years, dietary interventions for over 25 years, dietary interventions for over 25 years, focusing on what dietary interventions focusing on what dietary interventions focusing on what dietary interventions reduce weight and inflammation and for reduce weight and inflammation and for reduce weight and inflammation and for generally improving physical health. He generally improving physical health. He generally improving physical health. He is known for doing extremely is known for doing extremely is known for doing extremely well-controlled studies of nutrition well-controlled studies of nutrition well-controlled studies of nutrition where calories, macronutrients, so where calories, macronutrients, so where calories, macronutrients, so protein, fat, and carbohydrates and food protein, fat, and carbohydrates and food protein, fat, and carbohydrates and food quality are matched between the quality are matched between the quality are matched between the different groups and not simply different groups and not simply different groups and not simply comparing one intervention to the comparing one intervention to the comparing one intervention to the so-called standard American diet as so so-called standard American diet as so so-called standard American diet as so many other nutrition studies do. As many other nutrition studies do. As many other nutrition studies do. As such, his work has been published in such, his work has been published in such, his work has been published in prestigious journals such as the Journal prestigious journals such as the Journal prestigious journals such as the Journal of the American Medical Association and of the American Medical Association and of the American Medical Association and the New England Journal of Medicine. the New England Journal of Medicine. the New England Journal of Medicine. Today, we discuss several important Today, we discuss several important Today, we discuss several important nutritional controversies, and we nutritional controversies, and we nutritional controversies, and we examine what the science actually tells examine what the science actually tells examine what the science actually tells us. First, we explore protein us. First, we explore protein us. First, we explore protein requirements, how much protein we requirements, how much protein we requirements, how much protein we actually need, and do those needs change actually need, and do those needs change actually need, and do those needs change based on activity levels, age, and based on activity levels, age, and based on activity levels, age, and health status. And I should say that health status. And I should say that health status. And I should say that even though we started out with rather even though we started out with rather even though we started out with rather discrepant stance on this, we converge discrepant stance on this, we converge discrepant stance on this, we converge on an answer that I think will be on an answer that I think will be on an answer that I think will be satisfying at least to most people. and satisfying at least to most people. and satisfying at least to most people. and then you can tailor that answer to your then you can tailor that answer to your then you can tailor that answer to your unique needs. We then examine the unique needs. We then examine the unique needs. We then examine the ongoing debate between vegetarian, ongoing debate between vegetarian, ongoing debate between vegetarian, vegan, and omnivore diets for optimal vegan, and omnivore diets for optimal vegan, and omnivore diets for optimal health. And we dive into whether plant health. And we dive into whether plant health. And we dive into whether plant proteins are truly inferior to animal proteins are truly inferior to animal proteins are truly inferior to animal proteins as is often claimed. We also proteins as is often claimed. We also proteins as is often claimed. We also discuss the role of fiber in the diet discuss the role of fiber in the diet discuss the role of fiber in the diet and the emerging science on fermented and the emerging science on fermented and the emerging science on fermented foods and their powerful foods and their powerful foods and their powerful anti-inflammatory effects. Throughout anti-inflammatory effects. Throughout anti-inflammatory effects. Throughout today's conversation, we focus on food today's conversation, we focus on food today's conversation, we focus on food quality and not just macronutrient quality and not just macronutrient quality and not just macronutrient ratios or calories and how those can ratios or calories and how those can ratios or calories and how those can impact health outcomes. As you'll hear, impact health outcomes. As you'll hear, impact health outcomes. As you'll hear, Dr. Gardner and I don't agree on every Dr. Gardner and I don't agree on every Dr. Gardner and I don't agree on every nutritional recommendation, particularly nutritional recommendation, particularly nutritional recommendation, particularly how much protein people need and the how much protein people need and the how much protein people need and the discrepancy in views about animal-based discrepancy in views about animal-based discrepancy in views about animal-based proteins versus plant-based proteins. proteins versus plant-based proteins. proteins versus plant-based proteins. But by the end, I do believe that we But by the end, I do believe that we But by the end, I do believe that we converge on themes that everyone, converge on themes that everyone, converge on themes that everyone, regardless of their dietary preference, regardless of their dietary preference, regardless of their dietary preference, ought to be able to benefit from. As ought to be able to benefit from. As ought to be able to benefit from. As always, we provide you with always, we provide you with always, we provide you with science-based, actionable information science-based, actionable information science-based, actionable information that you can apply to your daily life. that you can apply to your daily life. that you can apply to your daily life. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer effort to bring zerocost to consumer effort to bring zerocost to consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this episode keeping with that theme, this episode keeping with that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my conversation with Dr. Christopher conversation with Dr. Christopher conversation with Dr. Christopher Gardner. Professor Christopher Gardner. Professor Christopher Gardner. Professor Christopher Gardner. So nice to meet you and to have you So nice to meet you and to have you So nice to meet you and to have you here. Happy to be here off Stanford here. Happy to be here off Stanford here. Happy to be here off Stanford campus talking to you. That's right. campus talking to you. That's right. campus talking to you. That's right. Even though we've both been there a very Even though we've both been there a very Even though we've both been there a very long time, it is a big place and so we long time, it is a big place and so we long time, it is a big place and so we haven't had the chance to interact haven't had the chance to interact haven't had the chance to interact directly, but of course I know who you directly, but of course I know who you directly, but of course I know who you are and I'm very familiar with much of are and I'm very familiar with much of are and I'm very familiar with much of your work, but you'll tell us about more your work, but you'll tell us about more your work, but you'll tell us about more of it today. To kick things of it today. To kick things of it today. To kick things off, I want to know is it possible that off, I want to know is it possible that off, I want to know is it possible that even though all human beings are, I even though all human beings are, I even though all human beings are, I presume, the same species, that some of presume, the same species, that some of presume, the same species, that some of us might thrive perhaps on one form of us might thrive perhaps on one form of us might thrive perhaps on one form of diet and others might thrive perhaps on diet and others might thrive perhaps on diet and others might thrive perhaps on a different form of diet. In other a different form of diet. In other a different form of diet. In other words, how do we justify talking about words, how do we justify talking about words, how do we justify talking about the quote unquote best diet for a given the quote unquote best diet for a given the quote unquote best diet for a given age, demographic, level of activity, age, demographic, level of activity, age, demographic, level of activity, etc. If one were to look at social media or If one were to look at social media or If one were to look at social media or even just the history of nutrition in even just the history of nutrition in even just the history of nutrition in this country, one can almost reflexively this country, one can almost reflexively this country, one can almost reflexively lean on the idea that you know maybe we lean on the idea that you know maybe we lean on the idea that you know maybe we all need something different and some all need something different and some all need something different and some experimentation and discovery is needed. experimentation and discovery is needed. experimentation and discovery is needed. So do we need different diets or is So do we need different diets or is So do we need different diets or is there a best diet? So there isn't one there a best diet? So there isn't one there a best diet? So there isn't one best diet and I don't think we need best diet and I don't think we need best diet and I don't think we need different diets. We're just incredibly different diets. We're just incredibly different diets. We're just incredibly resilient and we can do crazy wild resilient and we can do crazy wild resilient and we can do crazy wild things. So the way I start my human things. So the way I start my human things. So the way I start my human nutrition class at Berkeley with nutrition class at Berkeley with nutrition class at Berkeley with students is in the very first class I students is in the very first class I students is in the very first class I point out the Taraohara Indians who are point out the Taraohara Indians who are point out the Taraohara Indians who are like worldclass ultramarathon runners like worldclass ultramarathon runners like worldclass ultramarathon runners mostly corn and beans like total carb. mostly corn and beans like total carb. mostly corn and beans like total carb. And then you can look at the Alaskan And then you can look at the Alaskan And then you can look at the Alaskan Inuits who for centuries lived on whale Inuits who for centuries lived on whale Inuits who for centuries lived on whale and blubber and polar bear and things and blubber and polar bear and things and blubber and polar bear and things like that. So that was like total fat like that. So that was like total fat like that. So that was like total fat and total carb and they thrived. there's and total carb and they thrived. there's and total carb and they thrived. there's really no diabetes, no heart disease, no really no diabetes, no heart disease, no really no diabetes, no heart disease, no cancer, but eating all their local cancer, but eating all their local cancer, but eating all their local indigenous diets. You know, Michael indigenous diets. You know, Michael indigenous diets. You know, Michael Pollen has a great quote on this, the Pollen has a great quote on this, the Pollen has a great quote on this, the author of Omnivore's Dilemma. And he author of Omnivore's Dilemma. And he author of Omnivore's Dilemma. And he says, you know, if you really look says, you know, if you really look says, you know, if you really look around the world, it is amazing how much around the world, it is amazing how much around the world, it is amazing how much variety there is in a diet that people variety there is in a diet that people variety there is in a diet that people can thrive on, except the one that can thrive on, except the one that can thrive on, except the one that doesn't work is the American diet, the doesn't work is the American diet, the doesn't work is the American diet, the standard American diet, because it's standard American diet, because it's standard American diet, because it's full of processed, packaged food. And full of processed, packaged food. And full of processed, packaged food. And the sad thing is that the Tara Indians the sad thing is that the Tara Indians the sad thing is that the Tara Indians now eat a lot of crap. and the Alaskan now eat a lot of crap. and the Alaskan now eat a lot of crap. and the Alaskan people and the Inuit now have a lot of people and the Inuit now have a lot of people and the Inuit now have a lot of packaged processed food shipped in and packaged processed food shipped in and packaged processed food shipped in and the world's all sort of um centering on the world's all sort of um centering on the world's all sort of um centering on an unhealthy diet that is convenient and an unhealthy diet that is convenient and an unhealthy diet that is convenient and it's inexpensive and it's available and it's inexpensive and it's available and it's inexpensive and it's available and it's addictively tasty and it's addictively tasty and it's addictively tasty and it's problematic. So, no, there is not one problematic. So, no, there is not one problematic. So, no, there is not one best diet. It's incredible how resilient best diet. It's incredible how resilient best diet. It's incredible how resilient we are. So, I'd love to get into that. we are. So, I'd love to get into that. we are. So, I'd love to get into that. Great. Well, there's so many facets to Great. Well, there's so many facets to Great. Well, there's so many facets to what we call diet or nutrition. You what we call diet or nutrition. You what we call diet or nutrition. You know, there's the macronutrients, know, there's the macronutrients, know, there's the macronutrients, protein, fats, and carbohydrates. The protein, fats, and carbohydrates. The protein, fats, and carbohydrates. The micronutrients, there's how many micronutrients, there's how many micronutrients, there's how many calories are in there, there's how it calories are in there, there's how it calories are in there, there's how it was sourced, there's how that sourcing was sourced, there's how that sourcing was sourced, there's how that sourcing impacts the environment. There just so impacts the environment. There just so impacts the environment. There just so many lenses to look at this issue many lenses to look at this issue many lenses to look at this issue through. I would like to know because of through. I would like to know because of through. I would like to know because of what you just told us that people prior what you just told us that people prior what you just told us that people prior to food making its way around the world to food making its way around the world to food making its way around the world from different cultures to other from different cultures to other from different cultures to other cultures, food largely centered on what cultures, food largely centered on what cultures, food largely centered on what was grown and hunted and harvested was grown and hunted and harvested was grown and hunted and harvested locally. Yep. Is it possible that even locally. Yep. Is it possible that even locally. Yep. Is it possible that even though people have dispersed across the though people have dispersed across the though people have dispersed across the planet, sort of going back to this first planet, sort of going back to this first planet, sort of going back to this first question, that there is a um quote question, that there is a um quote question, that there is a um quote unquote best diet, meaning not that we unquote best diet, meaning not that we unquote best diet, meaning not that we can adapt to any diet, but that for some can adapt to any diet, but that for some can adapt to any diet, but that for some of us high meat, high fat, maybe even of us high meat, high fat, maybe even of us high meat, high fat, maybe even high, let's say high protein, high high, let's say high protein, high high, let's say high protein, high fiber, just to make it a little bit um fiber, just to make it a little bit um fiber, just to make it a little bit um less extreme. High protein, high fiber, less extreme. High protein, high fiber, less extreme. High protein, high fiber, low starch is better. And in for people low starch is better. And in for people low starch is better. And in for people that are descendants of people with that are descendants of people with that are descendants of people with genes from another part of the genes from another part of the genes from another part of the world that um high starch, high fiber, world that um high starch, high fiber, world that um high starch, high fiber, lower protein would be advisable. For lower protein would be advisable. For lower protein would be advisable. For me, the best way to answer that is me, the best way to answer that is me, the best way to answer that is people come up to me quite often and say people come up to me quite often and say people come up to me quite often and say something like, "Professor Gardner, I something like, "Professor Gardner, I something like, "Professor Gardner, I know you're all into whole food know you're all into whole food know you're all into whole food plant-based diets, and I was vegan. I plant-based diets, and I was vegan. I plant-based diets, and I was vegan. I was vegetarian. I was trying that, and was vegetarian. I was trying that, and was vegetarian. I was trying that, and uh I had some health issues, and I uh I had some health issues, and I uh I had some health issues, and I switched to be more fat and more meat." switched to be more fat and more meat." switched to be more fat and more meat." And I'm almost embarrassed to be And I'm almost embarrassed to be And I'm almost embarrassed to be asking you this cuz my doctor told me I asking you this cuz my doctor told me I asking you this cuz my doctor told me I shouldn't do this either, but all my shouldn't do this either, but all my shouldn't do this either, but all my health issues have cleaned up. I'm health issues have cleaned up. I'm health issues have cleaned up. I'm looking really good. And I have a whole looking really good. And I have a whole looking really good. And I have a whole another cadre of folks who were eating a another cadre of folks who were eating a another cadre of folks who were eating a lot of meat and a lot of fat. And they lot of meat and a lot of fat. And they lot of meat and a lot of fat. And they said, "I went vegan. I went low-fat said, "I went vegan. I went low-fat said, "I went vegan. I went low-fat vegan." And all my health issues cleaned vegan." And all my health issues cleaned vegan." And all my health issues cleaned up and I'm much better now than I was up and I'm much better now than I was up and I'm much better now than I was before. And it's really hard to look before. And it's really hard to look before. And it's really hard to look someone in the eye who's doing something someone in the eye who's doing something someone in the eye who's doing something wildly different and say, "Well, you're wildly different and say, "Well, you're wildly different and say, "Well, you're wrong. You're lying." I mean clearly wrong. You're lying." I mean clearly wrong. You're lying." I mean clearly these people were really probing for the these people were really probing for the these people were really probing for the diet that was best for them and they diet that was best for them and they diet that was best for them and they were following some advice that they were following some advice that they were following some advice that they thought was good and they kept they thought was good and they kept they thought was good and they kept following it and it wasn't working. They following it and it wasn't working. They following it and it wasn't working. They tried something counter to that and it tried something counter to that and it tried something counter to that and it worked better and they're trying to worked better and they're trying to worked better and they're trying to rationalize that and deal with that. So rationalize that and deal with that. So rationalize that and deal with that. So I am sure that there are different diets I am sure that there are different diets I am sure that there are different diets for different people. Um but at the end for different people. Um but at the end for different people. Um but at the end of the day it's just not the packaged of the day it's just not the packaged of the day it's just not the packaged processed food that the whole world is processed food that the whole world is processed food that the whole world is leaning towards. leaning towards. leaning towards. I really appreciate that answer because I really appreciate that answer because I really appreciate that answer because uh as somebody who's tried various uh as somebody who's tried various uh as somebody who's tried various diets, I never had any serious health diets, I never had any serious health diets, I never had any serious health issues, thank goodness. Um but I know issues, thank goodness. Um but I know issues, thank goodness. Um but I know what I thrive on. I'm an omnivore. Um what I thrive on. I'm an omnivore. Um what I thrive on. I'm an omnivore. Um not that people need to know this, but I not that people need to know this, but I not that people need to know this, but I like to eat meat, fish, chicken, eggs, like to eat meat, fish, chicken, eggs, like to eat meat, fish, chicken, eggs, lots of fruits and vegetables. I eat lots of fruits and vegetables. I eat lots of fruits and vegetables. I eat very little starch. I wouldn't say I'm very little starch. I wouldn't say I'm very little starch. I wouldn't say I'm low carb because I eat a lot of fruits low carb because I eat a lot of fruits low carb because I eat a lot of fruits and vegetables um and some limited and vegetables um and some limited and vegetables um and some limited amounts of starch. But having tried many amounts of starch. But having tried many amounts of starch. But having tried many different things including many different things including many different things including vegetarian diet, lactovo vegetarian many vegetarian diet, lactovo vegetarian many vegetarian diet, lactovo vegetarian many years ago and more extreme keto type years ago and more extreme keto type years ago and more extreme keto type diets that uh lean more heavily on meat diets that uh lean more heavily on meat diets that uh lean more heavily on meat as opposed to the way perhaps keto as opposed to the way perhaps keto as opposed to the way perhaps keto should be done which we'll talk about. should be done which we'll talk about. should be done which we'll talk about. I've just found this works really well I've just found this works really well I've just found this works really well for me. So I fully embrace the idea that for me. So I fully embrace the idea that for me. So I fully embrace the idea that different people thrive on different people thrive on different people thrive on different diets. How is it that's true? Meaning do diets. How is it that's true? Meaning do diets. How is it that's true? Meaning do you think this is because of genetic uh you think this is because of genetic uh you think this is because of genetic uh you know our inheritance of genes from you know our inheritance of genes from you know our inheritance of genes from people that you know came from different people that you know came from different people that you know came from different parts of the world and to what extent parts of the world and to what extent parts of the world and to what extent can a different diet pass through can a different diet pass through can a different diet pass through generations have epigenetic effects? generations have epigenetic effects? generations have epigenetic effects? Maybe I thrive on that and somebody else Maybe I thrive on that and somebody else Maybe I thrive on that and somebody else thrives on something different because thrives on something different because thrives on something different because of where their ancestors are from and of where their ancestors are from and of where their ancestors are from and what they've been eating for the last what they've been eating for the last what they've been eating for the last maybe even 300 years. That's not long maybe even 300 years. That's not long maybe even 300 years. That's not long for a an evolutionary event to take for a an evolutionary event to take for a an evolutionary event to take place but some things can happen in 300 place but some things can happen in 300 place but some things can happen in 300 years. So really the only classic years. So really the only classic years. So really the only classic example that's well established is example that's well established is example that's well established is lactose intolerance and lactase and lactose intolerance and lactase and lactose intolerance and lactase and northern Europeans developing the ability to Europeans developing the ability to Europeans developing the ability to continue making the enzyme lactase to continue making the enzyme lactase to continue making the enzyme lactase to break apart the molecule lactose well break apart the molecule lactose well break apart the molecule lactose well into adult life. So the majority of the into adult life. So the majority of the into adult life. So the majority of the world is lactose intolerant. And if we world is lactose intolerant. And if we world is lactose intolerant. And if we could just do that for a minute. So when could just do that for a minute. So when could just do that for a minute. So when you're a newborn infant and you're a newborn infant and you're a newborn infant and you're having breast milk you are getting having breast milk you are getting having breast milk you are getting lactose in your mom's milk. And then lactose in your mom's milk. And then lactose in your mom's milk. And then once you are weaned off the breast, most once you are weaned off the breast, most once you are weaned off the breast, most people in the world stop making lactase, people in the world stop making lactase, people in the world stop making lactase, that enzyme. And so I'm sure everybody that enzyme. And so I'm sure everybody that enzyme. And so I'm sure everybody listening to this knows someone who's listening to this knows someone who's listening to this knows someone who's lactose intolerant and either buys lactose intolerant and either buys lactose intolerant and either buys lactose lactase milk or avoids milk and lactose lactase milk or avoids milk and lactose lactase milk or avoids milk and avoids dairy because of the GI avoids dairy because of the GI avoids dairy because of the GI disorders. So, it really is fascinating disorders. So, it really is fascinating disorders. So, it really is fascinating that some northern Europeans at some that some northern Europeans at some that some northern Europeans at some point had enough cows and dairy and ate point had enough cows and dairy and ate point had enough cows and dairy and ate it that they developed the ability to it that they developed the ability to it that they developed the ability to keep making this enzyme later in life, keep making this enzyme later in life, keep making this enzyme later in life, whereas the rest of the planet didn't. whereas the rest of the planet didn't. whereas the rest of the planet didn't. And it's not really hard cut and dry. And it's not really hard cut and dry. And it's not really hard cut and dry. So, there's actually people who are So, there's actually people who are So, there's actually people who are lactose intolerant who can still lactose intolerant who can still lactose intolerant who can still tolerate some milk. There's a lot of tolerate some milk. There's a lot of tolerate some milk. There's a lot of people who can't digest it. And to be people who can't digest it. And to be people who can't digest it. And to be honest, it doesn't really make much honest, it doesn't really make much honest, it doesn't really make much sense. If you look at mammals around the sense. If you look at mammals around the sense. If you look at mammals around the planet, all the mammals, right, mamalian planet, all the mammals, right, mamalian planet, all the mammals, right, mamalian breast tissue, bre breast milk. So, breast tissue, bre breast milk. So, breast tissue, bre breast milk. So, they're all drinking the mom's breast they're all drinking the mom's breast they're all drinking the mom's breast milk until they get weaned off for food. milk until they get weaned off for food. milk until they get weaned off for food. No other mammal on the planet drinks the No other mammal on the planet drinks the No other mammal on the planet drinks the breast milk of another mammal to thrive breast milk of another mammal to thrive breast milk of another mammal to thrive later in life. So, humans are the only later in life. So, humans are the only later in life. So, humans are the only ones who do it. It's really mostly cow ones who do it. It's really mostly cow ones who do it. It's really mostly cow milk. And it's kind of faking bizarre, milk. And it's kind of faking bizarre, milk. And it's kind of faking bizarre, but it works for a lot of people. And so but it works for a lot of people. And so but it works for a lot of people. And so that is the classic example of so sort that is the classic example of so sort that is the classic example of so sort of overcoming genes over the course of overcoming genes over the course of overcoming genes over the course of evolution. But I don't know many like evolution. But I don't know many like evolution. But I don't know many like that. So I don't have a better example that. So I don't have a better example that. So I don't have a better example of can people who evolved from Africans of can people who evolved from Africans of can people who evolved from Africans versus Asians versus Scandinavians do versus Asians versus Scandinavians do versus Asians versus Scandinavians do anything different than that? That's the anything different than that? That's the anything different than that? That's the only example I've got, but could be only example I've got, but could be only example I've got, but could be possible. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. Eight makes smart mattress covers with Eight makes smart mattress covers with Eight makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking cooling, heating, and sleep tracking cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. Now, I've spoken before on capacity. Now, I've spoken before on capacity. Now, I've spoken before on this podcast about the critical need for this podcast about the critical need for this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality us to get adequate amounts of quality us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each and every night. Now, one of sleep each and every night. Now, one of sleep each and every night. Now, one of the best ways to ensure a great night's the best ways to ensure a great night's the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure that the temperature sleep is to ensure that the temperature sleep is to ensure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. of your sleeping environment is correct. of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and And that's because in order to fall and And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body stay deeply asleep, your body stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop about 1 temperature actually has to drop about 1 temperature actually has to drop about 1 to three degrees. And in order to wake to three degrees. And in order to wake to three degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your up feeling refreshed and energized, your up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. Now, I according to your unique needs. Now, I according to your unique needs. Now, I find that extremely useful because I find that extremely useful because I find that extremely useful because I like to make the bed really cool at the like to make the bed really cool at the like to make the bed really cool at the beginning of the night, even colder in beginning of the night, even colder in beginning of the night, even colder in the middle of the night, and warm as I the middle of the night, and warm as I the middle of the night, and warm as I wake up. That's what gives me the most wake up. That's what gives me the most wake up. That's what gives me the most slowwave sleep and rapid eye movement slowwave sleep and rapid eye movement slowwave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. And I know that because Eightleep sleep. And I know that because Eightleep sleep. And I know that because Eightleep has a great sleep tracker that tells me has a great sleep tracker that tells me has a great sleep tracker that tells me how well I've slept and the types of how well I've slept and the types of how well I've slept and the types of sleep that I'm getting throughout the sleep that I'm getting throughout the sleep that I'm getting throughout the night. I've been sleeping on an eightle night. I've been sleeping on an eightle night. I've been sleeping on an eightle mattress cover for 4 years now and it mattress cover for 4 years now and it mattress cover for 4 years now and it has completely transformed and improved has completely transformed and improved has completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. Their latest the quality of my sleep. Their latest the quality of my sleep. Their latest model, the Pod 4 Ultra, also has snoring model, the Pod 4 Ultra, also has snoring model, the Pod 4 Ultra, also has snoring detection that will automatically lift detection that will automatically lift detection that will automatically lift your head a few degrees in order to your head a few degrees in order to your head a few degrees in order to improve your airflow and stop you from improve your airflow and stop you from improve your airflow and stop you from snoring. If you decide to try eight, you snoring. If you decide to try eight, you snoring. If you decide to try eight, you have 30 days to try it at home and you have 30 days to try it at home and you have 30 days to try it at home and you can return it if you don't like it, no can return it if you don't like it, no can return it if you don't like it, no questions asked. But I'm sure that questions asked. But I'm sure that questions asked. But I'm sure that you'll love it. Go to you'll love it. Go to you'll love it. Go to eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 off your Pod 4 Ultra. Eightlee ships to off your Pod 4 Ultra. Eightlee ships to off your Pod 4 Ultra. Eightlee ships to many countries worldwide, including many countries worldwide, including many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 off your Pod 4 Ultra. Today's episode is off your Pod 4 Ultra. Today's episode is off your Pod 4 Ultra. Today's episode is also brought to us by Matina. Matina also brought to us by Matina. Matina also brought to us by Matina. Matina makes looseleaf and readyto drink yerba makes looseleaf and readyto drink yerba makes looseleaf and readyto drink yerba mate. I've often discussed Yerba's mate. I've often discussed Yerba's mate. I've often discussed Yerba's benefits such as regulating blood sugar, benefits such as regulating blood sugar, benefits such as regulating blood sugar, its high antioxidant content, and the its high antioxidant content, and the its high antioxidant content, and the ways that it can improve digestion. It ways that it can improve digestion. It ways that it can improve digestion. It also may have possible neuroprotective also may have possible neuroprotective also may have possible neuroprotective effects. It's for those reasons and the effects. It's for those reasons and the effects. It's for those reasons and the fact that yerba mate provides, in my fact that yerba mate provides, in my fact that yerba mate provides, in my opinion, the most even and steady rise opinion, the most even and steady rise opinion, the most even and steady rise in energy and focus with no crash. The in energy and focus with no crash. The in energy and focus with no crash. The yerba mate has long been my preferred yerba mate has long been my preferred yerba mate has long been my preferred source of caffeine. I also drink yerba source of caffeine. I also drink yerba source of caffeine. I also drink yerba mate because I love the taste. And while mate because I love the taste. And while mate because I love the taste. And while there are a lot of different yerba mate there are a lot of different yerba mate there are a lot of different yerba mate drinks out there, my absolute favorite drinks out there, my absolute favorite drinks out there, my absolute favorite is Matina. I'm excited to share that is Matina. I'm excited to share that is Matina. I'm excited to share that Matina has recently launched a series of Matina has recently launched a series of Matina has recently launched a series of new flavors of their cold brew all zero new flavors of their cold brew all zero new flavors of their cold brew all zero sugar yerba mate. There's a raspberry sugar yerba mate. There's a raspberry sugar yerba mate. There's a raspberry flavor, there's a mango flavor, there's flavor, there's a mango flavor, there's flavor, there's a mango flavor, there's a mint flavor, there's a lemon flavor a mint flavor, there's a lemon flavor a mint flavor, there's a lemon flavor and a peach flavor. And they are and a peach flavor. And they are and a peach flavor. And they are absolutely incredible. If I had to pick absolutely incredible. If I had to pick absolutely incredible. If I had to pick one that's my absolute favorite, it one that's my absolute favorite, it one that's my absolute favorite, it would probably be the mango or the would probably be the mango or the would probably be the mango or the raspberry. But frankly, I cannot pick raspberry. But frankly, I cannot pick raspberry. But frankly, I cannot pick just one. And I end up having basically just one. And I end up having basically just one. And I end up having basically one of each every single day. Again, all one of each every single day. Again, all one of each every single day. Again, all of these flavors are made with the of these flavors are made with the of these flavors are made with the highest quality ingredients, all highest quality ingredients, all highest quality ingredients, all organic, and again, all zero sugar. If organic, and again, all zero sugar. If organic, and again, all zero sugar. If you'd like to try Matina, you can go to you'd like to try Matina, you can go to you'd like to try Matina, you can go to drinkmatina.com/huberman. Again, that's drinkmatina.com/huberman. Again, that's drinkmatina.com/huberman. Again, that's drinkmatina.com/huberman. What do you say to all these people who What do you say to all these people who What do you say to all these people who have uh wheat allergies or gluten have uh wheat allergies or gluten have uh wheat allergies or gluten reactions? And and I want to be really reactions? And and I want to be really reactions? And and I want to be really careful here and distinguish between careful here and distinguish between careful here and distinguish between full-blown um wheat or gluten intolerant full-blown um wheat or gluten intolerant full-blown um wheat or gluten intolerant versus people that just don't feel good versus people that just don't feel good versus people that just don't feel good when they do this. I recently took a when they do this. I recently took a when they do this. I recently took a blood test that revealed to me I blood test that revealed to me I blood test that revealed to me I have a mild wheat um I wouldn't say have a mild wheat um I wouldn't say have a mild wheat um I wouldn't say allergic reaction because they didn't do allergic reaction because they didn't do allergic reaction because they didn't do the allergy test, but I have the allergy test, but I have the allergy test, but I have antibodies against it. Um and dairy. And antibodies against it. Um and dairy. And antibodies against it. Um and dairy. And it's true. I don't like drinking milk. it's true. I don't like drinking milk. it's true. I don't like drinking milk. It makes me feel lousy. to get all, you It makes me feel lousy. to get all, you It makes me feel lousy. to get all, you know, um, mucousy and, uh, and puffy know, um, mucousy and, uh, and puffy know, um, mucousy and, uh, and puffy and, um, but I like some sourdough and, um, but I like some sourdough and, um, but I like some sourdough bread. I'm sure there's wheat and a lot bread. I'm sure there's wheat and a lot bread. I'm sure there's wheat and a lot of sourdough bread out there. Some, yes, of sourdough bread out there. Some, yes, of sourdough bread out there. Some, yes, some, no. And I can eat parmesan cheese some, no. And I can eat parmesan cheese some, no. And I can eat parmesan cheese and feel fine. But I know people that and feel fine. But I know people that and feel fine. But I know people that even though they're not clinically even though they're not clinically even though they're not clinically diagnosed as gluten intolerant, they diagnosed as gluten intolerant, they diagnosed as gluten intolerant, they feel absolutely dreadful when they have feel absolutely dreadful when they have feel absolutely dreadful when they have any kind of gluten. So, what we're any kind of gluten. So, what we're any kind of gluten. So, what we're trying to do here, I guess, is um trying to do here, I guess, is um trying to do here, I guess, is um there's the science, uh, which we'll get there's the science, uh, which we'll get there's the science, uh, which we'll get into, and then there's people's into, and then there's people's into, and then there's people's experience. Yeah. And as you pointed experience. Yeah. And as you pointed experience. Yeah. And as you pointed out, people can't get around their own out, people can't get around their own out, people can't get around their own experience, and they probably shouldn't, experience, and they probably shouldn't, experience, and they probably shouldn't, right? I think, um, the whole world is right? I think, um, the whole world is right? I think, um, the whole world is done listening to people tell them that done listening to people tell them that done listening to people tell them that their experience isn't real, right? And their experience isn't real, right? And their experience isn't real, right? And that's what a lot of I think that the that's what a lot of I think that the that's what a lot of I think that the um, confusion in the world of nutrition um, confusion in the world of nutrition um, confusion in the world of nutrition is about. Totally respect that. Let me is about. Totally respect that. Let me is about. Totally respect that. Let me do the weed thing, but let me go back to do the weed thing, but let me go back to do the weed thing, but let me go back to lactose intolerance for just a minute. lactose intolerance for just a minute. lactose intolerance for just a minute. So, I had an opportunity to work with a So, I had an opportunity to work with a So, I had an opportunity to work with a guy who um raises uh raw milk products guy who um raises uh raw milk products guy who um raises uh raw milk products in California, and he was convinced this in California, and he was convinced this in California, and he was convinced this raw milk would heal lots of people of raw milk would heal lots of people of raw milk would heal lots of people of lots of things. Define raw milk. No lots of things. Define raw milk. No lots of things. Define raw milk. No pasteurization. Yeah. No pasteurization, pasteurization. Yeah. No pasteurization, pasteurization. Yeah. No pasteurization, which drives might as well just be which drives might as well just be which drives might as well just be drinking out of the uh cow. Yeah. Which drinking out of the uh cow. Yeah. Which drinking out of the uh cow. Yeah. Which drives some health professionals crazy drives some health professionals crazy drives some health professionals crazy because at a large scale, you could get because at a large scale, you could get because at a large scale, you could get lististeria and other issues from this lististeria and other issues from this lististeria and other issues from this if the whole thing wasn't properly if the whole thing wasn't properly if the whole thing wasn't properly hygienic. Okay. So anyway, some of his hygienic. Okay. So anyway, some of his hygienic. Okay. So anyway, some of his claims seemed outlandish and quite a few claims seemed outlandish and quite a few claims seemed outlandish and quite a few of them would be hard to test, like of them would be hard to test, like of them would be hard to test, like cancer or some chronic disease. You'd cancer or some chronic disease. You'd cancer or some chronic disease. You'd have to wait decades to see that happen. have to wait decades to see that happen. have to wait decades to see that happen. But at one point he said, "And raw milk But at one point he said, "And raw milk But at one point he said, "And raw milk cures lactose intolerance." And I cures lactose intolerance." And I cures lactose intolerance." And I thought that seems faking wild. So I thought that seems faking wild. So I thought that seems faking wild. So I mean, how would that happen? And for me, mean, how would that happen? And for me, mean, how would that happen? And for me, so I am a nutrition interventionist. so I am a nutrition interventionist. so I am a nutrition interventionist. That is like my superpower. I love That is like my superpower. I love That is like my superpower. I love designing trials to answer questions, designing trials to answer questions, designing trials to answer questions, but usually in a couple months or a but usually in a couple months or a but usually in a couple months or a year, not in 40 or 50 years. And I year, not in 40 or 50 years. And I year, not in 40 or 50 years. And I thought of all the claims that you have, thought of all the claims that you have, thought of all the claims that you have, lactose intolerance sets on in hours. So lactose intolerance sets on in hours. So lactose intolerance sets on in hours. So if you wanted to know if this worked or if you wanted to know if this worked or if you wanted to know if this worked or not, you'd know right away. So I said, I not, you'd know right away. So I said, I not, you'd know right away. So I said, I will do this. This is like the most will do this. This is like the most will do this. This is like the most inexpensive study that I have ever run. inexpensive study that I have ever run. inexpensive study that I have ever run. I'm going to find people who are lactose I'm going to find people who are lactose I'm going to find people who are lactose intolerant and I'm going to give them intolerant and I'm going to give them intolerant and I'm going to give them your raw milk, some commercial milk, and your raw milk, some commercial milk, and your raw milk, some commercial milk, and soy milk as sort of an extra control soy milk as sort of an extra control soy milk as sort of an extra control here. And all we're going to test for is here. And all we're going to test for is here. And all we're going to test for is symptoms. And we actually had to have symptoms. And we actually had to have symptoms. And we actually had to have some focus groups up front. Uh, most of some focus groups up front. Uh, most of some focus groups up front. Uh, most of my studies are done in a way that I my studies are done in a way that I my studies are done in a way that I think this is going to help you, but I'm think this is going to help you, but I'm think this is going to help you, but I'm not sure. In this particular study, if not sure. In this particular study, if not sure. In this particular study, if you're going to do all three harms, I you're going to do all three harms, I you're going to do all three harms, I know I'm going to hurt you. You're know I'm going to hurt you. You're know I'm going to hurt you. You're lactose intolerant. I'm going to ask you lactose intolerant. I'm going to ask you lactose intolerant. I'm going to ask you to drink cow's milk. I need you to have to drink cow's milk. I need you to have to drink cow's milk. I need you to have GI distress so that I can see if on the GI distress so that I can see if on the GI distress so that I can see if on the raw milk you don't, and compared to the raw milk you don't, and compared to the raw milk you don't, and compared to the soy milk, you won't. So, in our focus soy milk, you won't. So, in our focus soy milk, you won't. So, in our focus groups, we asked I usually don't pay groups, we asked I usually don't pay groups, we asked I usually don't pay people to be in our studies. I usually people to be in our studies. I usually people to be in our studies. I usually give them all the results of the give them all the results of the give them all the results of the studies, and they like that. But I said, studies, and they like that. But I said, studies, and they like that. But I said, "I'm going to hurt you. So, how much "I'm going to hurt you. So, how much "I'm going to hurt you. So, how much would I have to pay you?" And they said, would I have to pay you?" And they said, would I have to pay you?" And they said, "Yeah." And I said, "How much?" And they "Yeah." And I said, "How much?" And they "Yeah." And I said, "How much?" And they said, 'Well, 250 bucks would be okay, said, 'Well, 250 bucks would be okay, said, 'Well, 250 bucks would be okay, depending on how long this thing is. And depending on how long this thing is. And depending on how long this thing is. And we sort of talked about the duration. we sort of talked about the duration. we sort of talked about the duration. And it had an interesting design. So, And it had an interesting design. So, And it had an interesting design. So, there's a standard test for lactose there's a standard test for lactose there's a standard test for lactose intolerance. It's objective. It's a intolerance. It's objective. It's a intolerance. It's objective. It's a hydrogen breath test. And so you have to hydrogen breath test. And so you have to hydrogen breath test. And so you have to drink 16 ounces of milk in one setting drink 16 ounces of milk in one setting drink 16 ounces of milk in one setting fairly fast. And then you every half fairly fast. And then you every half fairly fast. And then you every half hour breathe into a tube, capture the hour breathe into a tube, capture the hour breathe into a tube, capture the gas, and put it into this breathalyzer. gas, and put it into this breathalyzer. gas, and put it into this breathalyzer. And it'll tell you if there's hydrogen And it'll tell you if there's hydrogen And it'll tell you if there's hydrogen there. And if you have not digested the there. And if you have not digested the there. And if you have not digested the lactose, it'll go to your colon. The lactose, it'll go to your colon. The lactose, it'll go to your colon. The microbes will eat it up. It'll generate microbes will eat it up. It'll generate microbes will eat it up. It'll generate hydrogen. You'll absorb that and you'll hydrogen. You'll absorb that and you'll hydrogen. You'll absorb that and you'll exhale it. So, it's a very objective exhale it. So, it's a very objective exhale it. So, it's a very objective test of whether you are or aren't test of whether you are or aren't test of whether you are or aren't digesting your digesting your digesting your lactose. So, they said, "Yeah, we would lactose. So, they said, "Yeah, we would lactose. So, they said, "Yeah, we would do this if the dose after we did the do this if the dose after we did the do this if the dose after we did the test was 4 ounces of milk one day and test was 4 ounces of milk one day and test was 4 ounces of milk one day and then 8, 12, 16, 20, 24." And I said, then 8, 12, 16, 20, 24." And I said, then 8, 12, 16, 20, 24." And I said, "It's only going to be a week and you "It's only going to be a week and you "It's only going to be a week and you can stop whenever the symptoms are can stop whenever the symptoms are can stop whenever the symptoms are intolerable. I don't want you to be in intolerable. I don't want you to be in intolerable. I don't want you to be in pain for this. You're not kicked out of pain for this. You're not kicked out of pain for this. You're not kicked out of the study. I'm really curious what dose the study. I'm really curious what dose the study. I'm really curious what dose it would take for you to react to this." it would take for you to react to this." it would take for you to react to this." And on the soy milk, you won't react at And on the soy milk, you won't react at And on the soy milk, you won't react at all. There's no lactose. So it'll just all. There's no lactose. So it'll just all. There's no lactose. So it'll just be this question between the cow milk, be this question between the cow milk, be this question between the cow milk, the commercial one, and the raw milk. So the commercial one, and the raw milk. So the commercial one, and the raw milk. So the first part of this study was the first part of this study was the first part of this study was recruiting. And so we had to say to be recruiting. And so we had to say to be recruiting. And so we had to say to be eligible for this study, you have to eligible for this study, you have to eligible for this study, you have to fail the hydrogen breath test and you fail the hydrogen breath test and you fail the hydrogen breath test and you have to complain about symptoms. So you have to complain about symptoms. So you have to complain about symptoms. So you have to be intolerant and objectively, have to be intolerant and objectively, have to be intolerant and objectively, not subjectively, fail this thing. And so we subjectively, fail this thing. And so we subjectively, fail this thing. And so we ended up with 16 people in the study. It ended up with 16 people in the study. It ended up with 16 people in the study. It wasn't a big deal. They did all three wasn't a big deal. They did all three wasn't a big deal. They did all three arms and 50% of the people who swore arms and 50% of the people who swore arms and 50% of the people who swore they were lactose intolerant failed the they were lactose intolerant failed the they were lactose intolerant failed the breath test. Like their hydrogen didn't breath test. Like their hydrogen didn't breath test. Like their hydrogen didn't go up after they drank 16 ounces of go up after they drank 16 ounces of go up after they drank 16 ounces of milk. But did any of them feel lousy? milk. But did any of them feel lousy? milk. But did any of them feel lousy? Yes. And so I couldn't look at them and Yes. And so I couldn't look at them and Yes. And so I couldn't look at them and say, "Sorry, you're not lactose say, "Sorry, you're not lactose say, "Sorry, you're not lactose intolerant. You're lying to me." I had intolerant. You're lying to me." I had intolerant. You're lying to me." I had to say, "You have failed our test. Our to say, "You have failed our test. Our to say, "You have failed our test. Our inclusion exclusion criteria meant that inclusion exclusion criteria meant that inclusion exclusion criteria meant that you have to feel these symptoms and you have to feel these symptoms and you have to feel these symptoms and you have to have this response. have to have this response. have to have this response. Interestingly, so we had Asian, black, Interestingly, so we had Asian, black, Interestingly, so we had Asian, black, Hispanic, white. It was all the Hispanic, white. It was all the Hispanic, white. It was all the Caucasians that failed the test that Caucasians that failed the test that Caucasians that failed the test that said they had said they had said they had symptoms and didn't pass the hydrogen symptoms and didn't pass the hydrogen symptoms and didn't pass the hydrogen breath test and show that their hydrogen breath test and show that their hydrogen breath test and show that their hydrogen went up, which pretty much parallels went up, which pretty much parallels went up, which pretty much parallels lactose intolerances usually in lactose intolerances usually in lactose intolerances usually in non-Caucasians. So, I'm sort of leading up to this point So, I'm sort of leading up to this point So, I'm sort of leading up to this point of they had symptoms, they complained, of they had symptoms, they complained, of they had symptoms, they complained, they attributed it to lactose they attributed it to lactose they attributed it to lactose intolerance, but technically they intolerance, but technically they intolerance, but technically they weren't. Something else was bothering weren't. Something else was bothering weren't. Something else was bothering them. Maybe it was small intestinal them. Maybe it was small intestinal them. Maybe it was small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, the bacterial overgrowth, the bacterial overgrowth, the SIBO. Now, flip that to wheat. Uh, SIBO. Now, flip that to wheat. Uh, SIBO. Now, flip that to wheat. Uh, before you do, because I just before you do, because I just before you do, because I just ask, I want to know, did raw milk help? ask, I want to know, did raw milk help? ask, I want to know, did raw milk help? Oh, so I just have to know. That's not Oh, so I just have to know. That's not Oh, so I just have to know. That's not fair. No, not at all. So they had the fair. No, not at all. So they had the fair. No, not at all. So they had the same exact symptoms on the raw milk as same exact symptoms on the raw milk as same exact symptoms on the raw milk as the conventional milk. Sorry, that was the conventional milk. Sorry, that was the conventional milk. Sorry, that was like the punchline of the whole story is like the punchline of the whole story is like the punchline of the whole story is it didn't help at all. It was absolutely it didn't help at all. It was absolutely it didn't help at all. It was absolutely identical. But it was a really easy test identical. But it was a really easy test identical. But it was a really easy test to study definitively. 16 people might to study definitively. 16 people might to study definitively. 16 people might not seem like a lot of people, but not seem like a lot of people, but not seem like a lot of people, but because GI disorder is so easy to because GI disorder is so easy to because GI disorder is so easy to detect, you either had diarrhea and gas detect, you either had diarrhea and gas detect, you either had diarrhea and gas or not. It was very proud of that or not. It was very proud of that or not. It was very proud of that tiny little paper, tiny little study we tiny little paper, tiny little study we tiny little paper, tiny little study we did. Although this raw milk company did. Although this raw milk company did. Although this raw milk company still on their website says they cure still on their website says they cure still on their website says they cure lactose intolerance. So this is a lactose intolerance. So this is a lactose intolerance. So this is a different issue alto together. So, let's different issue alto together. So, let's different issue alto together. So, let's not go there, but let's flip that to not go there, but let's flip that to not go there, but let's flip that to wheat because So, my concern in the wheat because So, my concern in the wheat because So, my concern in the world of wheat and gluten intolerance is world of wheat and gluten intolerance is world of wheat and gluten intolerance is yeah, it's amazing how many people feel yeah, it's amazing how many people feel yeah, it's amazing how many people feel some distress and if they were tested, some distress and if they were tested, some distress and if they were tested, you might find out that they're not you might find out that they're not you might find out that they're not clinically gluten intolerant or I'm sure clinically gluten intolerant or I'm sure clinically gluten intolerant or I'm sure that's a that's a that's a continuum, but I think this actually has continuum, but I think this actually has continuum, but I think this actually has to do with our food supply. So in a lot to do with our food supply. So in a lot to do with our food supply. So in a lot of foods that we grow historically there of foods that we grow historically there of foods that we grow historically there were multiple brands of or types of were multiple brands of or types of were multiple brands of or types of bananas and corn and wheat etc. And in bananas and corn and wheat etc. And in bananas and corn and wheat etc. And in the US we pretty much grow one kind of the US we pretty much grow one kind of the US we pretty much grow one kind of corn and one kind of wheat corn and one kind of wheat corn and one kind of wheat monocropping massive amounts and monocropping massive amounts and monocropping massive amounts and Americans in particular of all the Americans in particular of all the Americans in particular of all the grains that people eat around the world grains that people eat around the world grains that people eat around the world Americans eat wheat. I actually had to Americans eat wheat. I actually had to Americans eat wheat. I actually had to do a paper one time where we were sort do a paper one time where we were sort do a paper one time where we were sort of trying to determine how much protein of trying to determine how much protein of trying to determine how much protein came from different sources. How many came from different sources. How many came from different sources. How many how much from meat? How much from dairy? how much from meat? How much from dairy? how much from meat? How much from dairy? How much from grains? And I was very How much from grains? And I was very How much from grains? And I was very intrigued to see that this USDA database intrigued to see that this USDA database intrigued to see that this USDA database said, "Here's our value of protein from said, "Here's our value of protein from said, "Here's our value of protein from grains." And by grains, we mean wheat grains." And by grains, we mean wheat grains." And by grains, we mean wheat and oats and rice and quinoa and oats and rice and quinoa and oats and rice and quinoa and everything with a little footnote that everything with a little footnote that everything with a little footnote that said, because 90% of the grains said, because 90% of the grains said, because 90% of the grains Americans eat is wheat. We basically Americans eat is wheat. We basically Americans eat is wheat. We basically just use the wheat value for this and we just use the wheat value for this and we just use the wheat value for this and we didn't use the others. And I didn't use the others. And I didn't use the others. And I thought, "Oh my god, with rice and oats thought, "Oh my god, with rice and oats thought, "Oh my god, with rice and oats and everything else out there, 90% of and everything else out there, 90% of and everything else out there, 90% of the grains Americans eat as wheat." And the grains Americans eat as wheat." And the grains Americans eat as wheat." And but think about it. Bagels, pastry, but think about it. Bagels, pastry, but think about it. Bagels, pastry, breakfast toast, um they're breakfast, breakfast toast, um they're breakfast, breakfast toast, um they're breakfast, even pizza crust. Pizza crust, they we even pizza crust. Pizza crust, they we even pizza crust. Pizza crust, they we eat an insane amount of wheat. So, one eat an insane amount of wheat. So, one eat an insane amount of wheat. So, one of my favorite um graphics, and sorry, of my favorite um graphics, and sorry, of my favorite um graphics, and sorry, maybe we'll get into this later, maybe we'll get into this later, maybe we'll get into this later, sort of looking at the types of carbs, sort of looking at the types of carbs, sort of looking at the types of carbs, fats, and proteins that people in the US fats, and proteins that people in the US fats, and proteins that people in the US eat. And I'll have more details if you eat. And I'll have more details if you eat. And I'll have more details if you want to do this later, but 50% of what want to do this later, but 50% of what want to do this later, but 50% of what Americans eat for carbs is carbs, and Americans eat for carbs is carbs, and Americans eat for carbs is carbs, and 40% is crappy carbs, added sugar, and 40% is crappy carbs, added sugar, and 40% is crappy carbs, added sugar, and refined grains, which is mostly refined grains, which is mostly refined grains, which is mostly refined wheat. And 10% is healthy carbs. And so wheat. And 10% is healthy carbs. And so wheat. And 10% is healthy carbs. And so I think what Americans are eating and I think what Americans are eating and I think what Americans are eating and I think the gluten think the gluten think the gluten intolerance has to do with wheat being intolerance has to do with wheat being intolerance has to do with wheat being such a predominant grain source when it such a predominant grain source when it such a predominant grain source when it doesn't need to be and very little doesn't need to be and very little doesn't need to be and very little variety in the wheat. I know there's variety in the wheat. I know there's variety in the wheat. I know there's actually some folks out there that are actually some folks out there that are actually some folks out there that are trying to bring back sort of some trying to bring back sort of some trying to bring back sort of some heritage um versions of different wheat heritage um versions of different wheat heritage um versions of different wheat grains. Kamut and uh al uh buckwheat and grains. Kamut and uh al uh buckwheat and grains. Kamut and uh al uh buckwheat and uh what are some of the other ones? Uh uh what are some of the other ones? Uh uh what are some of the other ones? Uh pharaoh and wheat berries. I actually pharaoh and wheat berries. I actually pharaoh and wheat berries. I actually make a kick-ass wheat berry salad if you make a kick-ass wheat berry salad if you make a kick-ass wheat berry salad if you want to get into that later. But of all want to get into that later. But of all want to get into that later. But of all this refined wheat that we're eating to this refined wheat that we're eating to this refined wheat that we're eating to your point, I think God isn't that your point, I think God isn't that your point, I think God isn't that amazing that so many people are now amazing that so many people are now amazing that so many people are now coming up with gluten intolerance. What coming up with gluten intolerance. What coming up with gluten intolerance. What is going on? I think it's because we eat is going on? I think it's because we eat is going on? I think it's because we eat so much wheat, so much refined wheat, so much wheat, so much refined wheat, so much wheat, so much refined wheat, and it's really just one kind. I have and it's really just one kind. I have and it's really just one kind. I have heard, I don't know if you've had this heard, I don't know if you've had this heard, I don't know if you've had this experience. I've had Europeans come and experience. I've had Europeans come and experience. I've had Europeans come and say, you know, I ate a lot of bread in say, you know, I ate a lot of bread in say, you know, I ate a lot of bread in Europe and I come here and I I'm like Europe and I come here and I I'm like Europe and I come here and I I'm like gluten intolerant and then I go back to gluten intolerant and then I go back to gluten intolerant and then I go back to Europe and I can have bread again and Europe and I can have bread again and Europe and I can have bread again and I think I don't know this so I'm not a I think I don't know this so I'm not a I think I don't know this so I'm not a food scientist, but I think that's part food scientist, but I think that's part food scientist, but I think that's part of it. Yeah. of it. Yeah. of it. Yeah. very interesting and I know a lot of very interesting and I know a lot of very interesting and I know a lot of people listening are extremely people listening are extremely people listening are extremely curious about this issue of real versus curious about this issue of real versus curious about this issue of real versus not clinically diagnosed food allergies not clinically diagnosed food allergies not clinically diagnosed food allergies but just negative experiences with food. but just negative experiences with food. but just negative experiences with food. So how many people are actually gluten So how many people are actually gluten So how many people are actually gluten intolerant? Um you hear about celiac intolerant? Um you hear about celiac intolerant? Um you hear about celiac disease. I mean people also now know disease. I mean people also now know disease. I mean people also now know what the names of these things so they what the names of these things so they what the names of these things so they just kind of throw them out there um just kind of throw them out there um just kind of throw them out there um whether or not they have them or not. whether or not they have them or not. whether or not they have them or not. And how many people do you think And how many people do you think And how many people do you think actually struggle with a wheat actually struggle with a wheat actually struggle with a wheat intolerance like a wheat sensitivity? intolerance like a wheat sensitivity? intolerance like a wheat sensitivity? Seems like these are millions and Seems like these are millions and Seems like these are millions and millions of people. Yeah. Not my area of millions of people. Yeah. Not my area of millions of people. Yeah. Not my area of expertise. Don't really can't speak to expertise. Don't really can't speak to expertise. Don't really can't speak to this effectively. Do know that for a this effectively. Do know that for a this effectively. Do know that for a basic nutrition class that I teach. I basic nutrition class that I teach. I basic nutrition class that I teach. I was looking at a survey of celiac was looking at a survey of celiac was looking at a survey of celiac disease and testing people for it. disease and testing people for it. disease and testing people for it. And even like half the population with And even like half the population with And even like half the population with full-blown celiac disease didn't know full-blown celiac disease didn't know full-blown celiac disease didn't know they had it and were consuming wheat. they had it and were consuming wheat. they had it and were consuming wheat. And so even if you have it, there's a And so even if you have it, there's a And so even if you have it, there's a range of response. You could have and range of response. You could have and range of response. You could have and just think, "Oh, my stomach's grumbling. just think, "Oh, my stomach's grumbling. just think, "Oh, my stomach's grumbling. Huh, doesn't bother me that much." Huh, doesn't bother me that much." Huh, doesn't bother me that much." Whereas you have some people who don't Whereas you have some people who don't Whereas you have some people who don't have full-blown celiac and they have full-blown celiac and they have full-blown celiac and they have some gluten intolerance and a small some gluten intolerance and a small some gluten intolerance and a small amount bothers them. So even in there, amount bothers them. So even in there, amount bothers them. So even in there, there's some wiggle room that's hard to there's some wiggle room that's hard to there's some wiggle room that's hard to explain where you can't look somebody in explain where you can't look somebody in explain where you can't look somebody in the eye and say, "Sorry, I've diagnosed the eye and say, "Sorry, I've diagnosed the eye and say, "Sorry, I've diagnosed you. You don't have this." So it is you. You don't have this." So it is you. You don't have this." So it is really important for people to really important for people to really important for people to acknowledge and own what they feel. and acknowledge and own what they feel. and acknowledge and own what they feel. and to look into it. Let's talk about to look into it. Let's talk about to look into it. Let's talk about processed foods. That gets a lot of processed foods. That gets a lot of processed foods. That gets a lot of attention nowadays and there are I think attention nowadays and there are I think attention nowadays and there are I think we need to parse what we mean by we need to parse what we mean by we need to parse what we mean by processed foods. I'll just ask this in a processed foods. I'll just ask this in a processed foods. I'll just ask this in a very direct very direct very direct way. There are the so-called food way. There are the so-called food way. There are the so-called food additives, the dyes, the binders, the additives, the dyes, the binders, the additives, the dyes, the binders, the other things that are in um processed other things that are in um processed other things that are in um processed foods. We should talk about that. foods. We should talk about that. foods. We should talk about that. There's also the issue of caloric There's also the issue of caloric There's also the issue of caloric density relative to macro and density relative to macro and density relative to macro and micronutrients, right? a lot of calories micronutrients, right? a lot of calories micronutrients, right? a lot of calories but not a lot of nutrition so to speak. but not a lot of nutrition so to speak. but not a lot of nutrition so to speak. Sure. And then there probably 10 other Sure. And then there probably 10 other Sure. And then there probably 10 other things about what processed food is and things about what processed food is and things about what processed food is and what it isn't. Like tends to be low what it isn't. Like tends to be low what it isn't. Like tends to be low fiber, high calorie, low fiber for fiber, high calorie, low fiber for fiber, high calorie, low fiber for instance. So let's start with these food instance. So let's start with these food instance. So let's start with these food additives. This is very um much in the additives. This is very um much in the additives. This is very um much in the in the media space now and it's in the media space now and it's in the media space now and it's controversial. The dyes like they just controversial. The dyes like they just controversial. The dyes like they just banned another red dye number 40 I think banned another red dye number 40 I think banned another red dye number 40 I think it was. But the fact I can't remember it was. But the fact I can't remember it was. But the fact I can't remember which one just tells you that there are which one just tells you that there are which one just tells you that there are a lot of them. What about these dyes? a lot of them. What about these dyes? a lot of them. What about these dyes? How bad are these dyes? That was on the How bad are these dyes? That was on the How bad are these dyes? That was on the basis of a rat or rodent study basis of a rat or rodent study basis of a rat or rodent study rather. How much does do food dyes rather. How much does do food dyes rather. How much does do food dyes concern you as somebody who spent so concern you as somebody who spent so concern you as somebody who spent so much time in this studying this stuff? much time in this studying this stuff? much time in this studying this stuff? Um, nutrition don't concern me more than Um, nutrition don't concern me more than Um, nutrition don't concern me more than any of the other things that are in the any of the other things that are in the any of the other things that are in the packaged processed foods and partly packaged processed foods and partly packaged processed foods and partly because those are almost impossible to because those are almost impossible to because those are almost impossible to study. So in my world, if somebody says study. So in my world, if somebody says study. So in my world, if somebody says this thing is a concern, a health this thing is a concern, a health this thing is a concern, a health concern or health benefit, I have to concern or health benefit, I have to concern or health benefit, I have to think how would I study that and what is think how would I study that and what is think how would I study that and what is the outcome? So really my world is what the outcome? So really my world is what the outcome? So really my world is what is the exposure and what is the outcome? is the exposure and what is the outcome? is the exposure and what is the outcome? Can I get funded to do that? And if the Can I get funded to do that? And if the Can I get funded to do that? And if the outcome is heart disease or cancer or outcome is heart disease or cancer or outcome is heart disease or cancer or diabetes, I immediately write it off. I diabetes, I immediately write it off. I diabetes, I immediately write it off. I can't wait till somebody dies or goes to can't wait till somebody dies or goes to can't wait till somebody dies or goes to the hospital. I won't be able to publish the hospital. I won't be able to publish the hospital. I won't be able to publish my paper and I won't be able to keep my paper and I won't be able to keep my paper and I won't be able to keep my job at Stanford. I have to publish job at Stanford. I have to publish job at Stanford. I have to publish quicker. So most of my career has been quicker. So most of my career has been quicker. So most of my career has been very cardiomatabolic oriented. So I can very cardiomatabolic oriented. So I can very cardiomatabolic oriented. So I can move somebody's blood cholesterol, blood move somebody's blood cholesterol, blood move somebody's blood cholesterol, blood glucose, inflammatory markers, insulin glucose, inflammatory markers, insulin glucose, inflammatory markers, insulin in weeks and sometimes say, "Oh my god, in weeks and sometimes say, "Oh my god, in weeks and sometimes say, "Oh my god, how come you didn't do this for years?" how come you didn't do this for years?" how come you didn't do this for years?" Said, "Well, because most of the effect Said, "Well, because most of the effect Said, "Well, because most of the effect happened in the first two weeks. I did happened in the first two weeks. I did happened in the first two weeks. I did it for eight weeks or I did it for six it for eight weeks or I did it for six it for eight weeks or I did it for six months." But really, the effect months." But really, the effect months." But really, the effect plateaued in weeks if it was the plateaued in weeks if it was the plateaued in weeks if it was the cardioabolic risk factor here. So if you cardioabolic risk factor here. So if you cardioabolic risk factor here. So if you want to ask me what a dye does, I'd have want to ask me what a dye does, I'd have want to ask me what a dye does, I'd have to randomize people to sort of get the to randomize people to sort of get the to randomize people to sort of get the exposure or not. So the same food with exposure or not. So the same food with exposure or not. So the same food with or without the dye and I would have to or without the dye and I would have to or without the dye and I would have to have an outcome and there's really not have an outcome and there's really not have an outcome and there's really not many outcomes and your cholesterol many outcomes and your cholesterol many outcomes and your cholesterol wouldn't move. Your blood glucose wouldn't move. Your blood glucose wouldn't move. Your blood glucose wouldn't move. If it was the same for wouldn't move. If it was the same for wouldn't move. If it was the same for everything except the everything except the everything except the die, those measures would not move. So die, those measures would not move. So die, those measures would not move. So the idea is you give it to a rat in a the idea is you give it to a rat in a the idea is you give it to a rat in a huge dose and you see if they get cancer huge dose and you see if they get cancer huge dose and you see if they get cancer and it makes metabolic sense that and it makes metabolic sense that and it makes metabolic sense that creates a plausibility that this is a creates a plausibility that this is a creates a plausibility that this is a carcinogen but it's really hard to test carcinogen but it's really hard to test carcinogen but it's really hard to test and think of you just said you couldn't and think of you just said you couldn't and think of you just said you couldn't keep track of how many red dyes there keep track of how many red dyes there keep track of how many red dyes there were or blue dyes or yellow dyes were or blue dyes or yellow dyes were or blue dyes or yellow dyes combined with emulsifiers and jelling combined with emulsifiers and jelling combined with emulsifiers and jelling agents and colorants and uh anti or agents and colorants and uh anti or agents and colorants and uh anti or glazing agents. There's a list. So this glazing agents. There's a list. So this glazing agents. There's a list. So this NOVA classification put together by NOVA classification put together by NOVA classification put together by Carlos Montera from Brazil is like the Carlos Montera from Brazil is like the Carlos Montera from Brazil is like the hot topic in the world of ultrarocessed hot topic in the world of ultrarocessed hot topic in the world of ultrarocessed food. So for the last decade if you will food. So for the last decade if you will food. So for the last decade if you will look papers coming out every month look papers coming out every month look papers coming out every month talking about ultrarocessed and if you talking about ultrarocessed and if you talking about ultrarocessed and if you look at that paper it's the NOVA look at that paper it's the NOVA look at that paper it's the NOVA classification. So an interesting thing classification. So an interesting thing classification. So an interesting thing just to make this clear and we can stop just to make this clear and we can stop just to make this clear and we can stop if this is too far down the rabbit hole if this is too far down the rabbit hole if this is too far down the rabbit hole but the NOVA classification is agnostic but the NOVA classification is agnostic but the NOVA classification is agnostic to nutrition. He doesn't care how much to nutrition. He doesn't care how much to nutrition. He doesn't care how much fat or cholesterol or fiber is in there. fat or cholesterol or fiber is in there. fat or cholesterol or fiber is in there. His whole point in making this was His whole point in making this was His whole point in making this was there's something beyond that. I know there's something beyond that. I know there's something beyond that. I know we're worried about lack of fiber, too we're worried about lack of fiber, too we're worried about lack of fiber, too much saturated fat, something else. But much saturated fat, something else. But much saturated fat, something else. But isn't there something to the colorants isn't there something to the colorants isn't there something to the colorants and the flavorants and the jelling and the flavorants and the jelling and the flavorants and the jelling agents, etc. that could be separate from agents, etc. that could be separate from agents, etc. that could be separate from all this? in it and he in his analyses all this? in it and he in his analyses all this? in it and he in his analyses said if I if I parse that out in the said if I if I parse that out in the said if I if I parse that out in the data that I'm looking at that has an data that I'm looking at that has an data that I'm looking at that has an additive effect to all these other additive effect to all these other additive effect to all these other things and he's made a big case for it things and he's made a big case for it things and he's made a big case for it and people are publishing papers on it and people are publishing papers on it and people are publishing papers on it all the time um the American Heart all the time um the American Heart all the time um the American Heart Association has a scientific advisory on Association has a scientific advisory on Association has a scientific advisory on this and I've seen the table it's in our this and I've seen the table it's in our this and I've seen the table it's in our advisory there's 150 different molecules advisory there's 150 different molecules advisory there's 150 different molecules in this list that come into the in this list that come into the in this list that come into the different categories different categories different categories And if you look through the whole list, And if you look through the whole list, And if you look through the whole list, you would be a little shocked. So for you would be a little shocked. So for you would be a little shocked. So for one thing, turmeric is in the list of one thing, turmeric is in the list of one thing, turmeric is in the list of colorants. So technically, turmeric colorants. So technically, turmeric colorants. So technically, turmeric could move you into the ultrarocessed could move you into the ultrarocessed could move you into the ultrarocessed category, but turmeric is full of category, but turmeric is full of category, but turmeric is full of curcumin. And people are really excited curcumin. And people are really excited curcumin. And people are really excited about the possible health benefits of about the possible health benefits of about the possible health benefits of turmeric. Pectin is in there. People turmeric. Pectin is in there. People turmeric. Pectin is in there. People have used pectin for years to make jams have used pectin for years to make jams have used pectin for years to make jams and jellies and things like that. And and jellies and things like that. And and jellies and things like that. And there's some horrific names that you there's some horrific names that you there's some horrific names that you can't even pronounce in this thing which can't even pronounce in this thing which can't even pronounce in this thing which I've looked for in foods and I can't I've looked for in foods and I can't I've looked for in foods and I can't find many of the horrifically named find many of the horrifically named find many of the horrifically named things in any real foods that people things in any real foods that people things in any real foods that people eat. Anyway, there's 150 chemicals in eat. Anyway, there's 150 chemicals in eat. Anyway, there's 150 chemicals in this list. And it's really intuitively list. And it's really intuitively list. And it's really intuitively appealing. It's like there must be appealing. It's like there must be appealing. It's like there must be something beyond just these nutrients. something beyond just these nutrients. something beyond just these nutrients. Oh my god, the food industry is out of Oh my god, the food industry is out of Oh my god, the food industry is out of whack here. And if we could put pull in whack here. And if we could put pull in whack here. And if we could put pull in one other term, it's grass. Generally one other term, it's grass. Generally one other term, it's grass. Generally recognized as safe. And so decades and recognized as safe. And so decades and recognized as safe. And so decades and decades ago, the FDA said, "Wow, there's decades ago, the FDA said, "Wow, there's decades ago, the FDA said, "Wow, there's a lot of these things that the food a lot of these things that the food a lot of these things that the food industry is putting in industry is putting in industry is putting in foods to do an appropriate test to see foods to do an appropriate test to see foods to do an appropriate test to see if this would harm if this would harm if this would harm humans is really not feasible. You Plus, humans is really not feasible. You Plus, humans is really not feasible. You Plus, in my world, I can't really do studies in my world, I can't really do studies in my world, I can't really do studies where I'm going to harm people. I need where I'm going to harm people. I need where I'm going to harm people. I need you to sign up and your staff, and I'm you to sign up and your staff, and I'm you to sign up and your staff, and I'm going to randomize you to see who I hurt going to randomize you to see who I hurt going to randomize you to see who I hurt first. And once I know who I hurt, I'll first. And once I know who I hurt, I'll first. And once I know who I hurt, I'll know if I need to remove this from the know if I need to remove this from the know if I need to remove this from the food. So they'll do it in mice or food. So they'll do it in mice or food. So they'll do it in mice or they'll do it in rats or they'll do it they'll do it in rats or they'll do it they'll do it in rats or they'll do it in a petri dish to see if it's in a petri dish to see if it's in a petri dish to see if it's plausible. And at one plausible. And at one plausible. And at one point, there were 800 of these grass point, there were 800 of these grass point, there were 800 of these grass items and I think it's grown to items and I think it's grown to items and I think it's grown to 10,000. There's a whole bunch of 10,000. There's a whole bunch of 10,000. There's a whole bunch of ingredients that the food industry can ingredients that the food industry can ingredients that the food industry can put into foods because of this grass put into foods because of this grass put into foods because of this grass sort of by line this option. That's sort of by line this option. That's sort of by line this option. That's certainly problematic. So we have the certainly problematic. So we have the certainly problematic. So we have the NOVA list of these additives and he NOVA list of these additives and he NOVA list of these additives and he calls them cosmetic additives. So let's calls them cosmetic additives. So let's calls them cosmetic additives. So let's pause just for a minute to think of that pause just for a minute to think of that pause just for a minute to think of that name. So the cosmetic means it's to make name. So the cosmetic means it's to make name. So the cosmetic means it's to make the food look good. If you're going to the food look good. If you're going to the food look good. If you're going to go buy it on the shelf, I mean think go buy it on the shelf, I mean think go buy it on the shelf, I mean think just for a minute of an emulsifier. If just for a minute of an emulsifier. If just for a minute of an emulsifier. If you went to buy something and it was you went to buy something and it was you went to buy something and it was separated on the shelf, you thought, separated on the shelf, you thought, separated on the shelf, you thought, "Wow, I don't really want that. It looks "Wow, I don't really want that. It looks "Wow, I don't really want that. It looks like it's half this and half the other like it's half this and half the other like it's half this and half the other thing." If it, let's say, it was a salad thing." If it, let's say, it was a salad thing." If it, let's say, it was a salad dressing, I would want the salad dressing, I would want the salad dressing, I would want the salad dressing to look all homogenized, like dressing to look all homogenized, like dressing to look all homogenized, like somebody shook it up, and I don't want somebody shook it up, and I don't want somebody shook it up, and I don't want to buy the I don't want to put the parts to buy the I don't want to put the parts to buy the I don't want to put the parts on my salad. I want to put the salad on my salad. I want to put the salad on my salad. I want to put the salad dressing. So, the cosmetic additives are dressing. So, the cosmetic additives are dressing. So, the cosmetic additives are to make it look good. And that's why we to make it look good. And that's why we to make it look good. And that's why we have dyes. Oh, I don't think I want to have dyes. Oh, I don't think I want to have dyes. Oh, I don't think I want to buy that gray thing, but I would buy the buy that gray thing, but I would buy the buy that gray thing, but I would buy the red or the yellow or the whatever color red or the yellow or the whatever color red or the yellow or the whatever color it is. it is. it is. So those different additives are going So those different additives are going So those different additives are going in to make it look more appealing or in to make it look more appealing or in to make it look more appealing or feel more appealing uh or smell more feel more appealing uh or smell more feel more appealing uh or smell more appealing instead of just being food. So appealing instead of just being food. So appealing instead of just being food. So it does make sense that this is sort of it does make sense that this is sort of it does make sense that this is sort of we've gone too far. We have this we've gone too far. We have this we've gone too far. We have this incredible food system that makes incredible food system that makes incredible food system that makes inexpensive food very available for a inexpensive food very available for a inexpensive food very available for a lot of people lot of people lot of people 247 and we just went too far. It's too 247 and we just went too far. It's too 247 and we just went too far. It's too available. It's too inexpensive. It's available. It's too inexpensive. It's available. It's too inexpensive. It's too stable on the grocery shelf uh place too stable on the grocery shelf uh place too stable on the grocery shelf uh place there. So that like three months from there. So that like three months from there. So that like three months from now, no bugs have eaten it. It hasn't now, no bugs have eaten it. It hasn't now, no bugs have eaten it. It hasn't gone bad. Isn't that good economically gone bad. Isn't that good economically gone bad. Isn't that good economically that it hasn't gone bad? But isn't it a that it hasn't gone bad? But isn't it a that it hasn't gone bad? But isn't it a little scary that the bugs don't even little scary that the bugs don't even little scary that the bugs don't even want to eat it because they can tell want to eat it because they can tell want to eat it because they can tell there's no nutrition in here. So yeah, there's no nutrition in here. So yeah, there's no nutrition in here. So yeah, the processed food issue is very the processed food issue is very the processed food issue is very interesting. It's fasting that RFK Jr. interesting. It's fasting that RFK Jr. interesting. It's fasting that RFK Jr. is wants to handle this and a lot of us is wants to handle this and a lot of us is wants to handle this and a lot of us are really excited that somebody would are really excited that somebody would are really excited that somebody would like to take a real firm stance here like to take a real firm stance here like to take a real firm stance here because it is out of whack. That's super because it is out of whack. That's super because it is out of whack. That's super informative and I appreciate it for informative and I appreciate it for informative and I appreciate it for several reasons. Uh one that I'd like to several reasons. Uh one that I'd like to several reasons. Uh one that I'd like to highlight in particular is how now highlight in particular is how now highlight in particular is how now several times you've described that to several times you've described that to several times you've described that to do a proper study you need to manipulate do a proper study you need to manipulate do a proper study you need to manipulate variables one at a time. You just can't variables one at a time. You just can't variables one at a time. You just can't do the sorts of studies that one would do the sorts of studies that one would do the sorts of studies that one would like to do where you manipulate 10 20 40 like to do where you manipulate 10 20 40 like to do where you manipulate 10 20 40 100 variables of dyes and colors and in 100 variables of dyes and colors and in 100 variables of dyes and colors and in people and do that in a reasonable people and do that in a reasonable people and do that in a reasonable amount of time as you mentioned either amount of time as you mentioned either amount of time as you mentioned either people would all be dead or um there'd people would all be dead or um there'd people would all be dead or um there'd be no more funding uh for the government be no more funding uh for the government be no more funding uh for the government for any purpose if uh for a study after for any purpose if uh for a study after for any purpose if uh for a study after a study like that was done. It's just a study like that was done. It's just a study like that was done. It's just too expensive too timeconuming. The too expensive too timeconuming. The too expensive too timeconuming. The other thing is, given what you just told other thing is, given what you just told other thing is, given what you just told us about these us about these us about these additives, wouldn't it just make the additives, wouldn't it just make the additives, wouldn't it just make the most sense to just ban them all? Yep, it most sense to just ban them all? Yep, it most sense to just ban them all? Yep, it sure would. And that would wipe out 60% sure would. And that would wipe out 60% sure would. And that would wipe out 60% of what's in a grocery store right now. of what's in a grocery store right now. of what's in a grocery store right now. And if somebody went in to buy food for And if somebody went in to buy food for And if somebody went in to buy food for their family and 60% of the food was their family and 60% of the food was their family and 60% of the food was gone and we hadn't replaced it with food gone and we hadn't replaced it with food gone and we hadn't replaced it with food that is more nutritious but meets their that is more nutritious but meets their that is more nutritious but meets their budget and is accessible, that would be budget and is accessible, that would be budget and is accessible, that would be criminal to be perfectly honest. And criminal to be perfectly honest. And criminal to be perfectly honest. And that's why the health community that's why the health community that's why the health community is trying to figure out how to react to is trying to figure out how to react to is trying to figure out how to react to this. So part of this is I'll just take this. So part of this is I'll just take this. So part of this is I'll just take an example several examples of things that example several examples of things that example several examples of things that fall into the line of these fall into the line of these fall into the line of these ultrarocessed foods. There's actually ultrarocessed foods. There's actually ultrarocessed foods. There's actually quite a few whole wheat breads, yogurts, quite a few whole wheat breads, yogurts, quite a few whole wheat breads, yogurts, salad dressings, and things like tomato salad dressings, and things like tomato salad dressings, and things like tomato sauces. So, picture a very inexpensive sauces. So, picture a very inexpensive sauces. So, picture a very inexpensive quick meal for a family where the quick meal for a family where the quick meal for a family where the parents have three jobs. They're trying parents have three jobs. They're trying parents have three jobs. They're trying to make ends meet. Sure, it'd be great to make ends meet. Sure, it'd be great to make ends meet. Sure, it'd be great if they could be home growing their if they could be home growing their if they could be home growing their garden and scratch cooking all day, but garden and scratch cooking all day, but garden and scratch cooking all day, but they can't. So, they come home, they can't. So, they come home, they can't. So, they come home, they cook some pasta, they heat up some red cook some pasta, they heat up some red cook some pasta, they heat up some red tomato sauce, and they pour it on top. tomato sauce, and they pour it on top. tomato sauce, and they pour it on top. More nutritious than, let's say, a fast More nutritious than, let's say, a fast More nutritious than, let's say, a fast food something or other. So, if you take food something or other. So, if you take food something or other. So, if you take that tomato sauce away and they whipped that tomato sauce away and they whipped that tomato sauce away and they whipped together a little salad and the kids together a little salad and the kids together a little salad and the kids don't want to eat the raw vegetables don't want to eat the raw vegetables don't want to eat the raw vegetables that are just plain. They want some that are just plain. They want some that are just plain. They want some salad dressing on it. You picked up some salad dressing on it. You picked up some salad dressing on it. You picked up some salad dressing and for breakfast they salad dressing and for breakfast they salad dressing and for breakfast they were going to have um some yogurt or were going to have um some yogurt or were going to have um some yogurt or whole wheat bread. So, they're going to whole wheat bread. So, they're going to whole wheat bread. So, they're going to make some toast and put some avocado on make some toast and put some avocado on make some toast and put some avocado on it and have some avocado toast and it and have some avocado toast and it and have some avocado toast and it was it said whole wheat bread. All four was it said whole wheat bread. All four was it said whole wheat bread. All four of those things could have met the of those things could have met the of those things could have met the criteria for ultrarocessed food. So, you criteria for ultrarocessed food. So, you criteria for ultrarocessed food. So, you take those off. They can't have the take those off. They can't have the take those off. They can't have the salad. They can't have the pasta. They salad. They can't have the pasta. They salad. They can't have the pasta. They can't have the yogurt. And they can't have the yogurt. And they can't have the yogurt. And they can't have the avocado toast because you took have the avocado toast because you took have the avocado toast because you took those all away. Unless we had seen that those all away. Unless we had seen that those all away. Unless we had seen that and said, "Yes, we know these should be and said, "Yes, we know these should be and said, "Yes, we know these should be replaced with more nutritious food that replaced with more nutritious food that replaced with more nutritious food that don't have the cosmetic additives." And don't have the cosmetic additives." And don't have the cosmetic additives." And until we get to that place, you can't until we get to that place, you can't until we get to that place, you can't get rid of them all. That's just cruel. get rid of them all. That's just cruel. get rid of them all. That's just cruel. Yeah. No, it's a it's a wonderful well Yeah. No, it's a it's a wonderful well Yeah. No, it's a it's a wonderful well sad but um important excuse me example sad but um important excuse me example sad but um important excuse me example of the challenges that people face um in of the challenges that people face um in of the challenges that people face um in terms of how to feed a family. Um and at terms of how to feed a family. Um and at terms of how to feed a family. Um and at the same time we could wage the argument the same time we could wage the argument the same time we could wage the argument that people in Europe um you know have that people in Europe um you know have that people in Europe um you know have families um they work very hard um and families um they work very hard um and families um they work very hard um and their grocery stores include a lot of their grocery stores include a lot of their grocery stores include a lot of ultrarocessed foods and processed foods ultrarocessed foods and processed foods ultrarocessed foods and processed foods but also a lot of fruits and vegetables but also a lot of fruits and vegetables but also a lot of fruits and vegetables and as we talked about before maybe more and as we talked about before maybe more and as we talked about before maybe more variety of grains etc. So, we don't want variety of grains etc. So, we don't want variety of grains etc. So, we don't want to um paint a picture of like the French to um paint a picture of like the French to um paint a picture of like the French countryside uh where everything is grown countryside uh where everything is grown countryside uh where everything is grown and harvested and um you know, searching and harvested and um you know, searching and harvested and um you know, searching for truffles during the morning. I spent for truffles during the morning. I spent for truffles during the morning. I spent some time in the south of France and some time in the south of France and some time in the south of France and they actually do this. People there they actually do this. People there they actually do this. People there spend an immense amount of time and spend an immense amount of time and spend an immense amount of time and energy thinking about what they're going energy thinking about what they're going energy thinking about what they're going to eat, preparing that food, eating it, to eat, preparing that food, eating it, to eat, preparing that food, eating it, and talking about other great meals and talking about other great meals and talking about other great meals they've had while they eat it. And even they've had while they eat it. And even they've had while they eat it. And even people with without large budgets, at people with without large budgets, at people with without large budgets, at least at that time, um ate exceptionally least at that time, um ate exceptionally least at that time, um ate exceptionally high quality food um in reasonable high quality food um in reasonable high quality food um in reasonable amounts. and it was incredibly amounts. and it was incredibly amounts. and it was incredibly delicious. So there are areas of the delicious. So there are areas of the delicious. So there are areas of the world where people do this, but Northern world where people do this, but Northern world where people do this, but Northern Europe there's a lot of processed food Europe there's a lot of processed food Europe there's a lot of processed food and at the same time we don't see the and at the same time we don't see the and at the same time we don't see the same sorts of issues with obesity, at same sorts of issues with obesity, at same sorts of issues with obesity, at least not to the same degree that we do least not to the same degree that we do least not to the same degree that we do in the United States, the same chronic in the United States, the same chronic in the United States, the same chronic health and metabolic issues that we see health and metabolic issues that we see health and metabolic issues that we see here. So what if we were to compare and here. So what if we were to compare and here. So what if we were to compare and contrast just because they're closest um contrast just because they're closest um contrast just because they're closest um a northern European grocery store and a northern European grocery store and a northern European grocery store and family and the North family and the North family and the North American grocery store and family which American grocery store and family which American grocery store and family which you just described you illustrated for you just described you illustrated for you just described you illustrated for us I think a fairly representative us I think a fairly representative us I think a fairly representative example. What's different? What are they example. What's different? What are they example. What's different? What are they eating for dinner that's different? Is eating for dinner that's different? Is eating for dinner that's different? Is it that the tomato sauce doesn't contain it that the tomato sauce doesn't contain it that the tomato sauce doesn't contain these dyes? That it doesn't contain these dyes? That it doesn't contain these dyes? That it doesn't contain sugar? Um, and what are they replacing sugar? Um, and what are they replacing sugar? Um, and what are they replacing uh those foods with, if they're uh those foods with, if they're uh those foods with, if they're replacing them at all? So, probably at replacing them at all? So, probably at replacing them at all? So, probably at least two answers and one of them is least two answers and one of them is least two answers and one of them is going to be I can't tell you how many going to be I can't tell you how many going to be I can't tell you how many Europeans or other folks from other Europeans or other folks from other Europeans or other folks from other countries have said, I bought the same countries have said, I bought the same countries have said, I bought the same product that I buy in my home country product that I buy in my home country product that I buy in my home country here and it has twice as many here and it has twice as many here and it has twice as many ingredients. It's the same company. It's ingredients. It's the same company. It's ingredients. It's the same company. It's the same food. It could be um what's the same food. It could be um what's the same food. It could be um what's the hazelnut spread? Nutella. Like hazelnut spread? Nutella. Like hazelnut spread? Nutella. Like here's the Nutella you sell here and here's the Nutella you sell here and here's the Nutella you sell here and here's the Nutella I buy there. I've had here's the Nutella I buy there. I've had here's the Nutella I buy there. I've had multiple people bring those up to me and multiple people bring those up to me and multiple people bring those up to me and show me the different ingredients. And show me the different ingredients. And show me the different ingredients. And so it can be made the other country way, so it can be made the other country way, so it can be made the other country way, but in the US it's made another way for but in the US it's made another way for but in the US it's made another way for Americans. So if we could even just make Americans. So if we could even just make Americans. So if we could even just make that move, if we could say, okay, you that move, if we could say, okay, you that move, if we could say, okay, you already make this in another country, already make this in another country, already make this in another country, another way. Can you just make it the another way. Can you just make it the another way. Can you just make it the same way in the US? That would be a same way in the US? That would be a same way in the US? That would be a start right there. Why is it that start right there. Why is it that start right there. Why is it that there's this discrepancy in ingredients? there's this discrepancy in ingredients? there's this discrepancy in ingredients? This um became uh very much uh in the This um became uh very much uh in the This um became uh very much uh in the media recently with Froot Loops. It was media recently with Froot Loops. It was media recently with Froot Loops. It was argued, I don't know if this is true, argued, I don't know if this is true, argued, I don't know if this is true, but it was argued that Froot Loops in but it was argued that Froot Loops in but it was argued that Froot Loops in Canada are um colored with carrot juice Canada are um colored with carrot juice Canada are um colored with carrot juice and beet juice and Froot Loops in the and beet juice and Froot Loops in the and beet juice and Froot Loops in the United States use artificial dyes. And I United States use artificial dyes. And I United States use artificial dyes. And I can't verify that. Um I don't know I can't verify that. Um I don't know I can't verify that. Um I don't know that to be true, but I think a number of that to be true, but I think a number of that to be true, but I think a number of examples pointed to that possibly being examples pointed to that possibly being examples pointed to that possibly being true. Why would you uh have a system true. Why would you uh have a system true. Why would you uh have a system like ours if other people can do it like ours if other people can do it like ours if other people can do it presumably for same or lesser cost? I presumably for same or lesser cost? I presumably for same or lesser cost? I agree. I can't back up that one agree. I can't back up that one agree. I can't back up that one statement either, but I think that is statement either, but I think that is statement either, but I think that is true for reasons that I can't explain. true for reasons that I can't explain. true for reasons that I can't explain. And that's why it would be helpful to And that's why it would be helpful to And that's why it would be helpful to talk more to the food industry. I think talk more to the food industry. I think talk more to the food industry. I think there are some there are some there are some challenges with this reaction against challenges with this reaction against challenges with this reaction against ultrarocessed foods. I think there are ultrarocessed foods. I think there are ultrarocessed foods. I think there are some problems with NOVA that I brought some problems with NOVA that I brought some problems with NOVA that I brought up earlier. You'd have to make those up earlier. You'd have to make those up earlier. You'd have to make those foods accessible. But some of them you foods accessible. But some of them you foods accessible. But some of them you could fairly quickly if you took could fairly quickly if you took could fairly quickly if you took advantage of some of the other ways that advantage of some of the other ways that advantage of some of the other ways that people are making it. and the rules people are making it. and the rules people are making it. and the rules are just too loose in the US. So I are just too loose in the US. So I are just too loose in the US. So I think that's important and the level at think that's important and the level at think that's important and the level at which this could be impactful is not which this could be impactful is not which this could be impactful is not educating the public to look at the back educating the public to look at the back educating the public to look at the back and find the ultrarocessed cosmetic and find the ultrarocessed cosmetic and find the ultrarocessed cosmetic additive and removing it. It's to say additive and removing it. It's to say additive and removing it. It's to say that we're going to do this and the food that we're going to do this and the food that we're going to do this and the food industry will say I'm going to have to industry will say I'm going to have to industry will say I'm going to have to reformulate if somebody's going to buy reformulate if somebody's going to buy reformulate if somebody's going to buy my product. if they're going to call me my product. if they're going to call me my product. if they're going to call me out on this, not only am I going to have out on this, not only am I going to have out on this, not only am I going to have to reformulate, it won't be hard because to reformulate, it won't be hard because to reformulate, it won't be hard because I do it in another country and I could I do it in another country and I could I do it in another country and I could reformulate and so that ingredient will reformulate and so that ingredient will reformulate and so that ingredient will be gone. I should ask directly for your be gone. I should ask directly for your be gone. I should ask directly for your research. Do you take funding from uh research. Do you take funding from uh research. Do you take funding from uh companies in the food industry? So, companies in the food industry? So, companies in the food industry? So, several times. So, I've got avocado several times. So, I've got avocado several times. So, I've got avocado money, I took soy money, most recently I money, I took soy money, most recently I money, I took soy money, most recently I took Beyond Meat money. Let me talk took Beyond Meat money. Let me talk took Beyond Meat money. Let me talk about the Beyond Meat, which was the about the Beyond Meat, which was the about the Beyond Meat, which was the most recent one. I pitted uh Beyond Meat most recent one. I pitted uh Beyond Meat most recent one. I pitted uh Beyond Meat versus Red Meat for cardioabolic versus Red Meat for cardioabolic versus Red Meat for cardioabolic outcomes and the Beyond Meat won in outcomes and the Beyond Meat won in outcomes and the Beyond Meat won in several categories over the red meat and several categories over the red meat and several categories over the red meat and I got a lot of grief for that. People I got a lot of grief for that. People I got a lot of grief for that. People love their red meat, including me. Yeah. love their red meat, including me. Yeah. love their red meat, including me. Yeah. I'll go easy, but I'm not going to Yeah. I'll go easy, but I'm not going to Yeah. I'll go easy, but I'm not going to go completely easy. Oh my god, gardeners go completely easy. Oh my god, gardeners go completely easy. Oh my god, gardeners and industry shill. All he does is take and industry shill. All he does is take and industry shill. All he does is take No, most of my money does not come from No, most of my money does not come from No, most of my money does not come from there. But I actually couldn't get NIH there. But I actually couldn't get NIH there. But I actually couldn't get NIH funding to do that because they would funding to do that because they would funding to do that because they would say, "Wait a sec. Beyond Meat makes a say, "Wait a sec. Beyond Meat makes a say, "Wait a sec. Beyond Meat makes a crap ton of money. They just sold their crap ton of money. They just sold their crap ton of money. They just sold their IPO. Why would we fund that research? IPO. Why would we fund that research? IPO. Why would we fund that research? Let the food industry fund that. That Let the food industry fund that. That Let the food industry fund that. That actually happens all the time. And we actually happens all the time. And we actually happens all the time. And we could get into how problematic that is could get into how problematic that is could get into how problematic that is or isn't. It's certainly at least or isn't. It's certainly at least or isn't. It's certainly at least somewhat problematic that the company is somewhat problematic that the company is somewhat problematic that the company is funding the research that will test funding the research that will test funding the research that will test their product. But more interesting to their product. But more interesting to their product. But more interesting to me was that this was sort of Beyond Meat me was that this was sort of Beyond Meat me was that this was sort of Beyond Meat 1.0. And Beyond Meat actually did better 1.0. And Beyond Meat actually did better 1.0. And Beyond Meat actually did better than the red meat. And they actually than the red meat. And they actually than the red meat. And they actually after that took out the coconut oil, after that took out the coconut oil, after that took out the coconut oil, took out some other ingredients, added took out some other ingredients, added took out some other ingredients, added some more benign ingredients, and some more benign ingredients, and some more benign ingredients, and they've actually reformulated multiple they've actually reformulated multiple they've actually reformulated multiple times. And so by reformulating, even times. And so by reformulating, even times. And so by reformulating, even though the study we did show they had a though the study we did show they had a though the study we did show they had a benefit. I totally respect that. They're benefit. I totally respect that. They're benefit. I totally respect that. They're like, they are listening. They're like, they are listening. They're like, they are listening. They're looking at the health concerns. They're looking at the health concerns. They're looking at the health concerns. They're trying to be responsive. And I think if trying to be responsive. And I think if trying to be responsive. And I think if the food industry as a whole did this the food industry as a whole did this the food industry as a whole did this and we could work more closely with and we could work more closely with and we could work more closely with them, that would be the way to improve them, that would be the way to improve them, that would be the way to improve the US food supply as opposed to we have the US food supply as opposed to we have the US food supply as opposed to we have a new thing, it's NOVA, get rid of them a new thing, it's NOVA, get rid of them a new thing, it's NOVA, get rid of them all. That won't really work. So I'm all. That won't really work. So I'm all. That won't really work. So I'm hearing two things. One, we need to hearing two things. One, we need to hearing two things. One, we need to pressure the food industry to pressure the food industry to pressure the food industry to reformulate, get rid of these additives, reformulate, get rid of these additives, reformulate, get rid of these additives, dyes, what you call cosmetic additives dyes, what you call cosmetic additives dyes, what you call cosmetic additives that may or may not be deadly. Um, that may or may not be deadly. Um, that may or may not be deadly. Um, certainly not in the short term, but certainly not in the short term, but certainly not in the short term, but that in the long term could very well be that in the long term could very well be that in the long term could very well be problematic. We just we need to do problematic. We just we need to do problematic. We just we need to do something to make sure that stuff's something to make sure that stuff's something to make sure that stuff's removed. It just doesn't make sense to removed. It just doesn't make sense to removed. It just doesn't make sense to hedge on that one. and we can look to hedge on that one. and we can look to hedge on that one. and we can look to Europe and other places that don't Europe and other places that don't Europe and other places that don't clearly that if nothing else they've clearly that if nothing else they've clearly that if nothing else they've proved that you don't need these things proved that you don't need these things proved that you don't need these things in the foods for them to have a stable in the foods for them to have a stable in the foods for them to have a stable shelf life etc. Okay, so that's one. Uh shelf life etc. Okay, so that's one. Uh shelf life etc. Okay, so that's one. Uh the other is this issue of food the other is this issue of food the other is this issue of food industry funding of studies because industry funding of studies because industry funding of studies because um you know I'm not an expert in um you know I'm not an expert in um you know I'm not an expert in nutrition but I pay a lot of attention nutrition but I pay a lot of attention nutrition but I pay a lot of attention to the way that nut nutrition and health to the way that nut nutrition and health to the way that nut nutrition and health is discussed online. That's I'm in the is discussed online. That's I'm in the is discussed online. That's I'm in the that's my business more or less that's my business more or less that's my business more or less and every time somebody hears that a and every time somebody hears that a and every time somebody hears that a researcher took money from a company to researcher took money from a company to researcher took money from a company to run a study uh they assume that there's run a study uh they assume that there's run a study uh they assume that there's bias. um in fairness to you and to the bias. um in fairness to you and to the bias. um in fairness to you and to the process I'll just ask are they able to process I'll just ask are they able to process I'll just ask are they able to influence the influence the influence the question certainly not the collection of question certainly not the collection of question certainly not the collection of data there's I mean you know the data there's I mean you know the data there's I mean you know the data are the data um your graduate students are the data um your graduate students are the data um your graduate students and posttos who are the ones who and posttos who are the ones who and posttos who are the ones who actually run these experiments um actually run these experiments um actually run these experiments um presumably no have a hypothesis at the presumably no have a hypothesis at the presumably no have a hypothesis at the beginning they ask a question and they beginning they ask a question and they beginning they ask a question and they try and disprove that hypothesis um but try and disprove that hypothesis um but try and disprove that hypothesis um but does the company say we want you to test does the company say we want you to test does the company say we want you to test a given hypothesis or is it funding for a given hypothesis or is it funding for a given hypothesis or is it funding for you to test a hypothesis that you to test a hypothesis that you to test a hypothesis that you select. In other words, is there good select. In other words, is there good select. In other words, is there good separation of concept? Um, clearly the separation of concept? Um, clearly the separation of concept? Um, clearly the money issue gets people inflamed, but money issue gets people inflamed, but money issue gets people inflamed, but it's a very different thing when a it's a very different thing when a it's a very different thing when a company says, "Hey, can you test whether company says, "Hey, can you test whether company says, "Hey, can you test whether or not our product outperforms in terms or not our product outperforms in terms or not our product outperforms in terms of cardioabolic markers compared to red of cardioabolic markers compared to red of cardioabolic markers compared to red meat versus, hey, listen, you know, you meat versus, hey, listen, you know, you meat versus, hey, listen, you know, you want to stud you want to study want to stud you want to study want to stud you want to study cardioabolic markers in people that cardioabolic markers in people that cardioabolic markers in people that consume Beyond Meat versus cow meat? Um, consume Beyond Meat versus cow meat? Um, consume Beyond Meat versus cow meat? Um, okay, we'll fund that." There's there's okay, we'll fund that." There's there's okay, we'll fund that." There's there's it's it seems subtle but it's not so it's it seems subtle but it's not so it's it seems subtle but it's not so subtle because in one case they have a subtle because in one case they have a subtle because in one case they have a an endpoint that they're interested in. an endpoint that they're interested in. an endpoint that they're interested in. In another in the other case you have an In another in the other case you have an In another in the other case you have an end endpoint that you're interested in. end endpoint that you're interested in. end endpoint that you're interested in. Yeah. There's not a simple answer to Yeah. There's not a simple answer to Yeah. There's not a simple answer to that because it's not a yes no question. that because it's not a yes no question. that because it's not a yes no question. It's a total continuum. So they could It's a total continuum. So they could It's a total continuum. So they could say we'll give you this money if you'll say we'll give you this money if you'll say we'll give you this money if you'll do that. They could say we'll give you do that. They could say we'll give you do that. They could say we'll give you this money to do anything you want but this money to do anything you want but this money to do anything you want but tell us about it as you go. Uh you could tell us about it as you go. Uh you could tell us about it as you go. Uh you could write up the results. I'll give you the write up the results. I'll give you the write up the results. I'll give you the most interesting personal experience most interesting personal experience most interesting personal experience that I had in this. So everything was that I had in this. So everything was that I had in this. So everything was pretty benign. all the way up till when pretty benign. all the way up till when pretty benign. all the way up till when we got the study done. And this had to we got the study done. And this had to we got the study done. And this had to do with cognitive do with cognitive do with cognitive impairment. And so I'm not going to even impairment. And so I'm not going to even impairment. And so I'm not going to even talk about the product. I'll just set talk about the product. I'll just set talk about the product. I'll just set this up because I think you'll find it this up because I think you'll find it this up because I think you'll find it interesting. So turns out the people we interesting. So turns out the people we interesting. So turns out the people we recruited had pretty high cognitive recruited had pretty high cognitive recruited had pretty high cognitive ability. There's a cog there's a survey ability. There's a cog there's a survey ability. There's a cog there's a survey you can take and I think 50 was the top you can take and I think 50 was the top you can take and I think 50 was the top and everybody who signed up was a 45. and everybody who signed up was a 45. and everybody who signed up was a 45. And we were kind of looking to see if And we were kind of looking to see if And we were kind of looking to see if this supplement could increase cognitive this supplement could increase cognitive this supplement could increase cognitive ability. But we should have realized in ability. But we should have realized in ability. But we should have realized in the beginning that there wasn't much the beginning that there wasn't much the beginning that there wasn't much room to increase. They were 45 out of 50 room to increase. They were 45 out of 50 room to increase. They were 45 out of 50 to begin with and it failed to show that to begin with and it failed to show that to begin with and it failed to show that the product increased cognitive ability. the product increased cognitive ability. the product increased cognitive ability. So we shared it with the company and So we shared it with the company and So we shared it with the company and they said, "Well, I can see you're they said, "Well, I can see you're they said, "Well, I can see you're saying there's a null finding here, but saying there's a null finding here, but saying there's a null finding here, but could you also say uh there was no could you also say uh there was no could you also say uh there was no dilitterious effect?" And I said, "We dilitterious effect?" And I said, "We dilitterious effect?" And I said, "We weren't looking for a dilitterious weren't looking for a dilitterious weren't looking for a dilitterious effect. We were looking for an effect. We were looking for an effect. We were looking for an improvement." They said, "Yeah, but improvement." They said, "Yeah, but improvement." They said, "Yeah, but isn't it also true that it didn't make isn't it also true that it didn't make isn't it also true that it didn't make it worse?" I it worse?" I it worse?" I thought that's actually true. It didn't thought that's actually true. It didn't thought that's actually true. It didn't make it worse. Could I to make these make it worse. Could I to make these make it worse. Could I to make these guys happy and to maybe get more money guys happy and to maybe get more money guys happy and to maybe get more money later? Should we say it didn't make it later? Should we say it didn't make it later? Should we say it didn't make it worse? So, that would be a really subtle worse? So, that would be a really subtle worse? So, that would be a really subtle influence that they could have later on. influence that they could have later on. influence that they could have later on. In theory, they could mark it with this In theory, they could mark it with this In theory, they could mark it with this supplement maintains high levels of supplement maintains high levels of supplement maintains high levels of cognitive performance and be truthful cognitive performance and be truthful cognitive performance and be truthful but not giving the whole picture. And at but not giving the whole picture. And at but not giving the whole picture. And at the end of the day, really, the end of the day, really, the end of the day, really, the important thing is to look at the study important thing is to look at the study important thing is to look at the study design. So, let me I think I can flip design. So, let me I think I can flip design. So, let me I think I can flip this to something that's way more this to something that's way more this to something that's way more practical than that. It's not even practical than that. It's not even practical than that. It's not even industry influence. It's the industry influence. It's the industry influence. It's the investigator influence. So, in my world investigator influence. So, in my world investigator influence. So, in my world of nutrition, and this is going to go of nutrition, and this is going to go of nutrition, and this is going to go back to the parking lot of not doing one back to the parking lot of not doing one back to the parking lot of not doing one thing at one time, but doing multiple thing at one time, but doing multiple thing at one time, but doing multiple things at one time. Let's say I want to things at one time. Let's say I want to things at one time. Let's say I want to study vegan or paleo or keto or study vegan or paleo or keto or study vegan or paleo or keto or something like that. I can have diet A something like that. I can have diet A something like that. I can have diet A versus diet B and make a kick-ass diet A versus diet B and make a kick-ass diet A versus diet B and make a kick-ass diet A and a crappy diet B. So, it's really and a crappy diet B. So, it's really and a crappy diet B. So, it's really unlikely that B will win. And then I unlikely that B will win. And then I unlikely that B will win. And then I publish that and there's a headline on publish that and there's a headline on publish that and there's a headline on it. And then there's someone else who it. And then there's someone else who it. And then there's someone else who actually favors a competing diet. They actually favors a competing diet. They actually favors a competing diet. They start a study. They make a kick-ass diet start a study. They make a kick-ass diet start a study. They make a kick-ass diet B and a crappy diet A and the diet B and a crappy diet A and the diet B and a crappy diet A and the diet B wins because they set it up that way. No wins because they set it up that way. No wins because they set it up that way. No industry influence at all here. This is industry influence at all here. This is industry influence at all here. This is investigator influence. And then the investigator influence. And then the investigator influence. And then the public comes and says, "What the public comes and says, "What the public comes and says, "What the hell? It said diet A is better one day hell? It said diet A is better one day hell? It said diet A is better one day and it said diet B is better the next." and it said diet B is better the next." and it said diet B is better the next." My god, you nutrition scientists never My god, you nutrition scientists never My god, you nutrition scientists never agree on anything. I'm just gonna go agree on anything. I'm just gonna go agree on anything. I'm just gonna go have a burger. I was have a burger. I was have a burger. I was like, if you had looked at the design. like, if you had looked at the design. like, if you had looked at the design. So, one of my favorite new words in So, one of my favorite new words in So, one of my favorite new words in nutrition is nutrition is nutrition is equipoise. I've been trying to set up equipoise. I've been trying to set up equipoise. I've been trying to set up studies where it's the best diet A that studies where it's the best diet A that studies where it's the best diet A that you could be and the best diet B. So, if you could be and the best diet B. So, if you could be and the best diet B. So, if I can just riff off a couple things. One I can just riff off a couple things. One I can just riff off a couple things. One of my most famous studies is diet fits. of my most famous studies is diet fits. of my most famous studies is diet fits. It had to do with a low carb, low-fat It had to do with a low carb, low-fat It had to do with a low carb, low-fat diet. 600 people for uh a year. This is diet. 600 people for uh a year. This is diet. 600 people for uh a year. This is an $8 million study. This is the 2018 an $8 million study. This is the 2018 an $8 million study. This is the 2018 study. Yeah. Uhhuh. And we try and I study. Yeah. Uhhuh. And we try and I study. Yeah. Uhhuh. And we try and I told the dietitians, I said, I don't told the dietitians, I said, I don't told the dietitians, I said, I don't really care which one wins. Uh we really care which one wins. Uh we really care which one wins. Uh we actually think there's some genetic actually think there's some genetic actually think there's some genetic predisposition or metabolic predisposition or metabolic predisposition or metabolic predisposition. It'd be great if predisposition. It'd be great if predisposition. It'd be great if everybody won, but just to test this everybody won, but just to test this everybody won, but just to test this fairly, I want all the dieticians to be fairly, I want all the dieticians to be fairly, I want all the dieticians to be advising the 600 people in this study. advising the 600 people in this study. advising the 600 people in this study. You have to teach both lowfat and low You have to teach both lowfat and low You have to teach both lowfat and low carb. You get assigned to different carb. You get assigned to different carb. You get assigned to different groups and teach the best low carb you groups and teach the best low carb you groups and teach the best low carb you can and the best lowfat you can. So that can and the best lowfat you can. So that can and the best lowfat you can. So that if one wins at the end, we can say we if one wins at the end, we can say we if one wins at the end, we can say we gave both of them a fair shot. Um when gave both of them a fair shot. Um when gave both of them a fair shot. Um when we did swap meat, this is our say we did swap meat, this is our say we did swap meat, this is our say the study with appetizing plant food, a the study with appetizing plant food, a the study with appetizing plant food, a meat eating alternative trial, swap meat eating alternative trial, swap meat eating alternative trial, swap meat trial with beyond meat, what should we trial with beyond meat, what should we trial with beyond meat, what should we pick for the red meat? Should we pick for the red meat? Should we pick for the red meat? Should we pick fast food? Should we pick? We went to uh fast food? Should we pick? We went to uh fast food? Should we pick? We went to uh San Francisco and got good eggs which San Francisco and got good eggs which San Francisco and got good eggs which prides itself on getting organic, prides itself on getting organic, prides itself on getting organic, regeneratively farm, pasture-raised. So regeneratively farm, pasture-raised. So regeneratively farm, pasture-raised. So we wanted to get a good quality red we wanted to get a good quality red we wanted to get a good quality red meat. Uh we did a study with a vegan meat. Uh we did a study with a vegan meat. Uh we did a study with a vegan diet versus an omnivorous diet. And so diet versus an omnivorous diet. And so diet versus an omnivorous diet. And so for the omnivorous diet, we went to a for the omnivorous diet, we went to a for the omnivorous diet, we went to a company that makes really good food and company that makes really good food and company that makes really good food and we have it delivered versus vegan. We we have it delivered versus vegan. We we have it delivered versus vegan. We did ketogenic versus Mediterranean and did ketogenic versus Mediterranean and did ketogenic versus Mediterranean and we made a good Mediterranean diet. and we made a good Mediterranean diet. and we made a good Mediterranean diet. and we did Jeff Folic and Steve Finn's well we did Jeff Folic and Steve Finn's well we did Jeff Folic and Steve Finn's well formulated ketogenic diet as the formulated ketogenic diet as the formulated ketogenic diet as the comparison. So in all these our group comparison. So in all these our group comparison. So in all these our group has been having fun trying to address has been having fun trying to address has been having fun trying to address your comment separate from industry your comment separate from industry your comment separate from industry influence just to try to make the two influence just to try to make the two influence just to try to make the two arms as fairly competing against one arms as fairly competing against one arms as fairly competing against one another as you another as you another as you can. Going back to the industry one, can. Going back to the industry one, can. Going back to the industry one, there's no way to pull it off 100% there's no way to pull it off 100% there's no way to pull it off 100% clean. There's just no way. There's so clean. There's just no way. There's so clean. There's just no way. There's so many subtle things that could happen. many subtle things that could happen. many subtle things that could happen. So, the thing that does help these days So, the thing that does help these days So, the thing that does help these days is you have to register your is you have to register your is you have to register your trial in clinical trials.gov to start trial in clinical trials.gov to start trial in clinical trials.gov to start with. You have to name the primary with. You have to name the primary with. You have to name the primary outcome ahead of time and the whole outcome ahead of time and the whole outcome ahead of time and the whole study design for the world to see so study design for the world to see so study design for the world to see so that if it gets to the end of the study that if it gets to the end of the study that if it gets to the end of the study and you switched it, somebody will say and you switched it, somebody will say and you switched it, somebody will say calling you out on BS. That wasn't your calling you out on BS. That wasn't your calling you out on BS. That wasn't your primary outcome. You can have a third primary outcome. You can have a third primary outcome. You can have a third party analyze your data. You can lock party analyze your data. You can lock party analyze your data. You can lock down the data at the end. you can make down the data at the end. you can make down the data at the end. you can make the data publicly available. There's a the data publicly available. There's a the data publicly available. There's a couple more of these steps that you couple more of these steps that you couple more of these steps that you could This is as transparent as I can could This is as transparent as I can could This is as transparent as I can be. So, you can make the chance of be. So, you can make the chance of be. So, you can make the chance of industry influence industry influence industry influence lower, but you can never eliminate it. lower, but you can never eliminate it. lower, but you can never eliminate it. So, if I find a positive result, maybe So, if I find a positive result, maybe So, if I find a positive result, maybe they'll fund me again later for they'll fund me again later for they'll fund me again later for something else. Um, even though they something else. Um, even though they something else. Um, even though they didn't, some of this uh industry folks didn't, some of this uh industry folks didn't, some of this uh industry folks like I often get gifts. If it's a gift, like I often get gifts. If it's a gift, like I often get gifts. If it's a gift, they can't demand to see anything. But I they can't demand to see anything. But I they can't demand to see anything. But I can offer to show them what can offer to show them what can offer to show them what happened. And if I if I show them and happened. And if I if I show them and happened. And if I if I show them and they say, "Hey, would you consider doing they say, "Hey, would you consider doing they say, "Hey, would you consider doing this?" I'd be pretty stupid to say, "No, this?" I'd be pretty stupid to say, "No, this?" I'd be pretty stupid to say, "No, you gave me a gift." And I'm not going you gave me a gift." And I'm not going you gave me a gift." And I'm not going to consider the thing you said. I to consider the thing you said. I to consider the thing you said. I would say, "Yeah, I'll consider it. I would say, "Yeah, I'll consider it. I would say, "Yeah, I'll consider it. I will look at it and I want to present will look at it and I want to present will look at it and I want to present objective data." But it's I don't think objective data." But it's I don't think objective data." But it's I don't think it's the industry as much as the it's the industry as much as the it's the industry as much as the investigator and how they handle it. investigator and how they handle it. investigator and how they handle it. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 daily for more than 13 years. AG1 daily for more than 13 years. AG1 daily for more than 13 years. However, I've now found an even better However, I've now found an even better However, I've now found an even better vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. That vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. That vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. That new and better drink is the new and new and better drink is the new and new and better drink is the new and improved AG1, which just launched this improved AG1, which just launched this improved AG1, which just launched this month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is a more advanced clinically backed a more advanced clinically backed a more advanced clinically backed version of the product that I've been version of the product that I've been version of the product that I've been taking daily for years. It includes new taking daily for years. It includes new taking daily for years. It includes new bioavailable nutrients and enhanced bioavailable nutrients and enhanced bioavailable nutrients and enhanced probiotics. The NextGen formula is based probiotics. The NextGen formula is based probiotics. The NextGen formula is based on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes several specific it now includes several specific it now includes several specific clinically studied probiotic strains clinically studied probiotic strains clinically studied probiotic strains that have been shown to support both that have been shown to support both that have been shown to support both digestive health and immune system digestive health and immune system digestive health and immune system health as well as to improve bowel health as well as to improve bowel health as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. As regularity and to reduce bloating. As regularity and to reduce bloating. As someone who's been involved in research someone who's been involved in research someone who's been involved in research science for more than three decades and science for more than three decades and science for more than three decades and in health and fitness for equally as in health and fitness for equally as in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the long, I'm constantly looking for the long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental health, best tools to improve my mental health, best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and performance. I physical health, and performance. I physical health, and performance. I discovered and started taking AG1 way discovered and started taking AG1 way discovered and started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I ever had a back in 2012, long before I ever had a back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every podcast, and I've been taking it every podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. I find that it greatly day since. I find that it greatly day since. I find that it greatly improves all aspects of my health. I improves all aspects of my health. I improves all aspects of my health. I just feel so much better when I take it. just feel so much better when I take it. just feel so much better when I take it. With each passing year, and by the way, With each passing year, and by the way, With each passing year, and by the way, I'm turning 50 this September. I I'm turning 50 this September. I I'm turning 50 this September. I continue to feel better and better, and continue to feel better and better, and continue to feel better and better, and I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in uses the highest quality ingredients in uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're the right combinations, and they're the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. So, I'm without increasing the cost. So, I'm without increasing the cost. So, I'm honored to have them as a sponsor of honored to have them as a sponsor of honored to have them as a sponsor of this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you can go to you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an AG1 welcome kit with five free travel AG1 welcome kit with five free travel AG1 welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to K2. Again, go to K2. Again, go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the special welcome kit with five free special welcome kit with five free special welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of travel packs and a free bottle of travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I've been doing weekly therapy online. I've been doing weekly therapy online. I've been doing weekly therapy for over 30 years. Initially, I didn't for over 30 years. Initially, I didn't for over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition of have a choice. It was a condition of have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay in school. But being allowed to stay in school. But being allowed to stay in school. But pretty soon, I realized that therapy is pretty soon, I realized that therapy is pretty soon, I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to an extremely important component to an extremely important component to overall health. In fact, I consider overall health. In fact, I consider overall health. In fact, I consider doing regular weekly therapy just as doing regular weekly therapy just as doing regular weekly therapy just as important as getting regular exercise, important as getting regular exercise, important as getting regular exercise, which of course I also do every week. which of course I also do every week. which of course I also do every week. There are essentially three things that There are essentially three things that There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, great therapy provides. First of all, great therapy provides. First of all, great therapy provides a great rapport great therapy provides a great rapport great therapy provides a great rapport with somebody that you can trust and with somebody that you can trust and with somebody that you can trust and talk to about any and all issues with. talk to about any and all issues with. talk to about any and all issues with. Second of all, great therapy provides Second of all, great therapy provides Second of all, great therapy provides support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support or directed guidance. And third, expert or directed guidance. And third, expert or directed guidance. And third, expert therapy can provide useful insights. therapy can provide useful insights. therapy can provide useful insights. Sometimes those come from the therapist. Sometimes those come from the therapist. Sometimes those come from the therapist. Sometimes you realize those yourself in Sometimes you realize those yourself in Sometimes you realize those yourself in the course of therapy, and sometimes you the course of therapy, and sometimes you the course of therapy, and sometimes you arrive at those insights together. Those arrive at those insights together. Those arrive at those insights together. Those insights can allow you to make changes insights can allow you to make changes insights can allow you to make changes to improve your life in immeasurable to improve your life in immeasurable to improve your life in immeasurable ways. Not just your emotional life and ways. Not just your emotional life and ways. Not just your emotional life and your relationship life, but also your relationship life, but also your relationship life, but also your professional life. With BetterHelp, they professional life. With BetterHelp, they professional life. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy to find an expert make it very easy to find an expert make it very easy to find an expert therapist you resonate with and that can therapist you resonate with and that can therapist you resonate with and that can provide you these benefits that come provide you these benefits that come provide you these benefits that come through effective therapy. If you'd like through effective therapy. If you'd like through effective therapy. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. When it comes betterhelp.com/huberman. When it comes betterhelp.com/huberman. When it comes to Well, let's just um close the hatch to Well, let's just um close the hatch to Well, let's just um close the hatch on the industry funding part because I on the industry funding part because I on the industry funding part because I know that's going to get um some people know that's going to get um some people know that's going to get um some people uh hair standing up a little bit. uh hair standing up a little bit. uh hair standing up a little bit. Is there a world where you don't have to Is there a world where you don't have to Is there a world where you don't have to rely on industry funding to do these rely on industry funding to do these rely on industry funding to do these studies? I mean, my first response is studies? I mean, my first response is studies? I mean, my first response is like um why go there? Why not just I like um why go there? Why not just I like um why go there? Why not just I mean, we have a National Institutes of mean, we have a National Institutes of mean, we have a National Institutes of Health. Um they fund studies on Health. Um they fund studies on Health. Um they fund studies on everything from developing novel everything from developing novel everything from developing novel molecules for the treatment of molecules for the treatment of molecules for the treatment of Parkinson's to studying the effects of Parkinson's to studying the effects of Parkinson's to studying the effects of breath work on cancer outcomes. I mean I breath work on cancer outcomes. I mean I breath work on cancer outcomes. I mean I mean it's mean it's mean it's a nowadays it's a very wide range of a nowadays it's a very wide range of a nowadays it's a very wide range of topics that the NIH embraces but I think topics that the NIH embraces but I think topics that the NIH embraces but I think most people don't realize this but most people don't realize this but most people don't realize this but there's and everything in between so why there's and everything in between so why there's and everything in between so why not just go to NIH for the money not just go to NIH for the money not just go to NIH for the money historically the proportion of the NIH historically the proportion of the NIH historically the proportion of the NIH budget gone to nut that goes to budget gone to nut that goes to budget gone to nut that goes to nutrition studies is infinite decimally nutrition studies is infinite decimally nutrition studies is infinite decimally small there there's been many requests small there there's been many requests small there there's been many requests to create an institute of nutrition to create an institute of nutrition to create an institute of nutrition I personally that would be pretty I personally that would be pretty I personally that would be pretty selfish I'm all in I wish they would selfish I'm all in I wish they would selfish I'm all in I wish they would have more resources for me to do those have more resources for me to do those have more resources for me to do those kinds of studies with objective money. kinds of studies with objective money. kinds of studies with objective money. My guess is Robert Kennedy would be a My guess is Robert Kennedy would be a My guess is Robert Kennedy would be a fan of that sort of thing. I'm not fan of that sort of thing. I'm not fan of that sort of thing. I'm not speaking about this with any um speaking about this with any um speaking about this with any um political affiliation, but he seems to political affiliation, but he seems to political affiliation, but he seems to care a lot about getting dyes and care a lot about getting dyes and care a lot about getting dyes and additives out of food and cares a lot additives out of food and cares a lot additives out of food and cares a lot about the food supply. At least he about the food supply. At least he about the food supply. At least he stated that. Um and NIH is currently in stated that. Um and NIH is currently in stated that. Um and NIH is currently in a state of massive revision right now. a state of massive revision right now. a state of massive revision right now. Pause revision. Pause revision. Pause revision. Um, and I would imagine they would Um, and I would imagine they would Um, and I would imagine they would allocate more funding for studies of allocate more funding for studies of allocate more funding for studies of nutrition um, given who's in charge. nutrition um, given who's in charge. nutrition um, given who's in charge. Now, the bigger challenge is how Now, the bigger challenge is how Now, the bigger challenge is how many nutrition questions there are. So, many nutrition questions there are. So, many nutrition questions there are. So, I just served for two years on the I just served for two years on the I just served for two years on the dietary guidelines advisory committee. dietary guidelines advisory committee. dietary guidelines advisory committee. We had two years to consider 60 We had two years to consider 60 We had two years to consider 60 different questions. Each one of the questions questions. Each one of the questions questions. Each one of the questions generated sub questions. generated sub questions. generated sub questions. The vast majority of questions resulted The vast majority of questions resulted The vast majority of questions resulted in a conclusion that is either not in a conclusion that is either not in a conclusion that is either not enough data available or only enough data available or only enough data available or only enough data available to generate a limited data available to generate a limited data available to generate a limited strength response to get a moderate or a strength response to get a moderate or a strength response to get a moderate or a strong. More data are needed. This was strong. More data are needed. This was strong. More data are needed. This was almost mind-numbingly repetitive through almost mind-numbingly repetitive through almost mind-numbingly repetitive through the whole two-year process. More data the whole two-year process. More data the whole two-year process. More data needed, more data needed, more data. And needed, more data needed, more data. And needed, more data needed, more data. And this had to do with snacks, skipping this had to do with snacks, skipping this had to do with snacks, skipping meals, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, meals, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, meals, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, pregnancy, infancy, processed foods, pregnancy, infancy, processed foods, pregnancy, infancy, processed foods, seed oils, meat and protein, the seed oils, meat and protein, the seed oils, meat and protein, the questions are pretty endless. So if even questions are pretty endless. So if even questions are pretty endless. So if even if you opened up the NIH and said, if you opened up the NIH and said, if you opened up the NIH and said, "Yeah, we're going to we're going to "Yeah, we're going to we're going to "Yeah, we're going to we're going to move 25% of our budget to studying move 25% of our budget to studying move 25% of our budget to studying nutrition," you wouldn't even come close nutrition," you wouldn't even come close nutrition," you wouldn't even come close to answering all the questions that the to answering all the questions that the to answering all the questions that the public has right now. Yeah, that's an public has right now. Yeah, that's an public has right now. Yeah, that's an important point and I would say that the important point and I would say that the important point and I would say that the public is also doing these the public is also doing these the public is also doing these experiments. You know, the health and experiments. You know, the health and experiments. You know, the health and wellness uh community gets um catches a wellness uh community gets um catches a wellness uh community gets um catches a lot of flak from the standard scientific lot of flak from the standard scientific lot of flak from the standard scientific community. They'll say, you know, community. They'll say, you know, community. They'll say, you know, supplements aren't regulated. They are supplements aren't regulated. They are supplements aren't regulated. They are regulated. There is variety of qualities regulated. There is variety of qualities regulated. There is variety of qualities across brands and even probably even across brands and even probably even across brands and even probably even supplements within brand. But supplements within brand. But supplements within brand. But um the experiments are ongoing. You have um the experiments are ongoing. You have um the experiments are ongoing. You have people who are carnivore, you have people who are carnivore, you have people who are carnivore, you have people who are vegan, you have people who are vegan, you have people who are vegan, you have people finding what works for them. they finding what works for them. they finding what works for them. they eliminate this or they add that and eliminate this or they add that and eliminate this or they add that and they're becoming scientists for they're becoming scientists for they're becoming scientists for themselves and we've really themselves and we've really themselves and we've really decentralized nutrition science in my decentralized nutrition science in my decentralized nutrition science in my opinion. That's just my little opinion. That's just my little opinion. That's just my little editorializing. Um, you mentioned this editorializing. Um, you mentioned this editorializing. Um, you mentioned this 2018 study and I'm so glad that you 2018 study and I'm so glad that you 2018 study and I'm so glad that you mentioned um, your efforts to remove mentioned um, your efforts to remove mentioned um, your efforts to remove investigator bias by making the vegan investigator bias by making the vegan investigator bias by making the vegan diet not like crap vegan food and not diet not like crap vegan food and not diet not like crap vegan food and not making the meat diet all processed meats making the meat diet all processed meats making the meat diet all processed meats because that's happened in a lot of because that's happened in a lot of because that's happened in a lot of studies. Yes. And then that's why the studies. Yes. And then that's why the studies. Yes. And then that's why the headlines are so confusing over the headlines are so confusing over the headlines are so confusing over the years or even within a year. So um could years or even within a year. So um could years or even within a year. So um could you just share with us the major results you just share with us the major results you just share with us the major results of that study? What the what the key of that study? What the what the key of that study? What the what the key takeaway was so that people who heard oh takeaway was so that people who heard oh takeaway was so that people who heard oh I heard paleo, vegan, vegetarian um you I heard paleo, vegan, vegetarian um you I heard paleo, vegan, vegetarian um you know Mediterranean and omnivore which know Mediterranean and omnivore which know Mediterranean and omnivore which diet was best if any and for what diet was best if any and for what diet was best if any and for what purpose? Yeah at the end of the day my purpose? Yeah at the end of the day my purpose? Yeah at the end of the day my take if you put all of my studies take if you put all of my studies take if you put all of my studies together it's a whole food plant-based together it's a whole food plant-based together it's a whole food plant-based diet which does not mean vegan and diet which does not mean vegan and diet which does not mean vegan and doesn't mean vegetarian but could wait doesn't mean vegetarian but could wait doesn't mean vegetarian but could wait plant-based but includes meat. Yeah. So, plant-based but includes meat. Yeah. So, plant-based but includes meat. Yeah. So, I don't like this new thing about I don't like this new thing about I don't like this new thing about plant-based being vegan. Sorry. So, plant-based being vegan. Sorry. So, plant-based being vegan. Sorry. So, we're not It's a terrible name. So, we're not It's a terrible name. So, we're not It's a terrible name. So, let's just do this for 60 seconds. So, let's just do this for 60 seconds. So, let's just do this for 60 seconds. So, uh pescatarian, lactoova vegetarian, uh pescatarian, lactoova vegetarian, uh pescatarian, lactoova vegetarian, lacto vegetarian, ovoarian, lacto vegetarian, ovoarian, lacto vegetarian, ovoarian, uh vegan, flexitarian, reducarian. Oh my uh vegan, flexitarian, reducarian. Oh my uh vegan, flexitarian, reducarian. Oh my goodness, there's all kinds of words out goodness, there's all kinds of words out goodness, there's all kinds of words out there. And clearly, one of the ones that there. And clearly, one of the ones that there. And clearly, one of the ones that doesn't go over well is vegan. Vegan is doesn't go over well is vegan. Vegan is doesn't go over well is vegan. Vegan is very polarizing. And a lot of that is very polarizing. And a lot of that is very polarizing. And a lot of that is because the vegan community because the vegan community because the vegan community uh an important reason many of them are uh an important reason many of them are uh an important reason many of them are vegan is animal rights and welfare. And vegan is animal rights and welfare. And vegan is animal rights and welfare. And it becomes sort of a condescending it becomes sort of a condescending it becomes sort of a condescending thing. Oh my god, you're so unethical thing. Oh my god, you're so unethical thing. Oh my god, you're so unethical and immoral. You slaughter animals and immoral. You slaughter animals and immoral. You slaughter animals and eat them. I am holier than thou. I eat them. I am holier than thou. I eat them. I am holier than thou. I don't. Well, then it gets into issues don't. Well, then it gets into issues don't. Well, then it gets into issues whether or not a vegan is wearing whether or not a vegan is wearing whether or not a vegan is wearing leather shoes or not wearing leather shoes or not wearing leather shoes or not wearing leather shoes. And the vegan community and shoes. And the vegan community and shoes. And the vegan community and historically was very closely tied to historically was very closely tied to historically was very closely tied to the animal rights community. some of the animal rights community. some of the animal rights community. some of which were radical animal rights which were radical animal rights which were radical animal rights activists that blew up buildings and you activists that blew up buildings and you activists that blew up buildings and you know and worse. I know people who have know and worse. I know people who have know and worse. I know people who have been targeted by those explosions. I been targeted by those explosions. I been targeted by those explosions. I have been plant-based vegan for many have been plant-based vegan for many have been plant-based vegan for many years and I haven't blown up any many years and I haven't blown up any many years and I haven't blown up any buildings and I haven't thrown any rain buildings and I haven't thrown any rain buildings and I haven't thrown any rain red paint on anybody wearing a fur. But red paint on anybody wearing a fur. But red paint on anybody wearing a fur. But because that was so polarizing because that was so polarizing because that was so polarizing recently and I think this is going to recently and I think this is going to recently and I think this is going to have this is going to have a backlash have this is going to have a backlash have this is going to have a backlash and it's going to be fail. People have and it's going to be fail. People have and it's going to be fail. People have been using plant-based as a different been using plant-based as a different been using plant-based as a different word for vegan. Just like, oh, we're not word for vegan. Just like, oh, we're not word for vegan. Just like, oh, we're not the polarizing group. We're the polarizing group. We're the polarizing group. We're the plant-based, which is not polarizing. plant-based, which is not polarizing. plant-based, which is not polarizing. So, I've been doing this for 30 years. So, I've been doing this for 30 years. So, I've been doing this for 30 years. When I said plant-based for the last 20 When I said plant-based for the last 20 When I said plant-based for the last 20 years, I meant most of its plants and years, I meant most of its plants and years, I meant most of its plants and some of its dairy and some of its meat. some of its dairy and some of its meat. some of its dairy and some of its meat. So, I actually use it differently than So, I actually use it differently than So, I actually use it differently than what it has just morphed into recently. what it has just morphed into recently. what it has just morphed into recently. So when I say whole food plant-based So when I say whole food plant-based So when I say whole food plant-based diet, that could be 25% animal products, diet, that could be 25% animal products, diet, that could be 25% animal products, it could be 30% animal products, could it could be 30% animal products, could it could be 30% animal products, could be 10%, it could be zero animal be 10%, it could be zero animal be 10%, it could be zero animal products, but it be mostly plants. This products, but it be mostly plants. This products, but it be mostly plants. This is sort of Michael Pollen's old eat food is sort of Michael Pollen's old eat food is sort of Michael Pollen's old eat food not too much, mostly plants. So that's not too much, mostly plants. So that's not too much, mostly plants. So that's what my research would suggest. Um, the what my research would suggest. Um, the what my research would suggest. Um, the vegans did better than the omnivores in vegans did better than the omnivores in vegans did better than the omnivores in our twin study that was featured on our twin study that was featured on our twin study that was featured on Netflix. the Mediterranean versus the Netflix. the Mediterranean versus the Netflix. the Mediterranean versus the keto diet. It's a little more subtle. We keto diet. It's a little more subtle. We keto diet. It's a little more subtle. We might have to get into that. The low might have to get into that. The low might have to get into that. The low carb versus lowfat was very specifically carb versus lowfat was very specifically carb versus lowfat was very specifically for weight loss. So another issue here for weight loss. So another issue here for weight loss. So another issue here is you know what's the goal? Is it a is you know what's the goal? Is it a is you know what's the goal? Is it a weight loss thing? Is it a cardio weight loss thing? Is it a cardio weight loss thing? Is it a cardio amount? You have to think about the amount? You have to think about the amount? You have to think about the exposure in the exposure in the exposure in the population. So the diet fit study my population. So the diet fit study my population. So the diet fit study my most famous study with the 600 people is most famous study with the 600 people is most famous study with the 600 people is really fun to work. We had sort of really fun to work. We had sort of really fun to work. We had sort of unlimited funds mostly from NIH but from unlimited funds mostly from NIH but from unlimited funds mostly from NIH but from some from the nutrition science some from the nutrition science some from the nutrition science initiative that Peter Atia and Gary Tobs initiative that Peter Atia and Gary Tobs initiative that Peter Atia and Gary Tobs led. If it's okay if I go here just for led. If it's okay if I go here just for led. If it's okay if I go here just for a minute I had done another study before a minute I had done another study before a minute I had done another study before that called the A toZ study and A was that called the A toZ study and A was that called the A toZ study and A was Atkins and T was a traditional health Atkins and T was a traditional health Atkins and T was a traditional health professionals approach and O was Ornish professionals approach and O was Ornish professionals approach and O was Ornish and Z was zone and these were three of and Z was zone and these were three of and Z was zone and these were three of those were popular books that were those were popular books that were those were popular books that were bestsellers and they were wildly bestsellers and they were wildly bestsellers and they were wildly different in carbs and fats. Atkins was different in carbs and fats. Atkins was different in carbs and fats. Atkins was super low carb, Ornish was super high super low carb, Ornish was super high super low carb, Ornish was super high carb, zone was kind of in the middle and carb, zone was kind of in the middle and carb, zone was kind of in the middle and the traditional health professionals the traditional health professionals the traditional health professionals approach was sort of the control. We had approach was sort of the control. We had approach was sort of the control. We had 311 women who did it for a year and it 311 women who did it for a year and it 311 women who did it for a year and it was a weight loss study and at the end was a weight loss study and at the end was a weight loss study and at the end of the day when we published the paper of the day when we published the paper of the day when we published the paper in JAMA, they were a few pounds in JAMA, they were a few pounds in JAMA, they were a few pounds different. The only statistically different. The only statistically different. The only statistically significant difference was between significant difference was between significant difference was between Atkins and Atkins and Atkins and Zone, which was weird because those were Zone, which was weird because those were Zone, which was weird because those were the two low carb diets. You would have the two low carb diets. You would have the two low carb diets. You would have thought maybe it's Atkins versus Ornish, thought maybe it's Atkins versus Ornish, thought maybe it's Atkins versus Ornish, the two extreme diets, but those weren't the two extreme diets, but those weren't the two extreme diets, but those weren't different. When I looked at that study different. When I looked at that study different. When I looked at that study published in 2007, what really struck me published in 2007, what really struck me published in 2007, what really struck me was not the small differences between was not the small differences between was not the small differences between groups, but the within group groups, but the within group groups, but the within group differences, which were massive in every differences, which were massive in every differences, which were massive in every one of the groups, 75 women in a group, one of the groups, 75 women in a group, one of the groups, 75 women in a group, somebody had lost 30, 40, and 50 pounds, somebody had lost 30, 40, and 50 pounds, somebody had lost 30, 40, and 50 pounds, and somebody had gained five or 10. and somebody had gained five or 10. and somebody had gained five or 10. And I thought, "Oh my god, like the And I thought, "Oh my god, like the And I thought, "Oh my god, like the difference within the difference within the difference within the diets is way cooler than the difference diets is way cooler than the difference diets is way cooler than the difference the average difference between the average difference between the average difference between the diets." I'm starting to learn diets." I'm starting to learn diets." I'm starting to learn about insulin resistance. I'm starting about insulin resistance. I'm starting about insulin resistance. I'm starting to learn about genetic predisposition, to learn about genetic predisposition, to learn about genetic predisposition, which is sort of where our conversation which is sort of where our conversation which is sort of where our conversation started today. Ah, you know, maybe I started today. Ah, you know, maybe I started today. Ah, you know, maybe I should be looking at these personal should be looking at these personal should be looking at these personal factors, these predisposing factors, so factors, these predisposing factors, so factors, these predisposing factors, so I could help see if somebody was better I could help see if somebody was better I could help see if somebody was better on one versus another. And as we looked on one versus another. And as we looked on one versus another. And as we looked through our data and the rest of the through our data and the rest of the through our data and the rest of the literature, the two things that arose literature, the two things that arose literature, the two things that arose were insulin resistance may be better on were insulin resistance may be better on were insulin resistance may be better on low carb because folks who are insulin low carb because folks who are insulin low carb because folks who are insulin resistant have a hard time putting away resistant have a hard time putting away resistant have a hard time putting away carb. So the low fat is problematic if carb. So the low fat is problematic if carb. So the low fat is problematic if it's high carb. it's high carb. it's high carb. and genetic predisposition. There was a and genetic predisposition. There was a and genetic predisposition. There was a group called Interlucan Genetics that group called Interlucan Genetics that group called Interlucan Genetics that came and looked at some of our data and came and looked at some of our data and came and looked at some of our data and said, "Oh my god, we actually have a said, "Oh my god, we actually have a said, "Oh my god, we actually have a three snip single nucleotide three snip single nucleotide three snip single nucleotide polymorphism, a three- snip multilocus polymorphism, a three- snip multilocus polymorphism, a three- snip multilocus genotype pattern that we genotype pattern that we genotype pattern that we hypothesized predicts who's lowfat and hypothesized predicts who's lowfat and hypothesized predicts who's lowfat and low carb." And we said, "NIH, would you low carb." And we said, "NIH, would you low carb." And we said, "NIH, would you fund this?" And they did. And we got fund this?" And they did. And we got fund this?" And they did. And we got this extra money from the nutrition this extra money from the nutrition this extra money from the nutrition science initiative. We got 600 people. science initiative. We got 600 people. science initiative. We got 600 people. We randomized them for a year. Everybody We randomized them for a year. Everybody We randomized them for a year. Everybody was into is like the best highest rigor, was into is like the best highest rigor, was into is like the best highest rigor, highest generalizability study I've ever highest generalizability study I've ever highest generalizability study I've ever done. And importantly, there was no done. And importantly, there was no done. And importantly, there was no average difference at the end of the average difference at the end of the average difference at the end of the year in the two groups, which is year in the two groups, which is year in the two groups, which is actually exactly what we wanted. If we actually exactly what we wanted. If we actually exactly what we wanted. If we had a high quality of low carb and low had a high quality of low carb and low had a high quality of low carb and low fat, we assumed that the average fat, we assumed that the average fat, we assumed that the average difference would be negligible based on difference would be negligible based on difference would be negligible based on our past work, but we would get this our past work, but we would get this our past work, but we would get this range, and we did. This time, somebody range, and we did. This time, somebody range, and we did. This time, somebody had lost 60 pounds and somebody had lost 60 pounds and somebody had lost 60 pounds and somebody had gained 20 in both groups. And it was a gained 20 in both groups. And it was a gained 20 in both groups. And it was a continuum. And it's like ah this is continuum. And it's like ah this is continuum. And it's like ah this is perfect. We are going to have a chance perfect. We are going to have a chance perfect. We are going to have a chance to explain this variability with a to explain this variability with a to explain this variability with a glucose uh oral glucose tolerance test glucose uh oral glucose tolerance test glucose uh oral glucose tolerance test which is sort of state-of-the-art other which is sort of state-of-the-art other which is sort of state-of-the-art other than the steadystate plasma glucose than the steadystate plasma glucose than the steadystate plasma glucose thing Jerry Reven does which is too thing Jerry Reven does which is too thing Jerry Reven does which is too intense and too expensive. Oral glucose intense and too expensive. Oral glucose intense and too expensive. Oral glucose tolerance test much better than a tolerance test much better than a tolerance test much better than a fasting glucose. fasting glucose. fasting glucose. um and we'll genotype them and neither of them predicted the and neither of them predicted the and neither of them predicted the variability. That just means it was the variability. That just means it was the variability. That just means it was the wrong the wrong probe. You you're using wrong the wrong probe. You you're using wrong the wrong probe. You you're using the wrong test to try and address the wrong test to try and address the wrong test to try and address this correlation. So a postoc looked at this correlation. So a postoc looked at this correlation. So a postoc looked at me afterward and said there are like 50 me afterward and said there are like 50 me afterward and said there are like 50 single nucleotide polymorphisms that single nucleotide polymorphisms that single nucleotide polymorphisms that have been linked to obesity and you have been linked to obesity and you have been linked to obesity and you tested one set of three of them. So that tested one set of three of them. So that tested one set of three of them. So that does mean there's does mean there's does mean there's 9999,999 other 9999,999 other 9999,999 other genetic probes or tests that you could genetic probes or tests that you could genetic probes or tests that you could use and you've disproved one of them and use and you've disproved one of them and use and you've disproved one of them and I said yeah but the insulin resistance I said yeah but the insulin resistance I said yeah but the insulin resistance one was very popular. There were a bunch one was very popular. There were a bunch one was very popular. There were a bunch of studies that had done this and I have of studies that had done this and I have of studies that had done this and I have to share a really funny comment that to share a really funny comment that to share a really funny comment that Gary Tobs made while we were doing this Gary Tobs made while we were doing this Gary Tobs made while we were doing this because Gary Tobs was involved in Nuci. because Gary Tobs was involved in Nuci. because Gary Tobs was involved in Nuci. What's he best known for? Could you just What's he best known for? Could you just What's he best known for? Could you just Low carb low carb. So Gary Tobes is a Low carb low carb. So Gary Tobes is a Low carb low carb. So Gary Tobes is a low carb fanatic. low carb fanatic. low carb fanatic. Um, and he gives excellent talks. He Um, and he gives excellent talks. He Um, and he gives excellent talks. He can riff on and on about data and data can riff on and on about data and data can riff on and on about data and data and data. But I have to tell you a funny and data. But I have to tell you a funny and data. But I have to tell you a funny comment that he made as we got to the comment that he made as we got to the comment that he made as we got to the end of this study. He said, "I realized end of this study. He said, "I realized end of this study. He said, "I realized now that you're at the end and you're now that you're at the end and you're now that you're at the end and you're about to publish it that you screwed up about to publish it that you screwed up about to publish it that you screwed up the study." I said, "How did I screw up the study." I said, "How did I screw up the study." I said, "How did I screw up the study?" And he said, "Well, for the study?" And he said, "Well, for the study?" And he said, "Well, for the low-fat group, you told them not to have low-fat group, you told them not to have low-fat group, you told them not to have added sugar or refined grain, even added sugar or refined grain, even added sugar or refined grain, even though those are low fat." And I said, though those are low fat." And I said, though those are low fat." And I said, 'Well, yeah, actually, we told both 'Well, yeah, actually, we told both 'Well, yeah, actually, we told both groups to have a really healthy diet, groups to have a really healthy diet, groups to have a really healthy diet, and added sugar and refined grains and added sugar and refined grains and added sugar and refined grains aren't healthy. And he said, 'Well, aren't healthy. And he said, 'Well, aren't healthy. And he said, 'Well, that's it's going to diminish the chance that's it's going to diminish the chance that's it's going to diminish the chance to see a difference because most people to see a difference because most people to see a difference because most people who are eating low carb versus the who are eating low carb versus the who are eating low carb versus the traditional lowfat do better because the traditional lowfat do better because the traditional lowfat do better because the lowfatters eating high carb are eating lowfatters eating high carb are eating lowfatters eating high carb are eating added sugar and refined grain. I added sugar and refined grain. I added sugar and refined grain. I thought, that's not screwing this study thought, that's not screwing this study thought, that's not screwing this study up. That's doing the equipoise thing. I up. That's doing the equipoise thing. I up. That's doing the equipoise thing. I saw a lot of literature showing that saw a lot of literature showing that saw a lot of literature showing that insulin resistance did suggest that insulin resistance did suggest that insulin resistance did suggest that there was a subset of the population there was a subset of the population there was a subset of the population that would do better on low carb than that would do better on low carb than that would do better on low carb than low fat. And we've actually now followed low fat. And we've actually now followed low fat. And we've actually now followed up on that study with a ketogenic versus up on that study with a ketogenic versus up on that study with a ketogenic versus the Mediterranean diet study. And in the Mediterranean diet study. And in the Mediterranean diet study. And in that particular study, the way we set it that particular study, the way we set it that particular study, the way we set it up is both groups would get a lot of up is both groups would get a lot of up is both groups would get a lot of above ground vegetables, which keto says above ground vegetables, which keto says above ground vegetables, which keto says is okay, avoid added sugar and refined is okay, avoid added sugar and refined is okay, avoid added sugar and refined grain, and keto would have no beans, no grain, and keto would have no beans, no grain, and keto would have no beans, no fruits, no whole grains, and fruits, no whole grains, and fruits, no whole grains, and Mediterranean would embrace beans and Mediterranean would embrace beans and Mediterranean would embrace beans and whole grains and fruits. So they didn't whole grains and fruits. So they didn't whole grains and fruits. So they didn't have a glycosillated hemoglobin have a glycosillated hemoglobin have a glycosillated hemoglobin difference. That was a primary outcome difference. That was a primary outcome difference. That was a primary outcome listed on clinical trials.gov. The keto listed on clinical trials.gov. The keto listed on clinical trials.gov. The keto diet raised LDL. The keto diet did diet raised LDL. The keto diet did diet raised LDL. The keto diet did actually a better job lowering actually a better job lowering actually a better job lowering triglycerides than Mediterranean. The triglycerides than Mediterranean. The triglycerides than Mediterranean. The keto diet did better at lowering keto diet did better at lowering keto diet did better at lowering triglycerides. Yes. Than Mediterranean. triglycerides. Yes. Than Mediterranean. triglycerides. Yes. Than Mediterranean. Yes. That surprises me. No, because they Yes. That surprises me. No, because they Yes. That surprises me. No, because they did better at wiping out carbs when they did better at wiping out carbs when they did better at wiping out carbs when they wipe when you wipe out all your wipe when you wipe out all your wipe when you wipe out all your carbs. Then those extra carbs don't go carbs. Then those extra carbs don't go carbs. Then those extra carbs don't go into your liver to make triglycerides. into your liver to make triglycerides. into your liver to make triglycerides. Not surprised. And the keto diet was Not surprised. And the keto diet was Not surprised. And the keto diet was higher in saturated fat, so it raised higher in saturated fat, so it raised higher in saturated fat, so it raised the LDL. But the Mediterranean diet, the LDL. But the Mediterranean diet, the LDL. But the Mediterranean diet, carbs generally are pretty quote unquote carbs generally are pretty quote unquote carbs generally are pretty quote unquote healthy carbs. Yes. And that's the healthy carbs. Yes. And that's the healthy carbs. Yes. And that's the point. So can we go back there for a point. So can we go back there for a point. So can we go back there for a minute? So to me that is the point of minute? So to me that is the point of minute? So to me that is the point of sort of looking at this equipoise. So sort of looking at this equipoise. So sort of looking at this equipoise. So when we made the low carb and the lowfat when we made the low carb and the lowfat when we made the low carb and the lowfat both healthy, our primary um predictive healthy, our primary um predictive healthy, our primary um predictive outcomes, the genotype thing and the outcomes, the genotype thing and the outcomes, the genotype thing and the insulin resistance didn't work. And and insulin resistance didn't work. And and insulin resistance didn't work. And and what we took home from that message is what we took home from that message is what we took home from that message is you could do either one. If you do them you could do either one. If you do them you could do either one. If you do them in a healthy way, it would be okay. And in a healthy way, it would be okay. And in a healthy way, it would be okay. And when we took it to ketogenic and when we took it to ketogenic and when we took it to ketogenic and Mediterranean, they both lowered Mediterranean, they both lowered Mediterranean, they both lowered glycosillated hemoglobin. one had the glycosillated hemoglobin. one had the glycosillated hemoglobin. one had the keto had a worse effect on LDL but a keto had a worse effect on LDL but a keto had a worse effect on LDL but a better effect on triglycerides but we as better effect on triglycerides but we as better effect on triglycerides but we as we tracked the adherence people couldn't we tracked the adherence people couldn't we tracked the adherence people couldn't adhere to the keto they couldn't adhere to the keto they couldn't adhere to the keto they couldn't maintain that really low level of carb maintain that really low level of carb maintain that really low level of carb and the really low level of fat and so and the really low level of fat and so and the really low level of fat and so as you're working through these as you're working through these as you're working through these questions those are the subtle nuances questions those are the subtle nuances questions those are the subtle nuances in nutrition that you just said the poor in nutrition that you just said the poor in nutrition that you just said the poor public and I public and I public and I agree looks at so many of these says oh agree looks at so many of these says oh agree looks at so many of these says oh my god you guys can't agree can I go my god you guys can't agree can I go my god you guys can't agree can I go back to the fact that I've actually back to the fact that I've actually back to the fact that I've actually helped American Diabetes with their helped American Diabetes with their helped American Diabetes with their guidelines. I work a lot with the guidelines. I work a lot with the guidelines. I work a lot with the American Heart Association. I just American Heart Association. I just American Heart Association. I just rotated off the dietary guidelines rotated off the dietary guidelines rotated off the dietary guidelines advisory committee. And when there are advisory committee. And when there are advisory committee. And when there are scientists looking at nutrition data, we scientists looking at nutrition data, we scientists looking at nutrition data, we almost always agree. Nutrition almost always agree. Nutrition almost always agree. Nutrition scientists don't really disagree. We're scientists don't really disagree. We're scientists don't really disagree. We're almost boringly more in agreement than most boringly more in agreement than most boringly more in agreement than most people think. And what's fun for me people think. And what's fun for me people think. And what's fun for me personally, what why I get up in the personally, what why I get up in the personally, what why I get up in the morning and stay up late at night is the morning and stay up late at night is the morning and stay up late at night is the way you do science around food is the way you do science around food is the way you do science around food is fascinating and complicated. And the fascinating and complicated. And the fascinating and complicated. And the reason I'm on your show today is because reason I'm on your show today is because reason I'm on your show today is because I think if we had more of an I think if we had more of an I think if we had more of an opportunity to explain some of these opportunity to explain some of these opportunity to explain some of these subtle nuances, people would understand that nuances, people would understand that nuances, people would understand that the extremes probably aren't going to the extremes probably aren't going to the extremes probably aren't going to help you. There's really some middle-of help you. There's really some middle-of help you. There's really some middle-of the road stuff like a whole food the road stuff like a whole food the road stuff like a whole food plant-based diet where you could be plant-based diet where you could be plant-based diet where you could be vegan, you could be vegetarian. If you vegan, you could be vegetarian. If you vegan, you could be vegetarian. If you were vegan, you could be a crappy vegan. were vegan, you could be a crappy vegan. were vegan, you could be a crappy vegan. You could have Coke, French fries, and You could have Coke, French fries, and You could have Coke, French fries, and Oreos. Those are all vegan. If you were Oreos. Those are all vegan. If you were Oreos. Those are all vegan. If you were keto, you could be eating a whole bunch keto, you could be eating a whole bunch keto, you could be eating a whole bunch of meat, which is super low carb, but a of meat, which is super low carb, but a of meat, which is super low carb, but a keto diet is all fat. It's really not a keto diet is all fat. It's really not a keto diet is all fat. It's really not a lot of protein and meat. So, it's fun to lot of protein and meat. So, it's fun to lot of protein and meat. So, it's fun to come on your show and have the chance to come on your show and have the chance to come on your show and have the chance to dive a little deeper and talk to the dive a little deeper and talk to the dive a little deeper and talk to the listeners about some of the important listeners about some of the important listeners about some of the important facts that get a little facts that get a little facts that get a little obscured when the social influencers or obscured when the social influencers or obscured when the social influencers or the headline is just capturing an the headline is just capturing an the headline is just capturing an overall message without seeing some of overall message without seeing some of overall message without seeing some of the rest of this. How do we communicate the rest of this. How do we communicate the rest of this. How do we communicate this in a fun way? And my the personal this in a fun way? And my the personal this in a fun way? And my the personal way I've been doing this actually my way I've been doing this actually my way I've been doing this actually my career has shifted now. I now work a lot career has shifted now. I now work a lot career has shifted now. I now work a lot with the CIA. I am on the scient with the CIA. I am on the scient with the CIA. I am on the scient scientific advisory board of the CIA, scientific advisory board of the CIA, scientific advisory board of the CIA, not the Pentagon one, the Culinary not the Pentagon one, the Culinary not the Pentagon one, the Culinary Institute of America. And what's really Institute of America. And what's really Institute of America. And what's really been fun about them is how much they been fun about them is how much they been fun about them is how much they appreciate taste, energy, taste, like appreciate taste, energy, taste, like appreciate taste, energy, taste, like the things that people really care the things that people really care the things that people really care about, not some of my P values and my about, not some of my P values and my about, not some of my P values and my statistics and my equipoise. They want statistics and my equipoise. They want statistics and my equipoise. They want the aesthetic. They want to look good the aesthetic. They want to look good the aesthetic. They want to look good personally. They want the food to look personally. They want the food to look personally. They want the food to look good, taste good, be accessible. So, good, taste good, be accessible. So, good, taste good, be accessible. So, I've been doing some new fund studies I've been doing some new fund studies I've been doing some new fund studies where chefs are sort of leading the way. where chefs are sort of leading the way. where chefs are sort of leading the way. So, I'm pretty much against this whole So, I'm pretty much against this whole So, I'm pretty much against this whole protein craze thing that's going on. And protein craze thing that's going on. And protein craze thing that's going on. And the Culinary Institute of America has the Culinary Institute of America has the Culinary Institute of America has introduced this concept called the introduced this concept called the introduced this concept called the protein flip where instead of having a protein flip where instead of having a protein flip where instead of having a massive piece of flesh in the middle of massive piece of flesh in the middle of massive piece of flesh in the middle of the plate with maybe some vegetables and the plate with maybe some vegetables and the plate with maybe some vegetables and starch on the side, it's vegetables and starch on the side, it's vegetables and starch on the side, it's vegetables and grains and beans in the middle of the grains and beans in the middle of the grains and beans in the middle of the plate with an African, Asian, plate with an African, Asian, plate with an African, Asian, Mediterranean, Latin American um Mediterranean, Latin American um Mediterranean, Latin American um emphasis. And the meat is 2 ounces or emphasis. And the meat is 2 ounces or emphasis. And the meat is 2 ounces or it's a condiment or it's a side dish. it's a condiment or it's a side dish. it's a condiment or it's a side dish. It's like making the aesthetics look It's like making the aesthetics look It's like making the aesthetics look good, making it taste great. So, the good, making it taste great. So, the good, making it taste great. So, the phrase I use is from Greg Dresser from phrase I use is from Greg Dresser from phrase I use is from Greg Dresser from the CA unapologetically delicious. So, the CA unapologetically delicious. So, the CA unapologetically delicious. So, I'm hoping to have the science in my I'm hoping to have the science in my I'm hoping to have the science in my back pocket. I'm a card carrying PhD back pocket. I'm a card carrying PhD back pocket. I'm a card carrying PhD nutrition scientist. I got the science. nutrition scientist. I got the science. nutrition scientist. I got the science. We'll probably go there later. I got the We'll probably go there later. I got the We'll probably go there later. I got the environment in my back pocket, too. But environment in my back pocket, too. But environment in my back pocket, too. But don't people don't beat people over the don't people don't beat people over the don't people don't beat people over the head with that. Beat people over the head with that. Beat people over the head with that. Beat people over the head with this is going to blow your head with this is going to blow your head with this is going to blow your freaking taste buds away. This is so freaking taste buds away. This is so freaking taste buds away. This is so good. No, that's a good incentive. good. No, that's a good incentive. good. No, that's a good incentive. Working with chefs has been very fun. Working with chefs has been very fun. Working with chefs has been very fun. Yeah, that's a good incentive. Um, I Yeah, that's a good incentive. Um, I Yeah, that's a good incentive. Um, I would like to kind of just offer the would like to kind of just offer the would like to kind of just offer the opportunity. You don't have to take it, opportunity. You don't have to take it, opportunity. You don't have to take it, but offer the opportunity to finally at but offer the opportunity to finally at but offer the opportunity to finally at least start to do away with this least start to do away with this least start to do away with this ridiculous naming, which is plant-based. ridiculous naming, which is plant-based. ridiculous naming, which is plant-based. I mean, I have to say that again, I've I mean, I have to say that again, I've I mean, I have to say that again, I've spent a good amount of time in the spent a good amount of time in the spent a good amount of time in the uh public health sphere and public uh public health sphere and public uh public health sphere and public education sphere. How things are named education sphere. How things are named education sphere. How things are named means everything. Yeah. If there's ever means everything. Yeah. If there's ever means everything. Yeah. If there's ever a hope to get people eating more, let's a hope to get people eating more, let's a hope to get people eating more, let's just say fiber from vegetables and maybe just say fiber from vegetables and maybe just say fiber from vegetables and maybe fruit also, that sooner or later, this fruit also, that sooner or later, this fruit also, that sooner or later, this plant-based naming, I'm going to say, plant-based naming, I'm going to say, plant-based naming, I'm going to say, has got to go. It just is never going to has got to go. It just is never going to has got to go. It just is never going to work because people hear that and they work because people hear that and they work because people hear that and they hear vegan. It's just been too long. hear vegan. It's just been too long. hear vegan. It's just been too long. It's been too long. It's um it's just it It's been too long. It's um it's just it It's been too long. It's um it's just it sort of it defies uh any kind of logic sort of it defies uh any kind of logic sort of it defies uh any kind of logic to think that the public will eventually to think that the public will eventually to think that the public will eventually think that plant-based includes meat. I think that plant-based includes meat. I think that plant-based includes meat. I think there just needs to be a new name. think there just needs to be a new name. think there just needs to be a new name. So I don't expect you to come up with So I don't expect you to come up with So I don't expect you to come up with one on the fly, but could we call it one on the fly, but could we call it one on the fly, but could we call it plant biased perhaps? Um just omnivore. plant biased perhaps? Um just omnivore. plant biased perhaps? Um just omnivore. What's wrong with healthy omnivore? What's wrong with healthy omnivore? What's wrong with healthy omnivore? Omnivore is fine. Plant forward people Omnivore is fine. Plant forward people Omnivore is fine. Plant forward people have used plant centric people have used plant centric people have used plant centric people have used. I think as long as it's just plant used. I think as long as it's just plant used. I think as long as it's just plant forward just sounds like no meat. So let forward just sounds like no meat. So let forward just sounds like no meat. So let me tell you a funny story. So I me tell you a funny story. So I me tell you a funny story. So I participate in something called the participate in something called the participate in something called the Google food lab which is a whole bunch Google food lab which is a whole bunch Google food lab which is a whole bunch of people that come together for googly of people that come together for googly of people that come together for googly casual collisions twice a year. And at casual collisions twice a year. And at casual collisions twice a year. And at one of these twice a year one of these twice a year one of these twice a year events probably a decade ago, it's events probably a decade ago, it's events probably a decade ago, it's usually a two-day event and they have usually a two-day event and they have usually a two-day event and they have all kinds of different talks and all kinds of different talks and all kinds of different talks and sometimes breakout groups. They had for sometimes breakout groups. They had for sometimes breakout groups. They had for a whole hour and a half, two hours, we a whole hour and a half, two hours, we a whole hour and a half, two hours, we separated into 10 tables and the separated into 10 tables and the separated into 10 tables and the challenge was with a hundred really challenge was with a hundred really challenge was with a hundred really bright people all from the food industry bright people all from the food industry bright people all from the food industry to come up with options for plant-based to come up with options for plant-based to come up with options for plant-based and they failed. New names. Two hours. and they failed. New names. Two hours. and they failed. New names. Two hours. Two hours. a hundred people couldn't Two hours. a hundred people couldn't Two hours. a hundred people couldn't come up with a come up with a come up with a name that everybody agreed on. So, it's name that everybody agreed on. So, it's name that everybody agreed on. So, it's a problem. It's gonna That sounds like a problem. It's gonna That sounds like a problem. It's gonna That sounds like a psychological problem. We need more psychological problem. We need more psychological problem. We need more marketers and we need more infographic marketers and we need more infographic marketers and we need more infographic people to help with this thing. And but people to help with this thing. And but people to help with this thing. And but these were all really bright people. So, these were all really bright people. So, these were all really bright people. So, I agree the naming is problematic. I agree the naming is problematic. I agree the naming is problematic. Instead of naming it Instead of naming it Instead of naming it something, let's just point out that something, let's just point out that something, let's just point out that Americans eat more meat than anyone else Americans eat more meat than anyone else Americans eat more meat than anyone else in the world. It is a if you see these in the world. It is a if you see these in the world. It is a if you see these who world health organization graphics who world health organization graphics who world health organization graphics of who eats how much meat, it is the US of who eats how much meat, it is the US of who eats how much meat, it is the US and Canada and some European countries and Canada and some European countries and Canada and some European countries that eat the most. And there are that eat the most. And there are that eat the most. And there are countries who eat the least and they countries who eat the least and they countries who eat the least and they have limited access to foods. And some have limited access to foods. And some have limited access to foods. And some of those countries would benefit from of those countries would benefit from of those countries would benefit from more meat per person because the really more meat per person because the really more meat per person because the really they're eating cereal. They're eating they're eating cereal. They're eating they're eating cereal. They're eating dry cerealbased foods that honestly just dry cerealbased foods that honestly just dry cerealbased foods that honestly just don't have the full nutrition. They're don't have the full nutrition. They're don't have the full nutrition. They're just trying to get enough calories for just trying to get enough calories for just trying to get enough calories for the day. And it's not just about the day. And it's not just about the day. And it's not just about calories. And part of that isn't just calories. And part of that isn't just calories. And part of that isn't just access to food. A lot of those are access to food. A lot of those are access to food. A lot of those are countries where there's political issues countries where there's political issues countries where there's political issues where somebody's actually withholding where somebody's actually withholding where somebody's actually withholding food or making the distribution of food or making the distribution of food or making the distribution of food problematic. So there's something called problematic. So there's something called problematic. So there's something called the Lancet report that came out in 2019 the Lancet report that came out in 2019 the Lancet report that came out in 2019 published in Lancet, the Eat Lancet published in Lancet, the Eat Lancet published in Lancet, the Eat Lancet Commission, and came up with a healthy Commission, and came up with a healthy Commission, and came up with a healthy transformative diet for the planet that transformative diet for the planet that transformative diet for the planet that was the intersection of human and was the intersection of human and was the intersection of human and planetary health. planetary health. planetary health. And it was very little meat. It wasn't And it was very little meat. It wasn't And it was very little meat. It wasn't vegan. It was very little meat. Open to vegan. It was very little meat. Open to vegan. It was very little meat. Open to the idea that some of these countries the idea that some of these countries the idea that some of these countries that ate the least meat should probably that ate the least meat should probably that ate the least meat should probably eat more. But what was obscene was how eat more. But what was obscene was how eat more. But what was obscene was how much meat is eaten in America compared much meat is eaten in America compared much meat is eaten in America compared to the rest of the world. And to eat to the rest of the world. And to eat to the rest of the world. And to eat that much meat and be affordable has led that much meat and be affordable has led that much meat and be affordable has led to the concentrated animal feeding to the concentrated animal feeding to the concentrated animal feeding operations, which if they had glass operations, which if they had glass operations, which if they had glass walls, probably most of the country walls, probably most of the country walls, probably most of the country would go vegan. um if you saw what was would go vegan. um if you saw what was would go vegan. um if you saw what was happening not just to the animals the happening not just to the animals the happening not just to the animals the way that they're raised and the speed way that they're raised and the speed way that they're raised and the speed the line speed part of this is the way the line speed part of this is the way the line speed part of this is the way the humans are treated who are in the humans are treated who are in the humans are treated who are in the meat packing industry. So it's a very meat packing industry. So it's a very meat packing industry. So it's a very repetitive uh job. There's a lot of repetitive uh job. There's a lot of repetitive uh job. There's a lot of injury injuries in that uh situation and injury injuries in that uh situation and injury injuries in that uh situation and it's part of the reason we have very it's part of the reason we have very it's part of the reason we have very inexpensive meat that's very inexpensive meat that's very inexpensive meat that's very inaccessible. There's a guy named inaccessible. There's a guy named inaccessible. There's a guy named Timothy Pasharat who uh for his doctoral Timothy Pasharat who uh for his doctoral Timothy Pasharat who uh for his doctoral thesis went and worked in a slaughter thesis went and worked in a slaughter thesis went and worked in a slaughter house for a year undercover and house for a year undercover and house for a year undercover and published a whole book on this. And the published a whole book on this. And the published a whole book on this. And the title of the book is every 12 seconds. title of the book is every 12 seconds. title of the book is every 12 seconds. And the reason it's titled that is And the reason it's titled that is And the reason it's titled that is because a new cow came through the because a new cow came through the because a new cow came through the slaughter line every 12 seconds every slaughter line every 12 seconds every slaughter line every 12 seconds every day all day every day all day every day all day every year. and that the ability to protect year. and that the ability to protect year. and that the ability to protect some animal rights and welfare, the some animal rights and welfare, the some animal rights and welfare, the ability to protect the rights of humans ability to protect the rights of humans ability to protect the rights of humans to have some dignity like people peeing to have some dignity like people peeing to have some dignity like people peeing in bottles because they can't leave the in bottles because they can't leave the in bottles because they can't leave the line. Uh they can't even take a bathroom line. Uh they can't even take a bathroom line. Uh they can't even take a bathroom break. It's a messed up food system. So, break. It's a messed up food system. So, break. It's a messed up food system. So, I had an interesting debate with Mark I had an interesting debate with Mark I had an interesting debate with Mark Heyman the other day who's all into Heyman the other day who's all into Heyman the other day who's all into regenerative meat. You mean like regenerative meat. You mean like regenerative meat. You mean like regenerative farms? Like regenerative farms? Like regenerative farms? Like regenerative farming? Yeah. on regenerative farming? Yeah. on regenerative farming? Yeah. on regenerative ranches and said, you know, if we, he's ranches and said, you know, if we, he's ranches and said, you know, if we, he's all against the kayos, the concentrated all against the kayos, the concentrated all against the kayos, the concentrated animal feeding operations, if we could animal feeding operations, if we could animal feeding operations, if we could just move all those off to just move all those off to just move all those off to pasture. And he said, yeah, we could pasture. And he said, yeah, we could pasture. And he said, yeah, we could just do that. I said, do you know how just do that. I said, do you know how just do that. I said, do you know how much pasture that would take? That would much pasture that would take? That would much pasture that would take? That would take like three planets of agricultural take like three planets of agricultural take like three planets of agricultural land to move the millions and billions land to move the millions and billions land to move the millions and billions of cattle out of the kayos into there. of cattle out of the kayos into there. of cattle out of the kayos into there. So, I would like to move in your So, I would like to move in your So, I would like to move in your direction where some meat would be fine. direction where some meat would be fine. direction where some meat would be fine. If it was raised in a way that didn't If it was raised in a way that didn't If it was raised in a way that didn't require hormones, didn't require hormones, didn't require hormones, didn't require antibiotics, didn't require feeding cows antibiotics, didn't require feeding cows antibiotics, didn't require feeding cows corn and soy, they're just supposed to corn and soy, they're just supposed to corn and soy, they're just supposed to graze on grasses, and the corn and soy graze on grasses, and the corn and soy graze on grasses, and the corn and soy give them health issues. And so, they give them health issues. And so, they give them health issues. And so, they have to be treated prophylactically for have to be treated prophylactically for have to be treated prophylactically for the problems they'll have digestively the problems they'll have digestively the problems they'll have digestively with that. If we could go back to sort with that. If we could go back to sort with that. If we could go back to sort of the old animal husbandry of the day of the old animal husbandry of the day of the old animal husbandry of the day when the cattle and the pigs and the when the cattle and the pigs and the when the cattle and the pigs and the chickens were on pasture, we would eat a chickens were on pasture, we would eat a chickens were on pasture, we would eat a lot less meat, but we would eat meat lot less meat, but we would eat meat lot less meat, but we would eat meat that was raised appropriately and would that was raised appropriately and would that was raised appropriately and would be more healthy. And that would be that be more healthy. And that would be that be more healthy. And that would be that middle of the road where we were having middle of the road where we were having middle of the road where we were having multiple types of wheat, not just the multiple types of wheat, not just the multiple types of wheat, not just the one grain that grows right. We wouldn't one grain that grows right. We wouldn't one grain that grows right. We wouldn't be monocropping corn. We wouldn't be monocropping corn. We wouldn't be monocropping corn. We wouldn't be monocropping soy, which is mostly going monocropping soy, which is mostly going monocropping soy, which is mostly going to livestock feed or fuel. Very little to livestock feed or fuel. Very little to livestock feed or fuel. Very little corn or soy that we grow in the US is corn or soy that we grow in the US is corn or soy that we grow in the US is eaten directly by humans as corn or eaten directly by humans as corn or eaten directly by humans as corn or soy. I would be all for that if we soy. I would be all for that if we soy. I would be all for that if we spread out the meats that way. It spread out the meats that way. It spread out the meats that way. It would be better basically less meat, would be better basically less meat, would be better basically less meat, better meat. better meat. better meat. Would work fine. That would be part of a Would work fine. That would be part of a Would work fine. That would be part of a healthier diet for people in the planet. healthier diet for people in the planet. healthier diet for people in the planet. That meat would cost That meat would cost That meat would cost more. Raising it that way would more. Raising it that way would more. Raising it that way would certainly cost more. But if you ate less certainly cost more. But if you ate less certainly cost more. But if you ate less of it, it wouldn't be that big of a hit of it, it wouldn't be that big of a hit of it, it wouldn't be that big of a hit on your budget. So if you had less meat, on your budget. So if you had less meat, on your budget. So if you had less meat, better quality meat, you might be better quality meat, you might be better quality meat, you might be spending the same amount, but then you spending the same amount, but then you spending the same amount, but then you could also have more fiber for your could also have more fiber for your could also have more fiber for your microbiome, more other vitamins and microbiome, more other vitamins and microbiome, more other vitamins and minerals, less saturated fat, less minerals, less saturated fat, less minerals, less saturated fat, less hormone, less antibiotics. I love hormone, less antibiotics. I love hormone, less antibiotics. I love hearing that. I completely agree, by the hearing that. I completely agree, by the hearing that. I completely agree, by the way. And um I think that there is a way. And um I think that there is a way. And um I think that there is a theory, right? Um, I forget the name of theory, right? Um, I forget the name of theory, right? Um, I forget the name of this theory that one of the reasons why this theory that one of the reasons why this theory that one of the reasons why people in Europe, especially southern people in Europe, especially southern people in Europe, especially southern Europe, can eat all these foods that we Europe, can eat all these foods that we Europe, can eat all these foods that we consider kind of bad for us, they'll consider kind of bad for us, they'll consider kind of bad for us, they'll have a dessert, they have bread, they have a dessert, they have bread, they have a dessert, they have bread, they have butter, they have olive oil, they have butter, they have olive oil, they have butter, they have olive oil, they eat meat. In fact, they have a fairly eat meat. In fact, they have a fairly eat meat. In fact, they have a fairly pork-rich diet in certain parts of pork-rich diet in certain parts of pork-rich diet in certain parts of southern Europe that on average the southern Europe that on average the southern Europe that on average the obesity rates are much lower. And obesity rates are much lower. And obesity rates are much lower. And the argument, I think, is that the argument, I think, is that the argument, I think, is that the nutrient density is so high in these nutrient density is so high in these nutrient density is so high in these well-raised um appropriately raised and well-raised um appropriately raised and well-raised um appropriately raised and farmed foods that people end up eating farmed foods that people end up eating farmed foods that people end up eating less of them. It's not just that portion less of them. It's not just that portion less of them. It's not just that portion sizes are small, it's that the food sizes are small, it's that the food sizes are small, it's that the food tastes really good and it's satiating at tastes really good and it's satiating at tastes really good and it's satiating at a level that's different from volume or a level that's different from volume or a level that's different from volume or caloric intake. I think so much of what caloric intake. I think so much of what caloric intake. I think so much of what people um think tastes good actually is people um think tastes good actually is people um think tastes good actually is just relative to the fact that they've just relative to the fact that they've just relative to the fact that they've never tasted like a real strawberry. And never tasted like a real strawberry. And never tasted like a real strawberry. And I think um so what we're talking about I think um so what we're talking about I think um so what we're talking about here is revising the entire food supply. here is revising the entire food supply. here is revising the entire food supply. And I'm all for it. I really am. I I'm And I'm all for it. I really am. I I'm And I'm all for it. I really am. I I'm all for it. Um all for it. Um all for it. Um because addressing this from the level because addressing this from the level because addressing this from the level of following this diet or that diet, at of following this diet or that diet, at of following this diet or that diet, at least according to your work, doesn't least according to your work, doesn't least according to your work, doesn't really seem to be um the best approach, really seem to be um the best approach, really seem to be um the best approach, assuming that what people really are assuming that what people really are assuming that what people really are after is the experience of food. Right. after is the experience of food. Right. after is the experience of food. Right. And that's why it's so fun now working And that's why it's so fun now working And that's why it's so fun now working with chefs. So really our emphasis for with chefs. So really our emphasis for with chefs. So really our emphasis for right now, think about educating the right now, think about educating the right now, think about educating the population that usually doesn't work. population that usually doesn't work. population that usually doesn't work. Like this is a this is a big shift Like this is a this is a big shift Like this is a this is a big shift potentially that we're talking about. If potentially that we're talking about. If potentially that we're talking about. If you tied this to the environment, we're you tied this to the environment, we're you tied this to the environment, we're kind of on a horrific path to not having kind of on a horrific path to not having kind of on a horrific path to not having enough air and land and what whatever enough air and land and what whatever enough air and land and what whatever water to do this. Um but in the US at water to do this. Um but in the US at water to do this. Um but in the US at least 50% of food is eaten outside of least 50% of food is eaten outside of least 50% of food is eaten outside of the home. And if you think of a group the home. And if you think of a group the home. And if you think of a group like the Culinary Institute of America like the Culinary Institute of America like the Culinary Institute of America that trains chefs, you might think that trains chefs, you might think that trains chefs, you might think chefs, I bet their goal is to be in a chefs, I bet their goal is to be in a chefs, I bet their goal is to be in a three-star Michelin restaurant, they've three-star Michelin restaurant, they've three-star Michelin restaurant, they've apparently they've trained 55,000 chefs apparently they've trained 55,000 chefs apparently they've trained 55,000 chefs to date and very few of them run to date and very few of them run to date and very few of them run Michelin three star restaurants. They're Michelin three star restaurants. They're Michelin three star restaurants. They're in hospitals, they're in the Marriott in hospitals, they're in the Marriott in hospitals, they're in the Marriott Hotel, they're in universities, uh Hotel, they're in universities, uh Hotel, they're in universities, uh they're in schools. More of them could they're in schools. More of them could they're in schools. More of them could be in schools. and really their be in schools. and really their be in schools. and really their gift, their superpower is taking gift, their superpower is taking gift, their superpower is taking different food sources and putting them different food sources and putting them different food sources and putting them together in flavorful ways that people together in flavorful ways that people together in flavorful ways that people enjoy. And so my current interest uh enjoy. And so my current interest uh enjoy. And so my current interest uh actually in working with the new door actually in working with the new door actually in working with the new door school of sustainability at Stanford is school of sustainability at Stanford is school of sustainability at Stanford is to bring the chefs in and to think of to bring the chefs in and to think of to bring the chefs in and to think of these institutional food settings where these institutional food settings where these institutional food settings where so many people are eating at the work so many people are eating at the work so many people are eating at the work site, at the school, while they're site, at the school, while they're site, at the school, while they're visiting the hospital, whatever, and visiting the hospital, whatever, and visiting the hospital, whatever, and their choices are different and they their choices are different and they their choices are different and they taste good and they look good and in the taste good and they look good and in the taste good and they look good and in the back pocket they're actually good for back pocket they're actually good for back pocket they're actually good for you nutritionally and they're actually you nutritionally and they're actually you nutritionally and they're actually good for the environment. But we don't good for the environment. But we don't good for the environment. But we don't have to teach any about this. We like have to teach any about this. We like have to teach any about this. We like work with the chefs, chefs and work with the chefs, chefs and work with the chefs, chefs and scientists and business people. uh this scientists and business people. uh this scientists and business people. uh this group that I work with uh at the group that I work with uh at the group that I work with uh at the culinary institute of America about 12 culinary institute of America about 12 culinary institute of America about 12 years ago I was invited to something uh years ago I was invited to something uh years ago I was invited to something uh that's now called the menus of change that's now called the menus of change that's now called the menus of change and for the menus of and for the menus of and for the menus of change the background to this was the change the background to this was the change the background to this was the chefs were getting very frustrated that chefs were getting very frustrated that chefs were getting very frustrated that it was gluten-free one day and then it was gluten-free one day and then it was gluten-free one day and then vegan and then keto and then paleo and vegan and then keto and then paleo and vegan and then keto and then paleo and they sort of were getting this they sort of were getting this they sort of were getting this popular demand to change their menu popular demand to change their menu popular demand to change their menu design and to change some of the design and to change some of the design and to change some of the equipment that they had and they were equipment that they had and they were equipment that they had and they were getting a little frustrated at the getting a little frustrated at the getting a little frustrated at the leadership level thinking why are we leadership level thinking why are we leadership level thinking why are we being so reactive. Couldn't we be more being so reactive. Couldn't we be more being so reactive. Couldn't we be more proactive? Like, we're the chefs. Can't proactive? Like, we're the chefs. Can't proactive? Like, we're the chefs. Can't we help with food demand because we can we help with food demand because we can we help with food demand because we can make it taste good? So, they got a make it taste good? So, they got a make it taste good? So, they got a science board together to say, "Okay, science board together to say, "Okay, science board together to say, "Okay, the science doesn't really change. These the science doesn't really change. These the science doesn't really change. These things are healthy." They got a things are healthy." They got a things are healthy." They got a business board together like they have business board together like they have business board together like they have to stay in business. The customers have to stay in business. The customers have to stay in business. The customers have to come back and they have to pay so we to come back and they have to pay so we to come back and they have to pay so we can stay in business. And they had a can stay in business. And they had a can stay in business. And they had a chef board who said, "This is our craft. chef board who said, "This is our craft. chef board who said, "This is our craft. This is what we want to do for our life. This is what we want to do for our life. This is what we want to do for our life. We want to help people eat." And they We want to help people eat." And they We want to help people eat." And they sort of put all three of these groups sort of put all three of these groups sort of put all three of these groups together with their recommendations and together with their recommendations and together with their recommendations and they came up with what's called the 24 they came up with what's called the 24 they came up with what's called the 24 principles of the menus of change. 12 of principles of the menus of change. 12 of principles of the menus of change. 12 of the principles are food and the principles are food and the principles are food and nutritionoriented and 12 of them are nutritionoriented and 12 of them are nutritionoriented and 12 of them are operationally oriented. uh choose operationally oriented. uh choose operationally oriented. uh choose locally when you can, celebrate locally when you can, celebrate locally when you can, celebrate diversity, source locally, some a whole diversity, source locally, some a whole diversity, source locally, some a whole bunch of different principles. And the bunch of different principles. And the bunch of different principles. And the idea was there they would take the set idea was there they would take the set idea was there they would take the set of principles to these institutional of principles to these institutional of principles to these institutional food settings where they order pallets food settings where they order pallets food settings where they order pallets of food every day. They don't just go to of food every day. They don't just go to of food every day. They don't just go to the grocery store and I'm going to buy the grocery store and I'm going to buy the grocery store and I'm going to buy the organic one instead of the organic one instead of the organic one instead of the conventional one. I'm going to buy the conventional one. I'm going to buy the conventional one. I'm going to buy the regenerative meat instead of the other regenerative meat instead of the other regenerative meat instead of the other meat. They're going to order crap tons meat. They're going to order crap tons meat. They're going to order crap tons of food for everybody. And the idea was of food for everybody. And the idea was of food for everybody. And the idea was that if you could do that across these that if you could do that across these that if you could do that across these different institutions, you could change the institutions, you could change the institutions, you could change the pallet. You could show people, here's pallet. You could show people, here's pallet. You could show people, here's some great tasting things that really some great tasting things that really some great tasting things that really hit the intersection of taste and health hit the intersection of taste and health hit the intersection of taste and health and the environment all at once. So, and the environment all at once. So, and the environment all at once. So, personally, this is what I'm most personally, this is what I'm most personally, this is what I'm most excited about is keeping my PhD in excited about is keeping my PhD in excited about is keeping my PhD in nutrition in my back nutrition in my back nutrition in my back pocket, doing podcasts with somebody pocket, doing podcasts with somebody pocket, doing podcasts with somebody like you, working with these chefs in like you, working with these chefs in like you, working with these chefs in these different institutional settings. these different institutional settings. these different institutional settings. because there's a lot of different ways because there's a lot of different ways because there's a lot of different ways to eat. There's a lot of delicious ways to eat. There's a lot of delicious ways to eat. There's a lot of delicious ways to eat and it would be not too hard to eat and it would be not too hard to eat and it would be not too hard to eat more nutritionally beneficially than eat more nutritionally beneficially than eat more nutritionally beneficially than we do now. I'd like to take a quick we do now. I'd like to take a quick we do now. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need, but nothing you don't. That you need, but nothing you don't. That you need, but nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your the functioning of all the cells in your the functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to in water makes it extremely easy to in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate ensure that you're getting adequate ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To hydration and adequate electrolytes. To hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper make sure that I'm getting proper make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about dissolve one packet of element in about dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning. And I drink that in the morning. And I drink that in the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I basically first thing in the morning. I basically first thing in the morning. I also drink Element Dissolved in water also drink Element Dissolved in water also drink Element Dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise during any kind of physical exercise during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days that I'm doing, especially on hot days that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore when I'm sweating a lot and therefore when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes. losing a lot of water and electrolytes. losing a lot of water and electrolytes. They have a bunch of different great They have a bunch of different great They have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of Element. They have tasting flavors of Element. They have tasting flavors of Element. They have watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, them all. If you'd like to try Element, them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to you can go to you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the free element sample pack with the free element sample pack with the purchase of any Element drink mix. purchase of any Element drink mix. purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's Again, that's Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. I didn't think we were free sample pack. I didn't think we were free sample pack. I didn't think we were going to land where we happen to be now, going to land where we happen to be now, going to land where we happen to be now, but I but I'm excited that we are but I but I'm excited that we are but I but I'm excited that we are because I came into this conversation because I came into this conversation because I came into this conversation wanting to talk to you about and we will wanting to talk to you about and we will wanting to talk to you about and we will talk about, for instance, protein talk about, for instance, protein talk about, for instance, protein recommendations or food additives, which recommendations or food additives, which recommendations or food additives, which we touched on. What I'm hearing now is we touched on. What I'm hearing now is we touched on. What I'm hearing now is really surprising and exciting, but very really surprising and exciting, but very really surprising and exciting, but very practical. And here here's what I'm practical. And here here's what I'm practical. And here here's what I'm hearing. That we can talk about hearing. That we can talk about hearing. That we can talk about macronutrients, micronutrients, food macronutrients, micronutrients, food macronutrients, micronutrients, food supply, environment, long-term and supply, environment, long-term and supply, environment, long-term and short-term health until the end of time. short-term health until the end of time. short-term health until the end of time. And ultimately, people are going to try And ultimately, people are going to try And ultimately, people are going to try different things or not try different things or not try different things or not try different things and go with what works for them. things and go with what works for them. things and go with what works for them. However, if we want to create a However, if we want to create a However, if we want to create a wholesale change in everything from the wholesale change in everything from the wholesale change in everything from the food supply to what people consider food supply to what people consider food supply to what people consider appetizing and what they appetizing and what they appetizing and what they consume, we need to focus on taste. as consume, we need to focus on taste. as consume, we need to focus on taste. as you were describing this um thing with you were describing this um thing with you were describing this um thing with chefs, what I heard in my head was, chefs, what I heard in my head was, chefs, what I heard in my head was, well, that's great for me because I'm well, that's great for me because I'm well, that's great for me because I'm near Stanford at least part of the time near Stanford at least part of the time near Stanford at least part of the time and uh I can benefit from all this great and uh I can benefit from all this great and uh I can benefit from all this great tasting food, but I could also hear the tasting food, but I could also hear the tasting food, but I could also hear the many millions of people listening to many millions of people listening to many millions of people listening to this who are going to say, "Yeah, that's this who are going to say, "Yeah, that's this who are going to say, "Yeah, that's great for Stanford, but how do I access great for Stanford, but how do I access great for Stanford, but how do I access this delicious food?" Like kind of like, this delicious food?" Like kind of like, this delicious food?" Like kind of like, "F you." Um, so but "F you." Um, so but "F you." Um, so but then I came to the clarity and I think then I came to the clarity and I think then I came to the clarity and I think this is what you're getting at, which is this is what you're getting at, which is this is what you're getting at, which is if you can cook really well, healthy, if you can cook really well, healthy, if you can cook really well, healthy, great tasting food that's great for the great tasting food that's great for the great tasting food that's great for the environment, etc., for a big group of environment, etc., for a big group of environment, etc., for a big group of people, hundreds of thousands of people people, hundreds of thousands of people people, hundreds of thousands of people 5 days a week, then certainly there's a 5 days a week, then certainly there's a 5 days a week, then certainly there's a version of that for a family that's version of that for a family that's version of that for a family that's affordable. And what it takes us to is affordable. And what it takes us to is affordable. And what it takes us to is less a focus on like one form of diet less a focus on like one form of diet less a focus on like one form of diet versus another, but to the kind of versus another, but to the kind of versus another, but to the kind of return to or maybe it's never good to return to or maybe it's never good to return to or maybe it's never good to talk about going back to something to talk about going back to something to talk about going back to something to look toward people getting more involved look toward people getting more involved look toward people getting more involved in preparing their food again. Yep. in preparing their food again. Yep. in preparing their food again. Yep. Absolutely right. It's it's really Absolutely right. It's it's really Absolutely right. It's it's really about, you know, it's sort of like a about, you know, it's sort of like a about, you know, it's sort of like a discussion about health where you have discussion about health where you have discussion about health where you have to tell people, listen, I can't take to tell people, listen, I can't take to tell people, listen, I can't take away the need for you to get your heart away the need for you to get your heart away the need for you to get your heart rate up. You got to do cardio rate up. You got to do cardio rate up. You got to do cardio cardiovascular exercise. There is no cardiovascular exercise. There is no cardiovascular exercise. There is no peptide or even hormone that we can give peptide or even hormone that we can give peptide or even hormone that we can give you in pillar injection form that's you in pillar injection form that's you in pillar injection form that's going to offset the sarcopenia. You have going to offset the sarcopenia. You have going to offset the sarcopenia. You have to do something. It's called do to do something. It's called do to do something. It's called do resistance training of some sort. I tell resistance training of some sort. I tell resistance training of some sort. I tell my 80-year-old mother this like she my 80-year-old mother this like she my 80-year-old mother this like she lifts weights. And I'm so grateful she lifts weights. And I'm so grateful she lifts weights. And I'm so grateful she does, right? That 30 years ago, I should does, right? That 30 years ago, I should does, right? That 30 years ago, I should point out you and I know this, but for a point out you and I know this, but for a point out you and I know this, but for a lot of the audience, the idea that a lot of the audience, the idea that a lot of the audience, the idea that a woman would lift weights, much less a woman would lift weights, much less a woman would lift weights, much less a 80-year-old woman in service to her 80-year-old woman in service to her 80-year-old woman in service to her health, it would just be outrageous. health, it would just be outrageous. health, it would just be outrageous. It'll be all like just thoughts about It'll be all like just thoughts about It'll be all like just thoughts about bodybuilding and like a football players bodybuilding and like a football players bodybuilding and like a football players and it was just no one went to gyms and it was just no one went to gyms and it was just no one went to gyms besides those guys. So what I'm hearing besides those guys. So what I'm hearing besides those guys. So what I'm hearing is we need to get back to interacting is we need to get back to interacting is we need to get back to interacting with our food with our food with our food differently and that the convenience of differently and that the convenience of differently and that the convenience of ultrarocessed food is really what was ultrarocessed food is really what was ultrarocessed food is really what was the entry to this whole thing. And maybe the entry to this whole thing. And maybe the entry to this whole thing. And maybe what we need to do is get is figure out what we need to do is get is figure out what we need to do is get is figure out how preparation of quality food, how preparation of quality food, how preparation of quality food, acquisition and preparation of quality acquisition and preparation of quality acquisition and preparation of quality food can be more accessible and can be food can be more accessible and can be food can be more accessible and can be um commoditized in a positive way in um commoditized in a positive way in um commoditized in a positive way in the positive sense of the word. Yeah, the positive sense of the word. Yeah, the positive sense of the word. Yeah, absolutely. I going back to the Stanford absolutely. I going back to the Stanford absolutely. I going back to the Stanford only thing. I mean part of this argument only thing. I mean part of this argument only thing. I mean part of this argument was so the central campus of the was so the central campus of the was so the central campus of the Culinary Institute of America is Hide Culinary Institute of America is Hide Culinary Institute of America is Hide Park, New York in the Hudson Valley and Park, New York in the Hudson Valley and Park, New York in the Hudson Valley and most of the 55,000 chefs that have most of the 55,000 chefs that have most of the 55,000 chefs that have graduated from their program are all graduated from their program are all graduated from their program are all over the country and the world. They over the country and the world. They over the country and the world. They could be in a in a Marriott hotel in one could be in a in a Marriott hotel in one could be in a in a Marriott hotel in one place and in a school district in place and in a school district in place and in a school district in another place. Let me take a quick run another place. Let me take a quick run another place. Let me take a quick run at this. 2010, Michelle Obama thought at this. 2010, Michelle Obama thought at this. 2010, Michelle Obama thought maybe much like RFK Jr. that wow, the maybe much like RFK Jr. that wow, the maybe much like RFK Jr. that wow, the school food that we're giving kids is school food that we're giving kids is school food that we're giving kids is setting them up with habits that they're setting them up with habits that they're setting them up with habits that they're going to carry forward in life where going to carry forward in life where going to carry forward in life where they're going to want cheezos and pizzas they're going to want cheezos and pizzas they're going to want cheezos and pizzas and burgers all day long. We really have and burgers all day long. We really have and burgers all day long. We really have to do something there. And in 2010, they to do something there. And in 2010, they to do something there. And in 2010, they passed the Healthy Hunger-Free Kid Act, passed the Healthy Hunger-Free Kid Act, passed the Healthy Hunger-Free Kid Act, which was to improve school food. And which was to improve school food. And which was to improve school food. And they gave schools four years to prepare they gave schools four years to prepare they gave schools four years to prepare for it. So for it. So for it. So 2014, it was required. By 2015 and 2014, it was required. By 2015 and 2014, it was required. By 2015 and 16, all kinds of people were complaining 16, all kinds of people were complaining 16, all kinds of people were complaining that the kids were throwing the food that the kids were throwing the food that the kids were throwing the food away. It wasn't working. We're going to away. It wasn't working. We're going to away. It wasn't working. We're going to have to go back to pizza, pizza and have to go back to pizza, pizza and have to go back to pizza, pizza and cheezos and wizzos and crappy cheezos and wizzos and crappy cheezos and wizzos and crappy food because we don't want the kids food because we don't want the kids food because we don't want the kids throwing the food away. There were a throwing the food away. There were a throwing the food away. There were a couple people who put chefs in schools couple people who put chefs in schools couple people who put chefs in schools and said, "Okay, you can't just say and said, "Okay, you can't just say and said, "Okay, you can't just say eat better." If they were eating this eat better." If they were eating this eat better." If they were eating this way for the last however many years they way for the last however many years they way for the last however many years they were in school and you just took the were in school and you just took the were in school and you just took the pizza away and put in the hummus, pizza away and put in the hummus, pizza away and put in the hummus, they're not going to try that. But what they're not going to try that. But what they're not going to try that. But what if you brought a chef in that worked if you brought a chef in that worked if you brought a chef in that worked with not just the kids but the teachers, with not just the kids but the teachers, with not just the kids but the teachers, the administrators were thinking about the administrators were thinking about the administrators were thinking about attendance and um kids who go to attendance and um kids who go to attendance and um kids who go to detention and test scores and things detention and test scores and things detention and test scores and things like that. The teachers are complaining. like that. The teachers are complaining. like that. The teachers are complaining. The kids are either hungry or they're The kids are either hungry or they're The kids are either hungry or they're not paying attention in class. they're not paying attention in class. they're not paying attention in class. food many times if you pay more food many times if you pay more food many times if you pay more attention to it can have an impact on attention to it can have an impact on attention to it can have an impact on all those things many of which you were all those things many of which you were all those things many of which you were just talking about a minute ago and just talking about a minute ago and just talking about a minute ago and school food is a great place to do that school food is a great place to do that school food is a great place to do that and to put a chef in a rural school and to put a chef in a rural school and to put a chef in a rural school district in different places is amazing district in different places is amazing district in different places is amazing I now work with another amazing partner I now work with another amazing partner I now work with another amazing partner named Nora Lour who has a company called named Nora Lour who has a company called named Nora Lour who has a company called or a nonprofit called or a nonprofit called or a nonprofit called Eatreal and Eatreal goes in and Eatreal and Eatreal goes in and Eatreal and Eatreal goes in and certifies K to2 schools and school certifies K to2 schools and school certifies K to2 schools and school districts for meeting 10 different districts for meeting 10 different districts for meeting 10 different parameters, some of which are parameters, some of which are parameters, some of which are nutritious, but some of which have to do nutritious, but some of which have to do nutritious, but some of which have to do with sourcing locally and sustainably with sourcing locally and sustainably with sourcing locally and sustainably and things like this. And she I was just and things like this. And she I was just and things like this. And she I was just on a Zoom call with her with a pitch uh on a Zoom call with her with a pitch uh on a Zoom call with her with a pitch uh yesterday for some funding to do some yesterday for some funding to do some yesterday for some funding to do some more work. Uh she's already serving a more work. Uh she's already serving a more work. Uh she's already serving a million kids in school with this new million kids in school with this new million kids in school with this new thing. And she's getting demands from thing. And she's getting demands from thing. And she's getting demands from school districts. Can you please come school districts. Can you please come school districts. Can you please come look at our school, certify it? Schools look at our school, certify it? Schools look at our school, certify it? Schools are buying new equipment. They're are buying new equipment. They're are buying new equipment. They're redesigning some menus. They're talking redesigning some menus. They're talking redesigning some menus. They're talking to the staff and they have happier to the staff and they have happier to the staff and they have happier staff. They're talking to the kids. The staff. They're talking to the kids. The staff. They're talking to the kids. The kids like the food. If you put some kids like the food. If you put some kids like the food. If you put some effort into effort into effort into this, you can make it taste good and be this, you can make it taste good and be this, you can make it taste good and be healthier and be affordable in rural, in healthier and be affordable in rural, in healthier and be affordable in rural, in red states, blue states. This can this red states, blue states. This can this red states, blue states. This can this can happen anywhere. It's really not can happen anywhere. It's really not can happen anywhere. It's really not certainly not just a went to Stanford certainly not just a went to Stanford certainly not just a went to Stanford and got good tasting food. I like this and got good tasting food. I like this and got good tasting food. I like this idea about chefs in schools. Um I idea about chefs in schools. Um I idea about chefs in schools. Um I never thought about that. Um mostly never thought about that. Um mostly never thought about that. Um mostly because it seems reasonable to have one because it seems reasonable to have one because it seems reasonable to have one or two per several hundred students or two per several hundred students or two per several hundred students because the issue is always scalability. because the issue is always scalability. because the issue is always scalability. Yeah. I love the small farm Yeah. I love the small farm Yeah. I love the small farm thing, you know, uh but you know there's thing, you know, uh but you know there's thing, you know, uh but you know there's only so many Napa counties and there's only so many Napa counties and there's only so many Napa counties and there's only so many I mean Montana's got only so many I mean Montana's got only so many I mean Montana's got beautiful areas to for cattle to graze beautiful areas to for cattle to graze beautiful areas to for cattle to graze and things like but there we just don't and things like but there we just don't and things like but there we just don't have the land as you pointed out and we have the land as you pointed out and we have the land as you pointed out and we don't it's hard to do it at do things don't it's hard to do it at do things don't it's hard to do it at do things properly at scale. That's I think the properly at scale. That's I think the properly at scale. That's I think the fundamental issue here. But this sounds fundamental issue here. But this sounds fundamental issue here. But this sounds like it's scalable. And I would push like it's scalable. And I would push like it's scalable. And I would push back on small farms to middlesize farms. back on small farms to middlesize farms. back on small farms to middlesize farms. So really what we've got is gigantic So really what we've got is gigantic So really what we've got is gigantic mega farms. And this isn't my area. So mega farms. And this isn't my area. So mega farms. And this isn't my area. So I'm speaking completely out of my I'm speaking completely out of my I'm speaking completely out of my wheelhouse right now. But if you look at wheelhouse right now. But if you look at wheelhouse right now. But if you look at the amount of corn and soy or potatoes the amount of corn and soy or potatoes the amount of corn and soy or potatoes or the way things are grown, they're or the way things are grown, they're or the way things are grown, they're really inexpensive because they're so really inexpensive because they're so really inexpensive because they're so huge. If you look at dairy in the US, um huge. If you look at dairy in the US, um huge. If you look at dairy in the US, um dairy farms have been in number have dairy farms have been in number have dairy farms have been in number have been going down and down and down. And been going down and down and down. And been going down and down and down. And the megadeera farms are huge. So, we the megadeera farms are huge. So, we the megadeera farms are huge. So, we have suicides in the dairy farmer have suicides in the dairy farmer have suicides in the dairy farmer community because of losing their family community because of losing their family community because of losing their family business. We have all kinds of I'm sure business. We have all kinds of I'm sure business. We have all kinds of I'm sure you've heard this. This isn't uh any you've heard this. This isn't uh any you've heard this. This isn't uh any mystery, but a lot of farming families mystery, but a lot of farming families mystery, but a lot of farming families are having a hard time getting their are having a hard time getting their are having a hard time getting their kids to take over. We have a lot of kids to take over. We have a lot of kids to take over. We have a lot of really old farmers in the US. I didn't really old farmers in the US. I didn't really old farmers in the US. I didn't know this. I mean, it makes sense that know this. I mean, it makes sense that know this. I mean, it makes sense that now that I hear it. Yeah. So, we got a now that I hear it. Yeah. So, we got a now that I hear it. Yeah. So, we got a brain drain because of sort of the get brain drain because of sort of the get brain drain because of sort of the get bigger big out. We used to have um bigger big out. We used to have um bigger big out. We used to have um diverse aggroecology going on farms diverse aggroecology going on farms diverse aggroecology going on farms and they would have some livestock and they would have some livestock and they would have some livestock and they would have some produce and if they would have some produce and if they would have some produce and if there was any blight that happened. It there was any blight that happened. It there was any blight that happened. It didn't wipe out the farm because they didn't wipe out the farm because they didn't wipe out the farm because they had other crops or other livestock to had other crops or other livestock to had other crops or other livestock to back that up. And at one point there's a back that up. And at one point there's a back that up. And at one point there's a guy named Earl Buts who said ah the guy named Earl Buts who said ah the guy named Earl Buts who said ah the military the men are too weak to be military the men are too weak to be military the men are too weak to be in the military. We're not getting in the military. We're not getting in the military. We're not getting enough calories. This goes back like enough calories. This goes back like enough calories. This goes back like more than 50 years. Plant corn or soy more than 50 years. Plant corn or soy more than 50 years. Plant corn or soy fence row to fence row. Buy more land. fence row to fence row. Buy more land. fence row to fence row. Buy more land. buy the huge combine machinery to plant buy the huge combine machinery to plant buy the huge combine machinery to plant this. Don't be so diverse. And I know this. Don't be so diverse. And I know this. Don't be so diverse. And I know of one particular person uh at Stanford of one particular person uh at Stanford of one particular person uh at Stanford whose family had a farm. And the dad whose family had a farm. And the dad whose family had a farm. And the dad said, "I don't even want you to take said, "I don't even want you to take said, "I don't even want you to take over the farm. I've ruined the over the farm. I've ruined the over the farm. I've ruined the land. Um the biodiverse thing was great, land. Um the biodiverse thing was great, land. Um the biodiverse thing was great, but this monocropping thing has ruined but this monocropping thing has ruined but this monocropping thing has ruined it. Please go get another it. Please go get another it. Please go get another job." And so what I what my sense was is job." And so what I what my sense was is job." And so what I what my sense was is small farms aren't enough to make a small farms aren't enough to make a small farms aren't enough to make a decent living. And farmers should make a decent living. And farmers should make a decent living. And farmers should make a decent living. Absolutely. The farmers decent living. Absolutely. The farmers decent living. Absolutely. The farmers and ranchers and fishers should make a and ranchers and fishers should make a and ranchers and fishers should make a diff decent living. So again, out of my diff decent living. So again, out of my diff decent living. So again, out of my wheelhouse, but you mentioned small wheelhouse, but you mentioned small wheelhouse, but you mentioned small farms. I think the problem is mega farms. I think the problem is mega farms. I think the problem is mega farms. I think there's something in the farms. I think there's something in the farms. I think there's something in the middle where you could make a middle where you could make a middle where you could make a respectable living, but would have to be respectable living, but would have to be respectable living, but would have to be a more diverse agricultural system than a more diverse agricultural system than a more diverse agricultural system than just corn or just soy or just a just corn or just soy or just a just corn or just soy or just a concentrated animal feeding operation. concentrated animal feeding operation. concentrated animal feeding operation. And it had to be multiple crops, And it had to be multiple crops, And it had to be multiple crops, multiple livestock working together. I multiple livestock working together. I multiple livestock working together. I know these are new concepts to me in the know these are new concepts to me in the know these are new concepts to me in the sense that um I've not heard before what sense that um I've not heard before what sense that um I've not heard before what the what the um sort of tractable model the what the um sort of tractable model the what the um sort of tractable model is. Um but certainly these um issues is. Um but certainly these um issues is. Um but certainly these um issues have been on my mind for a long time as have been on my mind for a long time as have been on my mind for a long time as you know it's become clear that uh you know it's become clear that uh you know it's become clear that uh you know mega farms and factory meat I mean know mega farms and factory meat I mean know mega farms and factory meat I mean I don't think anyone in the world would I don't think anyone in the world would I don't think anyone in the world would say that um factory farmed meat like say that um factory farmed meat like say that um factory farmed meat like these you know cattle houses are these you know cattle houses are these you know cattle houses are good. I don't I don't think anyone would good. I don't I don't think anyone would good. I don't I don't think anyone would except maybe even the people who own except maybe even the people who own except maybe even the people who own them. Um, it just seems that what to do them. Um, it just seems that what to do them. Um, it just seems that what to do become instead becomes excessively become instead becomes excessively become instead becomes excessively challenging. So, I'm really uh grateful challenging. So, I'm really uh grateful challenging. So, I'm really uh grateful to hear about this uh chef's program. I to hear about this uh chef's program. I to hear about this uh chef's program. I I'm hoping that folks in the new I'm hoping that folks in the new I'm hoping that folks in the new administration will pay attention to administration will pay attention to administration will pay attention to this. They claim to be very interested this. They claim to be very interested this. They claim to be very interested in these sorts of issues and they wield in these sorts of issues and they wield in these sorts of issues and they wield a lot of power to be able to um make a lot of power to be able to um make a lot of power to be able to um make this kind of change possible. So, um this kind of change possible. So, um this kind of change possible. So, um were they to ask you uh to advise or were they to ask you uh to advise or were they to ask you uh to advise or help, would you be willing to do that? help, would you be willing to do that? help, would you be willing to do that? things have become so partisan now. I'm things have become so partisan now. I'm things have become so partisan now. I'm just curious like are you willing to just curious like are you willing to just curious like are you willing to work with um the new administration if work with um the new administration if work with um the new administration if they said hey listen like gardener like they said hey listen like gardener like they said hey listen like gardener like we need we need your input would you we need we need your input would you we need we need your input would you Yeah you know absolutely and it wouldn't Yeah you know absolutely and it wouldn't Yeah you know absolutely and it wouldn't just be mine that I I'm having a blast just be mine that I I'm having a blast just be mine that I I'm having a blast at Stanford right now just because uh at Stanford right now just because uh at Stanford right now just because uh this new school of sustainability is this new school of sustainability is this new school of sustainability is interested this very much thinking of interested this very much thinking of interested this very much thinking of the farmers and the ranchers and the farmers and the ranchers and the farmers and the ranchers and the fishers I mean this really the school of fishers I mean this really the school of fishers I mean this really the school of sustainability sort of grew out of the sustainability sort of grew out of the sustainability sort of grew out of the earth science school and so a lot of earth science school and so a lot of earth science school and so a lot of those people have been working with land those people have been working with land those people have been working with land and water and air and it they're always and water and air and it they're always and water and air and it they're always looking for that win-win across all looking for that win-win across all looking for that win-win across all sectors. So, that's one of them. Yeah. sectors. So, that's one of them. Yeah. sectors. So, that's one of them. Yeah. Let's talk about protein. Oh, okay. Do Let's talk about protein. Oh, okay. Do Let's talk about protein. Oh, okay. Do we have six more hours or just four? No, we have six more hours or just four? No, we have six more hours or just four? No, but we're going to make it simple. Okay, but we're going to make it simple. Okay, but we're going to make it simple. Okay, I'll try. I'll just start off by saying I'll try. I'll just start off by saying I'll try. I'll just start off by saying that I and I would say essentially every that I and I would say essentially every that I and I would say essentially every guest that's touched on nutrition, um, guest that's touched on nutrition, um, guest that's touched on nutrition, um, Peter Ailla, Dr. Gabrielle Lion, um Stacy Ailla, Dr. Gabrielle Lion, um Stacy Ailla, Dr. Gabrielle Lion, um Stacy Sims, Stacy Sims, Lane Norton, um who is Sims, Stacy Sims, Lane Norton, um who is Sims, Stacy Sims, Lane Norton, um who is degreed in biochemistry and nutrition. degreed in biochemistry and nutrition. degreed in biochemistry and nutrition. So, he probably of those people has So, he probably of those people has So, he probably of those people has had the most formal training in had the most formal training in had the most formal training in nutrition and biochemistry. Um and nutrition and biochemistry. Um and nutrition and biochemistry. Um and several others have made a what I several others have made a what I several others have made a what I consider a reasonable argument for, and consider a reasonable argument for, and consider a reasonable argument for, and try not to gasp here, Christopher. Yeah. try not to gasp here, Christopher. Yeah. try not to gasp here, Christopher. Yeah. One gram of quality protein. Uhhuh. So One gram of quality protein. Uhhuh. So One gram of quality protein. Uhhuh. So high bioavailab high bioavailab high bioavailab high bioavailability high protein to calorie bioavailability high protein to calorie bioavailability high protein to calorie ratio one gram of that per lean pound of ratio one gram of that per lean pound of ratio one gram of that per lean pound of body weight not kilogram per pound per body weight not kilogram per pound per body weight not kilogram per pound per pound. Oh of lean body weight of lean pound. Oh of lean body weight of lean pound. Oh of lean body weight of lean body weight. Dr. Gabrielle Lion is very body weight. Dr. Gabrielle Lion is very body weight. Dr. Gabrielle Lion is very precise about this. Um sometimes her precise about this. Um sometimes her precise about this. Um sometimes her words get twisted when uh when the media words get twisted when uh when the media words get twisted when uh when the media the mainstream media which is now no the mainstream media which is now no the mainstream media which is now no longer mainstream um talks about it but longer mainstream um talks about it but longer mainstream um talks about it but they've contorted her words a little they've contorted her words a little they've contorted her words a little bit. it's per pound of lean or bit. it's per pound of lean or bit. it's per pound of lean or desired body weight because that desired body weight because that desired body weight because that adjusts for this um you know for body adjusts for this um you know for body adjusts for this um you know for body fat percentage, right? If you're fat percentage, right? If you're fat percentage, right? If you're carrying a lot of muscle, Yeah. it's carrying a lot of muscle, Yeah. it's carrying a lot of muscle, Yeah. it's very different than if you're carrying very different than if you're carrying very different than if you're carrying less muscle under a lot of fat. less muscle under a lot of fat. less muscle under a lot of fat. So even so that those numbers are pretty So even so that those numbers are pretty So even so that those numbers are pretty high compared to the numbers that you've high compared to the numbers that you've high compared to the numbers that you've written about. Um and it's not per written about. Um and it's not per written about. Um and it's not per kilogram, it's per pound, right? So I kilogram, it's per pound, right? So I kilogram, it's per pound, right? So I weigh 210bs. I loosely aim for somewhere weigh 210bs. I loosely aim for somewhere weigh 210bs. I loosely aim for somewhere between 175 and 215 grams of quality between 175 and 215 grams of quality between 175 and 215 grams of quality protein per day. So, what are your protein per day. So, what are your protein per day. So, what are your thoughts about those recommendations? thoughts about those recommendations? thoughts about those recommendations? And then we'll kind of go back and forth And then we'll kind of go back and forth And then we'll kind of go back and forth and hopefully um come to some sort of and hopefully um come to some sort of and hopefully um come to some sort of conclusion that people can make their conclusion that people can make their conclusion that people can make their own decision about. Yeah. Okay. So, a own decision about. Yeah. Okay. So, a own decision about. Yeah. Okay. So, a super important fact just to dive in super important fact just to dive in super important fact just to dive in right off the bat is how much protein do right off the bat is how much protein do right off the bat is how much protein do you store if you ate in excess today for you store if you ate in excess today for you store if you ate in excess today for tomorrow? Like if you were just hedging tomorrow? Like if you were just hedging tomorrow? Like if you were just hedging your bets, how much of that 175 grams your bets, how much of that 175 grams your bets, how much of that 175 grams of protein do you think you applied to protein do you think you applied to protein do you think you applied to muscle? Very little. You're not gaining muscle? Very little. You're not gaining muscle? Very little. You're not gaining muscle right now. I'm going to guess. muscle right now. I'm going to guess. muscle right now. I'm going to guess. You're stable weight, stable muscle You're stable weight, stable muscle You're stable weight, stable muscle pretty much. I mean, maybe a little pretty much. I mean, maybe a little pretty much. I mean, maybe a little muscle here and there. Um, but yes, muscle here and there. Um, but yes, muscle here and there. Um, but yes, stable weight, stable muscle. So, I stable weight, stable muscle. So, I stable weight, stable muscle. So, I would say very little is going to go would say very little is going to go would say very little is going to go into there's sort of maintenance levels into there's sort of maintenance levels into there's sort of maintenance levels of protein synthesis. Anything that I of protein synthesis. Anything that I of protein synthesis. Anything that I stimulated by exercise, still very stimulated by exercise, still very stimulated by exercise, still very little. I'm perfectly fine with the idea little. I'm perfectly fine with the idea little. I'm perfectly fine with the idea that much of that protein intake is used that much of that protein intake is used that much of that protein intake is used as energy. In fact, I'm delighted with as energy. In fact, I'm delighted with as energy. In fact, I'm delighted with it because the conversion of that it because the conversion of that it because the conversion of that protein to energy is metabolically protein to energy is metabolically protein to energy is metabolically costly in a way that conversion of other costly in a way that conversion of other costly in a way that conversion of other caloric forms is less costly and the I'm caloric forms is less costly and the I'm caloric forms is less costly and the I'm also happy with it also happy with it also happy with it because it tastes good. The meat I eat because it tastes good. The meat I eat because it tastes good. The meat I eat is very dense. Meat, eggs, etc. um that is very dense. Meat, eggs, etc. um that is very dense. Meat, eggs, etc. um that I eat is very dense in other nutrients I eat is very dense in other nutrients I eat is very dense in other nutrients like healthy fats, especially for fish like healthy fats, especially for fish like healthy fats, especially for fish or for uh things of that sort. And I or for uh things of that sort. And I or for uh things of that sort. And I have to eat something. I have a caloric have to eat something. I have a caloric have to eat something. I have a caloric need and if I eat too many starches, I need and if I eat too many starches, I need and if I eat too many starches, I get sleepy. I feel lousy. I don't get sleepy. I feel lousy. I don't get sleepy. I feel lousy. I don't tolerate dairy. I love fruits and tolerate dairy. I love fruits and tolerate dairy. I love fruits and vegetables. But if I eat too many fruits vegetables. But if I eat too many fruits vegetables. But if I eat too many fruits and vegetables, I feel lousy because my and vegetables, I feel lousy because my and vegetables, I feel lousy because my gut can only take so much fiber. So gut can only take so much fiber. So gut can only take so much fiber. So that's what's worked for me because it that's what's worked for me because it that's what's worked for me because it basically establishes all the things basically establishes all the things basically establishes all the things that I'm looking for, right? I want that I'm looking for, right? I want that I'm looking for, right? I want enough fiber, but not so much that I'm enough fiber, but not so much that I'm enough fiber, but not so much that I'm bloated or gassy or not feeling well or bloated or gassy or not feeling well or bloated or gassy or not feeling well or I have to run to the restroom all the I have to run to the restroom all the I have to run to the restroom all the time. I want enough protein for syn time. I want enough protein for syn time. I want enough protein for syn protein synthesis and to cover any, you protein synthesis and to cover any, you protein synthesis and to cover any, you know, exercise induced needs, but I also know, exercise induced needs, but I also know, exercise induced needs, but I also like the way it tastes. Yeah. And I like the way it tastes. Yeah. And I like the way it tastes. Yeah. And I like what it brings with it and I source it what it brings with it and I source it what it brings with it and I source it from quality sources. from quality sources. from quality sources. So, it's hard for me to punch a hole in So, it's hard for me to punch a hole in So, it's hard for me to punch a hole in that argument. And I like rice as much that argument. And I like rice as much that argument. And I like rice as much as the next person. But if I eat two big as the next person. But if I eat two big as the next person. But if I eat two big bowls of rice, I feel like garbage. If I bowls of rice, I feel like garbage. If I bowls of rice, I feel like garbage. If I eat one bowl of rice with a nice little eat one bowl of rice with a nice little eat one bowl of rice with a nice little piece of grass-fed meat and a big piece of grass-fed meat and a big piece of grass-fed meat and a big salad and some vegetables and some salad and some vegetables and some salad and some vegetables and some berries for dessert, I feel like a king. berries for dessert, I feel like a king. berries for dessert, I feel like a king. Yeah. So, that's pretty good. Yeah. So, that's pretty good. Yeah. So, that's pretty good. Yeah. Where am I going wrong with one gram? Where am I going wrong with one gram? Where am I going wrong with one gram? Because the recommendations that Because the recommendations that Because the recommendations that I've seen in your papers and others are I've seen in your papers and others are I've seen in your papers and others are much lower. So, I'm not sure if much lower. So, I'm not sure if much lower. So, I'm not sure if they've been my recommendations. Part of they've been my recommendations. Part of they've been my recommendations. Part of it is just sort of pointing out protein it is just sort of pointing out protein it is just sort of pointing out protein 101. There's some myths here that are 101. There's some myths here that are 101. There's some myths here that are that are pretty ridiculous. Okay. So, if that are pretty ridiculous. Okay. So, if that are pretty ridiculous. Okay. So, if we were to start at the beginning, if we were to start at the beginning, if we were to start at the beginning, and if I go too far down the rabbit and if I go too far down the rabbit and if I go too far down the rabbit hole, feel free to stop me. I got my PhD hole, feel free to stop me. I got my PhD hole, feel free to stop me. I got my PhD at Berkeley. Part of the dietary at Berkeley. Part of the dietary at Berkeley. Part of the dietary recommendations for protein were recommendations for protein were recommendations for protein were established by Doris Callaway and established by Doris Callaway and established by Doris Callaway and Shelley Morgan at Berkeley. In Morgan Shelley Morgan at Berkeley. In Morgan Shelley Morgan at Berkeley. In Morgan Hall, the fifth floor is called the Hall, the fifth floor is called the Hall, the fifth floor is called the penthouse. And in the days of the penthouse. And in the days of the penthouse. And in the days of the Vietnam War, conscientious war objectors Vietnam War, conscientious war objectors Vietnam War, conscientious war objectors were allowed out of the war if they were allowed out of the war if they were allowed out of the war if they would be study participants and go up in would be study participants and go up in would be study participants and go up in the penthouse where they put on blue the penthouse where they put on blue the penthouse where they put on blue zoot suits every single day. And there zoot suits every single day. And there zoot suits every single day. And there was a kitchen facility up there and was a kitchen facility up there and was a kitchen facility up there and there were beds and they were not there were beds and they were not there were beds and they were not allowed to leave for months at a time to allowed to leave for months at a time to allowed to leave for months at a time to do this study. And they did what are do this study. And they did what are do this study. And they did what are called nitrogen balance studies, which called nitrogen balance studies, which called nitrogen balance studies, which today the protein community despises and today the protein community despises and today the protein community despises and says this is a horrific way to determine says this is a horrific way to determine says this is a horrific way to determine protein needs. But in the day was super protein needs. But in the day was super protein needs. But in the day was super clever. So picture that you're 50, 60, clever. So picture that you're 50, 60, clever. So picture that you're 50, 60, 70 years ago, however many, however long 70 years ago, however many, however long 70 years ago, however many, however long ago it was ago it was ago it was now. Um, protein is the main source of now. Um, protein is the main source of now. Um, protein is the main source of nitrogen in your body. If you were to do nitrogen in your body. If you were to do nitrogen in your body. If you were to do one of these bomb calorimeter things one of these bomb calorimeter things one of these bomb calorimeter things that blew up and burned your whole body, that blew up and burned your whole body, that blew up and burned your whole body, minerals would be left. You can't get minerals would be left. You can't get minerals would be left. You can't get rid of minerals. And and nitrogen is in rid of minerals. And and nitrogen is in rid of minerals. And and nitrogen is in that list. And so you can actually do a that list. And so you can actually do a that list. And so you can actually do a nitrogen analysis of food that you're nitrogen analysis of food that you're nitrogen analysis of food that you're eating and it'll tell you how much eating and it'll tell you how much eating and it'll tell you how much protein is in the food. And if you were protein is in the food. And if you were protein is in the food. And if you were to be in a blue zoot suit all day and to be in a blue zoot suit all day and to be in a blue zoot suit all day and collect your poop, your pee, your nasal collect your poop, your pee, your nasal collect your poop, your pee, your nasal blowings, the hairs that came off, the blowings, the hairs that came off, the blowings, the hairs that came off, the skin sloughing, the fingernail, if you skin sloughing, the fingernail, if you skin sloughing, the fingernail, if you captured everything that left your body, captured everything that left your body, captured everything that left your body, you would know how much protein you had you would know how much protein you had you would know how much protein you had eliminated during the day. So somebody eliminated during the day. So somebody eliminated during the day. So somebody came up with this idea for a nitrogen came up with this idea for a nitrogen came up with this idea for a nitrogen balance study. And they took these balance study. And they took these balance study. And they took these conscientious war objectors and put them conscientious war objectors and put them conscientious war objectors and put them in these suits for months and they in these suits for months and they in these suits for months and they lowered their protein to zero. At which lowered their protein to zero. At which lowered their protein to zero. At which point they realized, "Wow, this is point they realized, "Wow, this is point they realized, "Wow, this is fascinating. The losses that you have fascinating. The losses that you have fascinating. The losses that you have from protein decrease as you lower your from protein decrease as you lower your from protein decrease as you lower your protein to zero because your body protein to zero because your body protein to zero because your body realizes you need to be more efficient realizes you need to be more efficient realizes you need to be more efficient with what you had." And then they raised with what you had." And then they raised with what you had." And then they raised the dietary protein level back up until the dietary protein level back up until the dietary protein level back up until they were in balance. So the amount of they were in balance. So the amount of they were in balance. So the amount of protein leaving the body was the same as protein leaving the body was the same as protein leaving the body was the same as the amount going the amount going the amount going in. And they said, "This is the protein in. And they said, "This is the protein in. And they said, "This is the protein requirement. It's the amount that will requirement. It's the amount that will requirement. It's the amount that will replace your losses in this group of replace your losses in this group of replace your losses in this group of people. And it wasn't just Morgan Hall people. And it wasn't just Morgan Hall people. And it wasn't just Morgan Hall and the penthouse at Berkeley. It was and the penthouse at Berkeley. It was and the penthouse at Berkeley. It was multiple other groups were doing this in multiple other groups were doing this in multiple other groups were doing this in other places. And they pulled all their other places. And they pulled all their other places. And they pulled all their data and said this is and there's a data and said this is and there's a data and said this is and there's a range and some people need more and some range and some people need more and some range and some people need more and some people need less. And let's pretend it's people need less. And let's pretend it's people need less. And let's pretend it's a normal distribution. It isn't quite. a normal distribution. It isn't quite. a normal distribution. It isn't quite. But after all this, they came up with But after all this, they came up with But after all this, they came up with what would be an estimated average what would be an estimated average what would be an estimated average requirement for this population that requirement for this population that requirement for this population that we've studied and this bizarre prison we've studied and this bizarre prison we've studied and this bizarre prison incarceration food manipulation thing incarceration food manipulation thing incarceration food manipulation thing with this clever idea focusing on with this clever idea focusing on with this clever idea focusing on nitrogen just because it's so unique to nitrogen just because it's so unique to nitrogen just because it's so unique to protein. And they came up with uh 66 protein. And they came up with uh 66 protein. And they came up with uh 66 grams of protein per kilogram body grams of protein per kilogram body grams of protein per kilogram body weight per day. Not the Yeah. And this weight per day. Not the Yeah. And this weight per day. Not the Yeah. And this is the estimated average requirement. is the estimated average requirement. is the estimated average requirement. Okay. Now, let's do some super simple Okay. Now, let's do some super simple Okay. Now, let's do some super simple math. Let's say if you told the American math. Let's say if you told the American math. Let's say if you told the American public now they've done this bizarre public now they've done this bizarre public now they've done this bizarre disgusting task, this is how much disgusting task, this is how much disgusting task, this is how much everybody requires this estimated everybody requires this estimated everybody requires this estimated average requirement and they're in after average requirement and they're in after average requirement and they're in after everybody got exactly that much everybody got exactly that much everybody got exactly that much protein. What proportion of the protein. What proportion of the protein. What proportion of the population would be deficient at that population would be deficient at that population would be deficient at that level if they picked the average level if they picked the average level if they picked the average requirement? half. By definition, that's only the half. By definition, that's only the half. By definition, that's only the average. Half of the people are above average. Half of the people are above average. Half of the people are above average. So, the recommended daily average. So, the recommended daily average. So, the recommended daily allowance of protein is set at two allowance of protein is set at two allowance of protein is set at two standard deviations above the value determined by deviations above the value determined by deviations above the value determined by this disgusting nitrogen balance test this disgusting nitrogen balance test this disgusting nitrogen balance test decades and decades ago. And I decades and decades ago. And I decades and decades ago. And I understand that the community of protein understand that the community of protein understand that the community of protein fanatics doesn't like that. That's not fanatics doesn't like that. That's not fanatics doesn't like that. That's not an optimal protein. It's like a minimal an optimal protein. It's like a minimal an optimal protein. It's like a minimal protein requirement. Okay. So, I totally protein requirement. Okay. So, I totally protein requirement. Okay. So, I totally buy that argument. But I think the first buy that argument. But I think the first buy that argument. But I think the first thing that people get wrong is they thing that people get wrong is they thing that people get wrong is they think that old method is think that old method is think that old method is recommending the average recommending the average recommending the average requirement and it's not. It's got a requirement and it's not. It's got a requirement and it's not. It's got a safety buffer. It's got two standard safety buffer. It's got two standard safety buffer. It's got two standard deviations built on top of it. So that deviations built on top of it. So that deviations built on top of it. So that if everybody got that8 grams per if everybody got that8 grams per if everybody got that8 grams per kilogram body weight per day, two and a kilogram body weight per day, two and a kilogram body weight per day, two and a half% of the population would be half% of the population would be half% of the population would be deficient. And not only would 97 and a deficient. And not only would 97 and a deficient. And not only would 97 and a half% of the population meet their half% of the population meet their half% of the population meet their requirement, they would exceed it. If requirement, they would exceed it. If requirement, they would exceed it. If you drew the graph, right, you're seeing you drew the graph, right, you're seeing you drew the graph, right, you're seeing the line, this whole group would exceed the line, this whole group would exceed the line, this whole group would exceed it and this group would not meet it and it and this group would not meet it and it and this group would not meet it and this group would get just a small sliver this group would get just a small sliver this group would get just a small sliver would get what they needed. Thank you would get what they needed. Thank you would get what they needed. Thank you for that clarification. I have a for that clarification. I have a for that clarification. I have a couple of questions I know are popping couple of questions I know are popping couple of questions I know are popping up for people. Um I just would like to up for people. Um I just would like to up for people. Um I just would like to tick off if we can. Who were these tick off if we can. Who were these tick off if we can. Who were these subjects? Uh was it men and women? subjects? Uh was it men and women? subjects? Uh was it men and women? Uh these were conscientious objectors. Uh these were conscientious objectors. Uh these were conscientious objectors. So I would presume at that time we So I would presume at that time we So I would presume at that time we weren't sending women to Vietnam. So it weren't sending women to Vietnam. So it weren't sending women to Vietnam. So it would be just men. So this is just at would be just men. So this is just at would be just men. So this is just at Berkeley. So other people were doing Berkeley. So other people were doing Berkeley. So other people were doing this too. It wasn't just this one group. this too. It wasn't just this one group. this too. It wasn't just this one group. And I don't know who the others were. I And I don't know who the others were. I And I don't know who the others were. I just remember that I got my PhD at just remember that I got my PhD at just remember that I got my PhD at Berkeley and it's like as soon as I got Berkeley and it's like as soon as I got Berkeley and it's like as soon as I got there, people said, "Do you want to see there, people said, "Do you want to see there, people said, "Do you want to see the penthouse?" Said, "What the f is the penthouse?" Said, "What the f is the penthouse?" Said, "What the f is the penthouse?" the penthouse?" the penthouse?" The penthouse is where Doris Callaway The penthouse is where Doris Callaway The penthouse is where Doris Callaway and Shelley Margan figured this out and Shelley Margan figured this out and Shelley Margan figured this out and like this is a famous thing. And so, you like this is a famous thing. And so, you like this is a famous thing. And so, you know, they took great pride that part of know, they took great pride that part of know, they took great pride that part of that came from their work at Berkeley that came from their work at Berkeley that came from their work at Berkeley and they had to call it the penthouse to and they had to call it the penthouse to and they had to call it the penthouse to get people up there cuz what happened in get people up there cuz what happened in get people up there cuz what happened in there sounds anything but pleasant. Um, there sounds anything but pleasant. Um, there sounds anything but pleasant. Um, yeah, it was unpleasant. Yeah, at least yeah, it was unpleasant. Yeah, at least yeah, it was unpleasant. Yeah, at least for the Berkeley study. Uh, these guys for the Berkeley study. Uh, these guys for the Berkeley study. Uh, these guys are up there or guys and gals are up are up there or guys and gals are up are up there or guys and gals are up there. They're in these suits. They're there. They're in these suits. They're there. They're in these suits. They're collecting everything. They're not collecting everything. They're not collecting everything. They're not exercising. They're not breathing fresh exercising. They're not breathing fresh exercising. They're not breathing fresh air presumably. Um, they're not are they air presumably. Um, they're not are they air presumably. Um, they're not are they walking around? Are they getting even walking around? Are they getting even walking around? Are they getting even like a couple thousand steps a day? I like a couple thousand steps a day? I like a couple thousand steps a day? I mean, my concern is that Oh, absolutely. mean, my concern is that Oh, absolutely. mean, my concern is that Oh, absolutely. Yeah, they're concerns. My concern is Yeah, they're concerns. My concern is Yeah, they're concerns. My concern is that they turn them into mice that they turn them into mice that they turn them into mice essentially. Um, and as somebody listen, essentially. Um, and as somebody listen, essentially. Um, and as somebody listen, I've published work on mice, rats, I've published work on mice, rats, I've published work on mice, rats, uh, I no longer do this, but non-human uh, I no longer do this, but non-human uh, I no longer do this, but non-human primates, uh, something that I have no primates, uh, something that I have no primates, uh, something that I have no interest in doing anymore. And, um, the interest in doing anymore. And, um, the interest in doing anymore. And, um, the other uh, primates, us humans. And I other uh, primates, us humans. And I other uh, primates, us humans. And I know how hard it is to do a know how hard it is to do a know how hard it is to do a well-controlled study. It's extremely well-controlled study. It's extremely well-controlled study. It's extremely difficult. So I understand why they did difficult. So I understand why they did difficult. So I understand why they did this but then it becomes a very this but then it becomes a very this but then it becomes a very artificial circumstance. Now now the artificial circumstance. Now now the artificial circumstance. Now now the buffering with two standard deviations buffering with two standard deviations buffering with two standard deviations above this nitrogen balance amount. I above this nitrogen balance amount. I above this nitrogen balance amount. I think that's something really important think that's something really important think that's something really important to double click on for people to double click on for people to double click on for people because most people hear oh um it was because most people hear oh um it was because most people hear oh um it was just the minimum amount required to just the minimum amount required to just the minimum amount required to maintain nitrogen balance. Uh but in maintain nitrogen balance. Uh but in maintain nitrogen balance. Uh but in reality it's much higher than that. reality it's much higher than that. reality it's much higher than that. Yeah. So that was the first one. I feel Yeah. So that was the first one. I feel Yeah. So that was the first one. I feel like that's a misperception that like that's a misperception that like that's a misperception that was the average requirement. All the was the average requirement. All the was the average requirement. All the points you made are deadon critical points you made are deadon critical points you made are deadon critical important. Okay. Then the second one is important. Okay. Then the second one is important. Okay. Then the second one is where do you store it if you've eaten a where do you store it if you've eaten a where do you store it if you've eaten a Nexus? Because the fact is right Nexus? Because the fact is right Nexus? Because the fact is right after that I had a I had a debate with after that I had a I had a debate with after that I had a I had a debate with Stu Phillips at one point on Simon Hills Stu Phillips at one point on Simon Hills Stu Phillips at one point on Simon Hills podcast because we had exchanged some podcast because we had exchanged some podcast because we had exchanged some Twitter things and said, "Oh my god, Twitter things and said, "Oh my god, Twitter things and said, "Oh my god, they disagreed they should have a they disagreed they should have a they disagreed they should have a debate." Is Stu Phillips like a debate." Is Stu Phillips like a debate." Is Stu Phillips like a carnivore guy? So no, Stu Phillips, I'm carnivore guy? So no, Stu Phillips, I'm carnivore guy? So no, Stu Phillips, I'm sorry, is an exercise uh he's super sorry, is an exercise uh he's super sorry, is an exercise uh he's super great at exercise studies at McMaster great at exercise studies at McMaster great at exercise studies at McMaster University. Okay. Uh, and after we University. Okay. Uh, and after we University. Okay. Uh, and after we actually emailed one another, not just actually emailed one another, not just actually emailed one another, not just tweeting however many characters you get tweeting however many characters you get tweeting however many characters you get on Twitter, said, "Oh my god, we on Twitter, said, "Oh my god, we on Twitter, said, "Oh my god, we actually agree on most things." And the actually agree on most things." And the actually agree on most things." And the reason we agreed is we have national the reason we agreed is we have national the reason we agreed is we have national data on what the protein intake is of data on what the protein intake is of data on what the protein intake is of Americans. So, forget the protein bars Americans. So, forget the protein bars Americans. So, forget the protein bars and the protein powders and everything and the protein powders and everything and the protein powders and everything else. The average American doesn't do else. The average American doesn't do else. The average American doesn't do that. And the average intake is like 1.2 that. And the average intake is like 1.2 that. And the average intake is like 1.2 two grams per kilogram body weight per two grams per kilogram body weight per two grams per kilogram body weight per day or higher of quality protein just day or higher of quality protein just day or higher of quality protein just food. So just food. So let's just food. So just food. So let's just food. So just food. So let's stop here. Just food. So the fun thing stop here. Just food. So the fun thing stop here. Just food. So the fun thing was is Stu and I got together. I said, was is Stu and I got together. I said, was is Stu and I got together. I said, you know, Stu, you hate that.8 grams per you know, Stu, you hate that.8 grams per you know, Stu, you hate that.8 grams per kilogram body weight and you're saying kilogram body weight and you're saying kilogram body weight and you're saying people should have one gram per kilogram people should have one gram per kilogram people should have one gram per kilogram body weight or maybe even 1.2, which body weight or maybe even 1.2, which body weight or maybe even 1.2, which would be 1.2 would be 50% higher than would be 1.2 would be 50% higher than would be 1.2 would be 50% higher than 08. That's the average American intake. 08. That's the average American intake. 08. That's the average American intake. and he said, "Well, that's true, too." and he said, "Well, that's true, too." and he said, "Well, that's true, too." So, I he hates the point8, but he So, I he hates the point8, but he So, I he hates the point8, but he realized it's almost an irrelevant realized it's almost an irrelevant realized it's almost an irrelevant number because most people get more than number because most people get more than number because most people get more than that. I just served on the dietary that. I just served on the dietary that. I just served on the dietary guidelines advisory committee. And we guidelines advisory committee. And we guidelines advisory committee. And we looked at those same data and it's still looked at those same data and it's still looked at those same data and it's still true. Americans eat more protein than true. Americans eat more protein than true. Americans eat more protein than the RDA on a on a general basis without the RDA on a on a general basis without the RDA on a on a general basis without trying, without knowing about it. It's trying, without knowing about it. It's trying, without knowing about it. It's just in more foods than you think. So just in more foods than you think. So just in more foods than you think. So the second issue is well if so many the second issue is well if so many the second issue is well if so many people are eating more is there anything people are eating more is there anything people are eating more is there anything bad about the extra like what do you do bad about the extra like what do you do bad about the extra like what do you do with the extra uh and so uh there's sort with the extra uh and so uh there's sort with the extra uh and so uh there's sort of infinite capacity to store fat in of infinite capacity to store fat in of infinite capacity to store fat in your body you probably know this in your body you probably know this in your body you probably know this in your belly in your butt in your underarms belly in your butt in your underarms belly in your butt in your underarms everywhere is limited capacity for everywhere is limited capacity for everywhere is limited capacity for carbohydrate store you can store I carbohydrate store you can store I carbohydrate store you can store I actually heard uh Gabrielle Lions talk actually heard uh Gabrielle Lions talk actually heard uh Gabrielle Lions talk about how much is in your liver and how about how much is in your liver and how about how much is in your liver and how much is in your skeletal muscle but if much is in your skeletal muscle but if much is in your skeletal muscle but if you are a marathon runner in 4 hours you are a marathon runner in 4 hours you are a marathon runner in 4 hours after 20 miles or so. You bonk because after 20 miles or so. You bonk because after 20 miles or so. You bonk because you've exhausted all your carb stores. you've exhausted all your carb stores. you've exhausted all your carb stores. You can exhaust all your carb stores in You can exhaust all your carb stores in You can exhaust all your carb stores in 4 hours where it would take days and 4 hours where it would take days and 4 hours where it would take days and days and days with fat. But there is no days and days with fat. But there is no days and days with fat. But there is no storage depot for protein. At the end of storage depot for protein. At the end of storage depot for protein. At the end of the day, if you ate more than you the day, if you ate more than you the day, if you ate more than you needed, you're not storing any for the needed, you're not storing any for the needed, you're not storing any for the next day. It's not in your big toe. It's next day. It's not in your big toe. It's next day. It's not in your big toe. It's not in your spleen. It's not in your not in your spleen. It's not in your not in your spleen. It's not in your liver. It's nowhere. After you made all liver. It's nowhere. After you made all liver. It's nowhere. After you made all the enzymes, hormones, hair, the enzymes, hormones, hair, the enzymes, hormones, hair, fingernails, and muscle tissue that you fingernails, and muscle tissue that you fingernails, and muscle tissue that you wanted, you break off the nitrogen. You wanted, you break off the nitrogen. You wanted, you break off the nitrogen. You have to eliminate that as ammonia in have to eliminate that as ammonia in have to eliminate that as ammonia in your kidney. And you turn the carbon your kidney. And you turn the carbon your kidney. And you turn the carbon skeleton into carbs, which if we do get skeleton into carbs, which if we do get skeleton into carbs, which if we do get back to the keto diet, is throwing the back to the keto diet, is throwing the back to the keto diet, is throwing the meat eaters on the keto diet out of meat eaters on the keto diet out of meat eaters on the keto diet out of ketosis because you just turned the ketosis because you just turned the ketosis because you just turned the protein you're eating to avoid the carbs protein you're eating to avoid the carbs protein you're eating to avoid the carbs into the carbs that you were avoiding. into the carbs that you were avoiding. into the carbs that you were avoiding. But we won't go there. Well, for the But we won't go there. Well, for the But we won't go there. Well, for the moment, we'll just say there's no place moment, we'll just say there's no place moment, we'll just say there's no place to store it. So, you're not really to store it. So, you're not really to store it. So, you're not really getting any benefit about I was very getting any benefit about I was very getting any benefit about I was very interested to hear you just say you're interested to hear you just say you're interested to hear you just say you're fine eating the protein for the fine eating the protein for the fine eating the protein for the calories, the energy. Well, because calories, the energy. Well, because calories, the energy. Well, because I need a certain amount of calories. I need a certain amount of calories. I need a certain amount of calories. I would also and I'm not just playing would also and I'm not just playing would also and I'm not just playing devil's advocate here. I feel first of devil's advocate here. I feel first of devil's advocate here. I feel first of all lucky that at a very young age I all lucky that at a very young age I all lucky that at a very young age I started paying attention to what I ate started paying attention to what I ate started paying attention to what I ate uh for uh not in a neurotic way. I've uh for uh not in a neurotic way. I've uh for uh not in a neurotic way. I've just um did that. Um, and I will say just um did that. Um, and I will say just um did that. Um, and I will say that when you have a certain amount of that when you have a certain amount of that when you have a certain amount of caloric need, everyone does, you ask caloric need, everyone does, you ask caloric need, everyone does, you ask where's it going to come from? And you where's it going to come from? And you where's it going to come from? And you know, you eat enough vegetables, great, know, you eat enough vegetables, great, know, you eat enough vegetables, great, but it's hard to get your rational but it's hard to get your rational but it's hard to get your rational calories, fruits, calories, fruits, calories, fruits, quality protein. So, I'm referring to quality protein. So, I'm referring to quality protein. So, I'm referring to that as um, you know, let's just put the that as um, you know, let's just put the that as um, you know, let's just put the tastes good to you. Uh, so you tastes good to you. Uh, so you tastes good to you. Uh, so you know, beef, fish, chicken, eggs. Um, and know, beef, fish, chicken, eggs. Um, and know, beef, fish, chicken, eggs. Um, and I guess for the vegetarian, some I guess for the vegetarian, some I guess for the vegetarian, some combination of like beans and rice, that combination of like beans and rice, that combination of like beans and rice, that type of thing, or that where you get type of thing, or that where you get type of thing, or that where you get enough lucine, this sort of thing. But enough lucine, this sort of thing. But enough lucine, this sort of thing. But the key thing I believe is that you the key thing I believe is that you the key thing I believe is that you can that one, I'll just speak from my can that one, I'll just speak from my can that one, I'll just speak from my own experience. I can eat those and feel own experience. I can eat those and feel own experience. I can eat those and feel satiated. Uhhuh. Most starches on their satiated. Uhhuh. Most starches on their satiated. Uhhuh. Most starches on their own don't taste good. Fair. Enough. I own don't taste good. Fair. Enough. I own don't taste good. Fair. Enough. I mean, I like oatmeal with some salt and mean, I like oatmeal with some salt and mean, I like oatmeal with some salt and some cinnamon, but most starches don't some cinnamon, but most starches don't some cinnamon, but most starches don't taste good on their own unless you add taste good on their own unless you add taste good on their own unless you add lipids. you add fats. And so I would lipids. you add fats. And so I would lipids. you add fats. And so I would argue that most people are struggling argue that most people are struggling argue that most people are struggling with too much body fat because they with too much body fat because they with too much body fat because they overeat starches combined with fats. Y overeat starches combined with fats. Y overeat starches combined with fats. Y not because they overeat steak or not because they overeat steak or not because they overeat steak or they're overeating. It's it's not the they're overeating. It's it's not the they're overeating. It's it's not the hamburger, it's the hamburger bun that hamburger, it's the hamburger bun that hamburger, it's the hamburger bun that includes sugar, the cheese, and then the includes sugar, the cheese, and then the includes sugar, the cheese, and then the and the and we didn't even we don't even and the and we didn't even we don't even and the and we didn't even we don't even need to talk about sugary soda. It's need to talk about sugary soda. It's need to talk about sugary soda. It's just kind of a duh now. Just it's loaded just kind of a duh now. Just it's loaded just kind of a duh now. Just it's loaded with all sorts of things that aren't with all sorts of things that aren't with all sorts of things that aren't nutritious. So I think that the nutritious. So I think that the nutritious. So I think that the key issue with this you pointed to this key issue with this you pointed to this key issue with this you pointed to this idea and not I'm not trying to protect idea and not I'm not trying to protect idea and not I'm not trying to protect the protein crowd. Um, but I think that the protein crowd. Um, but I think that the protein crowd. Um, but I think that one of the reasons that they are one of the reasons that they are one of the reasons that they are proponents of one gram per pound of body proponents of one gram per pound of body proponents of one gram per pound of body weight roughly or lean body weight is weight roughly or lean body weight is weight roughly or lean body weight is that we need to eat something. We that we need to eat something. We that we need to eat something. We ideally should eat something that tastes ideally should eat something that tastes ideally should eat something that tastes good, that provides some nutrition for good, that provides some nutrition for good, that provides some nutrition for us and that is not um is not something us and that is not um is not something us and that is not um is not something that requires a bunch of other things in that requires a bunch of other things in that requires a bunch of other things in order to make it palatable. Y and order to make it palatable. Y and order to make it palatable. Y and you know I love fruit, but you can't you know I love fruit, but you can't you know I love fruit, but you can't just live on fruit, you know, and I love just live on fruit, you know, and I love just live on fruit, you know, and I love vegetables in their raw form, but um vegetables in their raw form, but um vegetables in their raw form, but um they taste better with some olive oil on they taste better with some olive oil on they taste better with some olive oil on them. It doesn't take much to make a them. It doesn't take much to make a them. It doesn't take much to make a vegetable taste really good because I vegetable taste really good because I vegetable taste really good because I love vegetables. Same same for fruit. I'll vegetables. Same same for fruit. I'll vegetables. Same same for fruit. I'll eat them on their own all day. But the eat them on their own all day. But the eat them on their own all day. But the starches are a problem because of the starches are a problem because of the starches are a problem because of the quote unquote requirements that and the quote unquote requirements that and the quote unquote requirements that and preferences they bring with them. The preferences they bring with them. The preferences they bring with them. The problem isn't a loaf of sourdough bread. problem isn't a loaf of sourdough bread. problem isn't a loaf of sourdough bread. The problem is the immense amounts of The problem is the immense amounts of The problem is the immense amounts of butter and olive oil get spped up and butter and olive oil get spped up and butter and olive oil get spped up and brought down with it. Most people I brought down with it. Most people I brought down with it. Most people I would argue are overweight not because would argue are overweight not because would argue are overweight not because they eat too much protein. That's the they eat too much protein. That's the they eat too much protein. That's the point I'm trying to make. Okay, fair. point I'm trying to make. Okay, fair. point I'm trying to make. Okay, fair. But okay, so weight is a little separate But okay, so weight is a little separate But okay, so weight is a little separate issue. And if you're getting that for issue. And if you're getting that for issue. And if you're getting that for meat, you're getting more saturated fat meat, you're getting more saturated fat meat, you're getting more saturated fat and not fiber. And we're destroying the and not fiber. And we're destroying the and not fiber. And we're destroying the planet with the amount of meat and the planet with the amount of meat and the planet with the amount of meat and the kind of meat that we're getting right kind of meat that we're getting right kind of meat that we're getting right now. But parking lot for now, unless now. But parking lot for now, unless now. But parking lot for now, unless it's sustainably sourced, which is such it's sustainably sourced, which is such it's sustainably sourced, which is such a small proportion of meat grown in the a small proportion of meat grown in the a small proportion of meat grown in the US, it takes attention. It takes US, it takes attention. It takes US, it takes attention. It takes attention. Most people cannot access attention. Most people cannot access attention. Most people cannot access that right now. Unfortunately, I that right now. Unfortunately, I that right now. Unfortunately, I completely agree with you there. So, completely agree with you there. So, completely agree with you there. So, that is a great comment. I would love it that is a great comment. I would love it that is a great comment. I would love it if we went there. Okay, but let me move if we went there. Okay, but let me move if we went there. Okay, but let me move on. So, one was the two standard on. So, one was the two standard on. So, one was the two standard deviations. Two is there's no place to deviations. Two is there's no place to deviations. Two is there's no place to store it. You're going to convert it to store it. You're going to convert it to store it. You're going to convert it to something else. And three is your something else. And three is your something else. And three is your quality thing. So, here's another myth quality thing. So, here's another myth quality thing. So, here's another myth that we need to bust. So, the myth part that we need to bust. So, the myth part that we need to bust. So, the myth part is that plants are uh missing amino is that plants are uh missing amino is that plants are uh missing amino acids. Uh they're not complete. Uh I'm acids. Uh they're not complete. Uh I'm acids. Uh they're not complete. Uh I'm sure everybody listening today has heard sure everybody listening today has heard sure everybody listening today has heard quinoa, the only plant with all nine quinoa, the only plant with all nine quinoa, the only plant with all nine essential amino acids. So, I essential amino acids. So, I essential amino acids. So, I don't know if you can look at my paper don't know if you can look at my paper don't know if you can look at my paper in your podcast or show it. And I have in your podcast or show it. And I have in your podcast or show it. And I have it on links on the on the show note it on links on the on the show note it on links on the on the show note captions. Right. So, we wrote a paper in captions. Right. So, we wrote a paper in captions. Right. So, we wrote a paper in 2019 and this actually was pretty fun 2019 and this actually was pretty fun 2019 and this actually was pretty fun for me. It came from working with the for me. It came from working with the for me. It came from working with the chefs. The chefs were working on that chefs. The chefs were working on that chefs. The chefs were working on that protein flip idea that I mentioned protein flip idea that I mentioned protein flip idea that I mentioned earlier and they were a little worried. earlier and they were a little worried. earlier and they were a little worried. They said, "What is the thing about the They said, "What is the thing about the They said, "What is the thing about the plants missing the amino acids or being plants missing the amino acids or being plants missing the amino acids or being incomplete?" And so, I knew a lot about incomplete?" And so, I knew a lot about incomplete?" And so, I knew a lot about this, but to make a slideshow for them this, but to make a slideshow for them this, but to make a slideshow for them that day, I did something I had never that day, I did something I had never that day, I did something I had never done before. And I got a whole bunch of done before. And I got a whole bunch of done before. And I got a whole bunch of foods and I plotted out the amounts of foods and I plotted out the amounts of foods and I plotted out the amounts of every single amino acid in the food and every single amino acid in the food and every single amino acid in the food and the proportions they were in. If you the proportions they were in. If you the proportions they were in. If you looked at that point8 gram per kilogram looked at that point8 gram per kilogram looked at that point8 gram per kilogram body weight per day and if you thought body weight per day and if you thought body weight per day and if you thought that exceeded the needs of some people, that exceeded the needs of some people, that exceeded the needs of some people, it's plausible that a lot of people it's plausible that a lot of people it's plausible that a lot of people by that calculation need 40 grams of by that calculation need 40 grams of by that calculation need 40 grams of protein a day, which sounds I'm sure protein a day, which sounds I'm sure protein a day, which sounds I'm sure very little. And I'm only bringing very little. And I'm only bringing very little. And I'm only bringing that up because there's 20 amino acids. that up because there's 20 amino acids. that up because there's 20 amino acids. And I would assume the average person And I would assume the average person And I would assume the average person would think, well, if I needed 40 and would think, well, if I needed 40 and would think, well, if I needed 40 and there's 20 amino acids, I would need two there's 20 amino acids, I would need two there's 20 amino acids, I would need two grams of every amino acid. And that is grams of every amino acid. And that is grams of every amino acid. And that is totally not the way it works. It totally not the way it works. It totally not the way it works. It actually works more like the board game actually works more like the board game actually works more like the board game of Scrabble. So when you're drawing, of Scrabble. So when you're drawing, of Scrabble. So when you're drawing, there's a 100 Scrabble letters in the there's a 100 Scrabble letters in the there's a 100 Scrabble letters in the bag and there's 26 letters in the bag and there's 26 letters in the bag and there's 26 letters in the alphabet and almost seems like there alphabet and almost seems like there alphabet and almost seems like there would be four of each letter in the bag. would be four of each letter in the bag. would be four of each letter in the bag. But you all know there's only one Z and But you all know there's only one Z and But you all know there's only one Z and one Y and one X or maybe there's two one Y and one X or maybe there's two one Y and one X or maybe there's two Y's, but there's a crap ton of E's and Y's, but there's a crap ton of E's and Y's, but there's a crap ton of E's and N's and Rs. And your amino acids are N's and Rs. And your amino acids are N's and Rs. And your amino acids are just like that. So you need a crap ton just like that. So you need a crap ton just like that. So you need a crap ton of lysine and leucine. And you need very of lysine and leucine. And you need very of lysine and leucine. And you need very little methane or cysteine. So it was little methane or cysteine. So it was little methane or cysteine. So it was really fun in putting these graphics really fun in putting these graphics really fun in putting these graphics together. I said, "Here's eggs, here's together. I said, "Here's eggs, here's together. I said, "Here's eggs, here's beef, here's salmon, here's pork. Get beef, here's salmon, here's pork. Get beef, here's salmon, here's pork. Get ready because I'm going to show you ready because I'm going to show you ready because I'm going to show you beans and rice and grains and fruit. And beans and rice and grains and fruit. And beans and rice and grains and fruit. And I'm focusing on proportion. And I will I'm focusing on proportion. And I will I'm focusing on proportion. And I will say per calorie meat has more protein say per calorie meat has more protein say per calorie meat has more protein than plants in just in terms of than plants in just in terms of than plants in just in terms of calories. But calories. But calories. But proportion-wise, one of the myths is the proportion-wise, one of the myths is the proportion-wise, one of the myths is the missing amino acids or the incomplete missing amino acids or the incomplete missing amino acids or the incomplete ones. Because if you make a graphic out ones. Because if you make a graphic out ones. Because if you make a graphic out of this, you will see all plants have of this, you will see all plants have of this, you will see all plants have all godamn 20 amino acids. They all have all godamn 20 amino acids. They all have all godamn 20 amino acids. They all have lysine. They all have methionine and lysine. They all have methionine and lysine. They all have methionine and cyine. And the idea that they're missing cyine. And the idea that they're missing cyine. And the idea that they're missing is wrong. The idea that you have to is wrong. The idea that you have to is wrong. The idea that you have to complement your beans and grains is complement your beans and grains is complement your beans and grains is wrong. Unless you're getting very little wrong. Unless you're getting very little wrong. Unless you're getting very little protein at that point, it is important protein at that point, it is important protein at that point, it is important to complement them. But it's really not to complement them. But it's really not to complement them. But it's really not hard to get a lot of amino acids. You hard to get a lot of amino acids. You hard to get a lot of amino acids. You mentioned the quality of your protein. mentioned the quality of your protein. mentioned the quality of your protein. If you're getting 175 grams of protein a If you're getting 175 grams of protein a If you're getting 175 grams of protein a day, quality doesn't matter a hoot. You day, quality doesn't matter a hoot. You day, quality doesn't matter a hoot. You like you met your needs at 60 or 70 like you met your needs at 60 or 70 like you met your needs at 60 or 70 grams and I think you're converting the grams and I think you're converting the grams and I think you're converting the rest to carbs. So the sorry to interrupt rest to carbs. So the sorry to interrupt rest to carbs. So the sorry to interrupt you but I'm going to do it intentionally you but I'm going to do it intentionally you but I'm going to do it intentionally that the idea is to get when I say that the idea is to get when I say that the idea is to get when I say quality is to get the protein that quality is to get the protein that quality is to get the protein that one seeks without overdoing caloric one seeks without overdoing caloric one seeks without overdoing caloric intake that gets tough with starches. intake that gets tough with starches. intake that gets tough with starches. Okay. Very tough. I mean a half a bowl Okay. Very tough. I mean a half a bowl Okay. Very tough. I mean a half a bowl of rice Yeah. is um is not very of rice Yeah. is um is not very of rice Yeah. is um is not very satiating. At least for me. I'll take a satiating. At least for me. I'll take a satiating. At least for me. I'll take a quarter of a bowl of steak over a over quarter of a bowl of steak over a over quarter of a bowl of steak over a over two bowls of rice to survive on now and two bowls of rice to survive on now and two bowls of rice to survive on now and forever. Yeah. And I wouldn't go with forever. Yeah. And I wouldn't go with forever. Yeah. And I wouldn't go with the grains. So the grains are only like the grains. So the grains are only like the grains. So the grains are only like 10% protein. Beans are 20%. Soy beans 10% protein. Beans are 20%. Soy beans 10% protein. Beans are 20%. Soy beans are like 40%. are like 40%. are like 40%. And actually the amino acid profile of And actually the amino acid profile of And actually the amino acid profile of soy is better than any other beans. So soy is better than any other beans. So soy is better than any other beans. So the Asians who were doing soy milk, the Asians who were doing soy milk, the Asians who were doing soy milk, tempe, tofu for so long, pretty smart. tempe, tofu for so long, pretty smart. tempe, tofu for so long, pretty smart. But actually there's a an interesting But actually there's a an interesting But actually there's a an interesting issue in the US compared to other issue in the US compared to other issue in the US compared to other countries in the world is how few beans countries in the world is how few beans countries in the world is how few beans we eat. And beans are super versatile. we eat. And beans are super versatile. we eat. And beans are super versatile. So you've got red in Ghana and So you've got red in Ghana and So you've got red in Ghana and you've got um hummus in the you've got um hummus in the you've got um hummus in the Mediterranean and you've got tacos and Mediterranean and you've got tacos and Mediterranean and you've got tacos and burritos and things in Latin America. burritos and things in Latin America. burritos and things in Latin America. Well, Indian, you've got dolls and Well, Indian, you've got dolls and Well, Indian, you've got dolls and lentils and things like that. That whole lentils and things like that. That whole lentils and things like that. That whole legume family is the best source of legume family is the best source of legume family is the best source of quality protein for the plant eaters. quality protein for the plant eaters. quality protein for the plant eaters. And so it's really a shame that the sort And so it's really a shame that the sort And so it's really a shame that the sort of the quality thing is like, oh, plant of the quality thing is like, oh, plant of the quality thing is like, oh, plant foods don't have quality protein. foods don't have quality protein. foods don't have quality protein. They're missing amino acids. So if I can They're missing amino acids. So if I can They're missing amino acids. So if I can add that to the pool, so the two add that to the pool, so the two add that to the pool, so the two standard deviations, no place to store standard deviations, no place to store standard deviations, no place to store it, and plants are better sources of it, and plants are better sources of it, and plants are better sources of protein than most people think. And so protein than most people think. And so protein than most people think. And so that's why there are vegan bodybuilders. that's why there are vegan bodybuilders. that's why there are vegan bodybuilders. You can win a gold medal in a You can win a gold medal in a You can win a gold medal in a bodybuilding competition strictly on bodybuilding competition strictly on bodybuilding competition strictly on plant proteins because they're not plant proteins because they're not plant proteins because they're not missing. So I if I could just help missing. So I if I could just help missing. So I if I could just help dispel that myth, they're not missing. dispel that myth, they're not missing. dispel that myth, they're not missing. They're not absent. They're not absent. They're not absent. There is something to the proportions of There is something to the proportions of There is something to the proportions of proteins. So if you were to see the grid proteins. So if you were to see the grid proteins. So if you were to see the grid of the heat map of amino acids that of the heat map of amino acids that of the heat map of amino acids that I'll share with you later. I looked at I'll share with you later. I looked at I'll share with you later. I looked at this prior to this and I will say that this prior to this and I will say that this prior to this and I will say that the proportions of let's just the proportions of let's just the proportions of let's just concentrate on leucine perhaps since concentrate on leucine perhaps since concentrate on leucine perhaps since most listeners will be familiar with most listeners will be familiar with most listeners will be familiar with leucine as kind of the critical one for leucine as kind of the critical one for leucine as kind of the critical one for muscle building. I've got that in air muscle building. I've got that in air muscle building. I've got that in air quotes for those just listening. What um quotes for those just listening. What um quotes for those just listening. What um how does how do the different sources how does how do the different sources how does how do the different sources for protein play out in that case? for protein play out in that case? for protein play out in that case? Almost identical all the way down the Almost identical all the way down the Almost identical all the way down the list of foods that I have. Leucine is list of foods that I have. Leucine is list of foods that I have. Leucine is not a problem in plant food. The problem not a problem in plant food. The problem not a problem in plant food. The problem in plant food is it's low in lysine for in plant food is it's low in lysine for in plant food is it's low in lysine for grains and it's low in methionine for grains and it's low in methionine for grains and it's low in methionine for beans. They're actually called limiting beans. They're actually called limiting beans. They're actually called limiting amino acids because they would run out amino acids because they would run out amino acids because they would run out for if you only ate grains or you only for if you only ate grains or you only for if you only ate grains or you only ate beans. They would run out first and ate beans. They would run out first and ate beans. They would run out first and then you'd be screwed. You can't then you'd be screwed. You can't then you'd be screwed. You can't actually substitute another amino acid actually substitute another amino acid actually substitute another amino acid for a hormone or an enzyme. You have to for a hormone or an enzyme. You have to for a hormone or an enzyme. You have to have all the amino acids in the have all the amino acids in the have all the amino acids in the proportions you want. And that's where proportions you want. And that's where proportions you want. And that's where the complimentary thing came in because the complimentary thing came in because the complimentary thing came in because grains although they're low in lysine grains although they're low in lysine grains although they're low in lysine are a little high in methionine and are a little high in methionine and are a little high in methionine and beans which are low in methionine are a beans which are low in methionine are a beans which are low in methionine are a little high in lysine. If you ate them little high in lysine. If you ate them little high in lysine. If you ate them together it would be closer to their together it would be closer to their together it would be closer to their proportions in meat. It's still meat proportions in meat. It's still meat proportions in meat. It's still meat would still be better. It has like would still be better. It has like would still be better. It has like because animals are animals and were because animals are animals and were because animals are animals and were animals. The proportions are perfect animals. The proportions are perfect animals. The proportions are perfect in animals. But what most people in this in animals. But what most people in this in animals. But what most people in this conference where I presented to the conference where I presented to the conference where I presented to the chefs, they're like jaws were on the chefs, they're like jaws were on the chefs, they're like jaws were on the floor. Like seriously, the proportions floor. Like seriously, the proportions floor. Like seriously, the proportions are that similar. God, that is are that similar. God, that is are that similar. God, that is mind-boggling that they're that similar. mind-boggling that they're that similar. mind-boggling that they're that similar. I realize they're not perfect. Was this I realize they're not perfect. Was this I realize they're not perfect. Was this um made equivalent for calories or was um made equivalent for calories or was um made equivalent for calories or was it 100 calories of this? Proportion. it 100 calories of this? Proportion. it 100 calories of this? Proportion. This is proportion. Proportion. But if I This is proportion. Proportion. But if I This is proportion. Proportion. But if I took let's just say 100 calories which took let's just say 100 calories which took let's just say 100 calories which just for sake of example and we took just for sake of example and we took just for sake of example and we took your chart uh and which shows and I your chart uh and which shows and I your chart uh and which shows and I again I looked at this prior to our again I looked at this prior to our again I looked at this prior to our conversation today and it did um hit conversation today and it did um hit conversation today and it did um hit me square in the face that like all me square in the face that like all me square in the face that like all these plant sources have a lot of they these plant sources have a lot of they these plant sources have a lot of they have all the different amino acids that have all the different amino acids that have all the different amino acids that beef does in different proportions but beef does in different proportions but beef does in different proportions but they have them. But if we said okay now they have them. But if we said okay now they have them. But if we said okay now we're going to make that chart but for we're going to make that chart but for we're going to make that chart but for 100 calories of food. So, it's either 100 calories of food. So, it's either 100 calories of food. So, it's either 100 calories of ribeye or 100 calories 100 calories of ribeye or 100 calories 100 calories of ribeye or 100 calories of red beans or 100 calories of quinoa. of red beans or 100 calories of quinoa. of red beans or 100 calories of quinoa. You get the idea. Absolutely. And that's You get the idea. Absolutely. And that's You get the idea. Absolutely. And that's why for the next slide when I give these why for the next slide when I give these why for the next slide when I give these presentations, my next slide is 100 presentations, my next slide is 100 presentations, my next slide is 100 calories of 20 foods. We didn't plan calories of 20 foods. We didn't plan calories of 20 foods. We didn't plan that, folks. So, it shows like for black that, folks. So, it shows like for black that, folks. So, it shows like for black beans, uh, two and a half cups would be beans, uh, two and a half cups would be beans, uh, two and a half cups would be 40 grams of protein. Uh, for soybeans, 40 grams of protein. Uh, for soybeans, 40 grams of protein. Uh, for soybeans, two cups would be 40 grams of protein. two cups would be 40 grams of protein. two cups would be 40 grams of protein. For rice, like 20 cups of rice would be For rice, like 20 cups of rice would be For rice, like 20 cups of rice would be 40 grams of protein. But if you put 40 grams of protein. But if you put 40 grams of protein. But if you put the different plant sources together, the different plant sources together, the different plant sources together, broccoli is actually oddly a good source broccoli is actually oddly a good source broccoli is actually oddly a good source of protein. Can we use that protein or of protein. Can we use that protein or of protein. Can we use that protein or this is just what? All of it. Oh yeah. this is just what? All of it. Oh yeah. this is just what? All of it. Oh yeah. Okay. Because bioavailability gets Okay. Because bioavailability gets Okay. Because bioavailability gets lumped into quality protein like this. lumped into quality protein like this. lumped into quality protein like this. So there are these charts, right, that So there are these charts, right, that So there are these charts, right, that say that, you know, egg is the say that, you know, egg is the say that, you know, egg is the near-perfect protein or beef is the near near-perfect protein or beef is the near near-perfect protein or beef is the near perfect pro protein because of the perfect pro protein because of the perfect pro protein because of the bioavailability, our ability to use the bioavailability, our ability to use the bioavailability, our ability to use the amino acids as opposed to the amino acids as opposed to the amino acids as opposed to the amino acids being bound up by fiber or um acids being bound up by fiber or um acids being bound up by fiber or um somehow not accessible. Yeah. So that somehow not accessible. Yeah. So that somehow not accessible. Yeah. So that for in my field that term would really for in my field that term would really for in my field that term would really mean digestibility and absorbability. mean digestibility and absorbability. mean digestibility and absorbability. And so at the level of protein and carbs And so at the level of protein and carbs And so at the level of protein and carbs and fats, humans eat get like 80 to 85 and fats, humans eat get like 80 to 85 and fats, humans eat get like 80 to 85 to 90% of everything. It's not like 20% to 90% of everything. It's not like 20% to 90% of everything. It's not like 20% and 80%. If even if it's plants bound in and 80%. If even if it's plants bound in and 80%. If even if it's plants bound in fiber, you're getting 80% of the protein fiber, you're getting 80% of the protein fiber, you're getting 80% of the protein absorbed. And then it's a question if absorbed. And then it's a question if absorbed. And then it's a question if the proportions are correct. So if the proportions are correct. So if the proportions are correct. So if you're losing a little bit from not you're losing a little bit from not you're losing a little bit from not absorbing at all and if the proportions absorbing at all and if the proportions absorbing at all and if the proportions aren't perfect, that's where meat comes aren't perfect, that's where meat comes aren't perfect, that's where meat comes out on top. Absolutely. So some out on top. Absolutely. So some out on top. Absolutely. So some colleagues and I wrote um a paper called colleagues and I wrote um a paper called colleagues and I wrote um a paper called modernizing the definition of protein modernizing the definition of protein modernizing the definition of protein quality, which is technically always quality, which is technically always quality, which is technically always been on amino acid proportions and been on amino acid proportions and been on amino acid proportions and availability of digestion and availability of digestion and availability of digestion and absorption. And meat always wins. And we absorption. And meat always wins. And we absorption. And meat always wins. And we said, "That's fine, but nobody in the US said, "That's fine, but nobody in the US said, "That's fine, but nobody in the US is deficient in protein." I go and talk is deficient in protein." I go and talk is deficient in protein." I go and talk at conferences all the time, and I say, at conferences all the time, and I say, at conferences all the time, and I say, "Oh, you're all physicians. How many of "Oh, you're all physicians. How many of "Oh, you're all physicians. How many of you have a vegan or vegetarian in your you have a vegan or vegetarian in your you have a vegan or vegetarian in your practice?" All their hands go up. They practice?" All their hands go up. They practice?" All their hands go up. They have some. I say, "How many of you ever have some. I say, "How many of you ever have some. I say, "How many of you ever in your entire career treated anyone for in your entire career treated anyone for in your entire career treated anyone for protein deficiency?" And no one's hand protein deficiency?" And no one's hand protein deficiency?" And no one's hand has been up to this day. No one has been up to this day. No one has been up to this day. No one has treated them for protein deficiency treated them for protein deficiency treated them for protein deficiency short of caloric deficiency or other short of caloric deficiency or other short of caloric deficiency or other things that are going on in there. It's things that are going on in there. It's things that are going on in there. It's not a an isolated protein deficiency not a an isolated protein deficiency not a an isolated protein deficiency because they're vegetarians or vegans. because they're vegetarians or vegans. because they're vegetarians or vegans. And so our definition included And so our definition included And so our definition included environmental impact and the other environmental impact and the other environmental impact and the other nutrients that come with meat that don't nutrients that come with meat that don't nutrients that come with meat that don't come with plants. And so when we created come with plants. And so when we created come with plants. And so when we created a scale that said chemical acid amino a scale that said chemical acid amino a scale that said chemical acid amino acid composition and bioavailability and acid composition and bioavailability and acid composition and bioavailability and impact on the planet and the other impact on the planet and the other impact on the planet and the other nutrients that come with it are absent. nutrients that come with it are absent. nutrients that come with it are absent. Plants and animals are the same. We sort Plants and animals are the same. We sort Plants and animals are the same. We sort of neutralized it. of neutralized it. of neutralized it. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Levels. acknowledge one of our sponsors, Levels. acknowledge one of our sponsors, Levels. Levels is a program that lets you see Levels is a program that lets you see Levels is a program that lets you see how different foods affect your health how different foods affect your health how different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your by giving you real-time feedback on your by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor. diet using a continuous glucose monitor. diet using a continuous glucose monitor. One of the most important factors in One of the most important factors in One of the most important factors in both short and long-term health is your both short and long-term health is your both short and long-term health is your body's ability to manage glucose. This body's ability to manage glucose. This body's ability to manage glucose. This is something I've discussed in depth on is something I've discussed in depth on is something I've discussed in depth on this podcast with experts such as Dr. this podcast with experts such as Dr. this podcast with experts such as Dr. Chris Palmer, Dr. Robert Lustig, and Dr. Chris Palmer, Dr. Robert Lustig, and Dr. Chris Palmer, Dr. Robert Lustig, and Dr. Casey Means. One thing that's abundantly Casey Means. One thing that's abundantly Casey Means. One thing that's abundantly clear is that to maintain energy and clear is that to maintain energy and clear is that to maintain energy and focus throughout the day, you want to focus throughout the day, you want to focus throughout the day, you want to keep your blood glucose relatively keep your blood glucose relatively keep your blood glucose relatively steady without any big spikes or steady without any big spikes or steady without any big spikes or crashes. I first started using Levels crashes. I first started using Levels crashes. I first started using Levels about 3 years ago as a way to try and about 3 years ago as a way to try and about 3 years ago as a way to try and understand how different foods impact my understand how different foods impact my understand how different foods impact my blood glucose levels. Levels has proven blood glucose levels. Levels has proven blood glucose levels. Levels has proven to be incredibly informative for helping to be incredibly informative for helping to be incredibly informative for helping me determine what food choices I should me determine what food choices I should me determine what food choices I should make and when best to eat relative to make and when best to eat relative to make and when best to eat relative to things like exercise, sleep, and work. things like exercise, sleep, and work. things like exercise, sleep, and work. Indeed, using Levels has helped me shape Indeed, using Levels has helped me shape Indeed, using Levels has helped me shape my entire schedule. I now have more my entire schedule. I now have more my entire schedule. I now have more energy than ever and I sleep better than energy than ever and I sleep better than energy than ever and I sleep better than ever. And I attribute that largely to ever. And I attribute that largely to ever. And I attribute that largely to understanding how different foods and understanding how different foods and understanding how different foods and behaviors impact my blood glucose. So, behaviors impact my blood glucose. So, behaviors impact my blood glucose. So, if you're interested in learning more if you're interested in learning more if you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, go to go to go to levels.link/huberman. Right now, Levels levels.link/huberman. Right now, Levels levels.link/huberman. Right now, Levels is offering an additional two free is offering an additional two free is offering an additional two free months of membership when signing up. months of membership when signing up. months of membership when signing up. Again, that's levels.link, spelled, of Again, that's levels.link, spelled, of Again, that's levels.link, spelled, of course, LK/huberman, to get the additional two LK/huberman, to get the additional two LK/huberman, to get the additional two free months of membership. I really free months of membership. I really free months of membership. I really appreciate all that information. very appreciate all that information. very appreciate all that information. very illuminating. Um, and I'll just remind illuminating. Um, and I'll just remind illuminating. Um, and I'll just remind myself and everyone that um, I love myself and everyone that um, I love myself and everyone that um, I love vegetables. In fact, these days, ah, vegetables. In fact, these days, ah, vegetables. In fact, these days, ah, I'll say this for anyone listening. One I'll say this for anyone listening. One I'll say this for anyone listening. One of the great things about getting older of the great things about getting older of the great things about getting older is I actually eat less, but I just try is I actually eat less, but I just try is I actually eat less, but I just try and focus on eating quality food. And I and focus on eating quality food. And I and focus on eating quality food. And I just find that I don't need to eat as just find that I don't need to eat as just find that I don't need to eat as much food to maintain my body weight and much food to maintain my body weight and much food to maintain my body weight and feel good and have energy. In fact, I'm feel good and have energy. In fact, I'm feel good and have energy. In fact, I'm eating less and less each year. eating less and less each year. eating less and less each year. Once I start eating, I like to eat. But Once I start eating, I like to eat. But Once I start eating, I like to eat. But I think one of the markers of health in I think one of the markers of health in I think one of the markers of health in my opinion is the ability to wait to eat my opinion is the ability to wait to eat my opinion is the ability to wait to eat or to um you know to eat a slightly or to um you know to eat a slightly or to um you know to eat a slightly larger meal and not have it you know larger meal and not have it you know larger meal and not have it you know crater your sleep or something like that crater your sleep or something like that crater your sleep or something like that or to have some you know eat less one or to have some you know eat less one or to have some you know eat less one day and more the next day. And maybe we day and more the next day. And maybe we day and more the next day. And maybe we don't need as much uh protein every day. don't need as much uh protein every day. don't need as much uh protein every day. I've played with this idea before I've played with this idea before I've played with this idea before of, you know, limiting the amount of of, you know, limiting the amount of of, you know, limiting the amount of protein I eat for a few days and then protein I eat for a few days and then protein I eat for a few days and then eating, you know, going to a barbecue eating, you know, going to a barbecue eating, you know, going to a barbecue and eating like two ribe eyes, you know, and eating like two ribe eyes, you know, and eating like two ribe eyes, you know, and enjoying that more. I think we and enjoying that more. I think we and enjoying that more. I think we think of things in this very static think of things in this very static think of things in this very static way, like best thing to eat each day. way, like best thing to eat each day. way, like best thing to eat each day. And you also illuminate for us that um And you also illuminate for us that um And you also illuminate for us that um you know that there's a lot of nutrition you know that there's a lot of nutrition you know that there's a lot of nutrition in beans and legumes and other plants. in beans and legumes and other plants. in beans and legumes and other plants. And I again I I'm starting to explore And I again I I'm starting to explore And I again I I'm starting to explore this more and more because I'm not a this more and more because I'm not a this more and more because I'm not a great cook, but I love to eat when I do great cook, but I love to eat when I do great cook, but I love to eat when I do eat. And I do think there's a real der eat. And I do think there's a real der eat. And I do think there's a real der of variety in the American diet that's of variety in the American diet that's of variety in the American diet that's uh that we can all work on. As long uh that we can all work on. As long uh that we can all work on. As long as we're talking about meat, I'm going as we're talking about meat, I'm going as we're talking about meat, I'm going to pick on Beyond Meat a little bit. to pick on Beyond Meat a little bit. to pick on Beyond Meat a little bit. Sure. Um I think it's the child of a Sure. Um I think it's the child of a Sure. Um I think it's the child of a Stanford professor that started this Stanford professor that started this Stanford professor that started this company, right? No, that's impossible. company, right? No, that's impossible. company, right? No, that's impossible. Impossible. Then I'm going to pick on Impossible. Then I'm going to pick on Impossible. Then I'm going to pick on them both. I'm going to pick on them both. I'm going to pick on them both. I'm going to pick on them both. I don't know these people. Um, I both. I don't know these people. Um, I both. I don't know these people. Um, I have nothing against them, but I will have nothing against them, but I will have nothing against them, but I will say that I saw some pretty convincing say that I saw some pretty convincing say that I saw some pretty convincing arguments against these um, for lack of arguments against these um, for lack of arguments against these um, for lack of a better word, artificial meats, fake a better word, artificial meats, fake a better word, artificial meats, fake meats. Yeah. Um, you put up the list of meats. Yeah. Um, you put up the list of meats. Yeah. Um, you put up the list of ingredients for Beyond Meat or ingredients for Beyond Meat or ingredients for Beyond Meat or Impossible Meat and then you compare it Impossible Meat and then you compare it Impossible Meat and then you compare it to the ingredients in beef to the ingredients in beef to the ingredients in beef and you don't have to be a nutrition and you don't have to be a nutrition and you don't have to be a nutrition expert to say there's a lot of expert to say there's a lot of expert to say there's a lot of ingredients. I mean, it reads like an ingredients. I mean, it reads like an ingredients. I mean, it reads like an encyclopedia of ingredients in the fake encyclopedia of ingredients in the fake encyclopedia of ingredients in the fake meat. um which aligns with processed meat. um which aligns with processed meat. um which aligns with processed which aligns with people's notions of which aligns with people's notions of which aligns with people's notions of fake and bad for us. So that kind of fake and bad for us. So that kind of fake and bad for us. So that kind of hits any potential consumer square in hits any potential consumer square in hits any potential consumer square in the face. So just because there are a the face. So just because there are a the face. So just because there are a lot of ingredients doesn't mean they're lot of ingredients doesn't mean they're lot of ingredients doesn't mean they're all bad for you. But you mentioned all bad for you. But you mentioned all bad for you. But you mentioned earlier in the context of dyes and earlier in the context of dyes and earlier in the context of dyes and cosmetic additives, you know, a lot of cosmetic additives, you know, a lot of cosmetic additives, you know, a lot of things that can't be pronounced that things that can't be pronounced that things that can't be pronounced that we've never heard of. I mean I have a we've never heard of. I mean I have a we've never heard of. I mean I have a formal training in science and half of formal training in science and half of formal training in science and half of the ingredients in that in Beyond the ingredients in that in Beyond the ingredients in that in Beyond Impossible Meat are completely foreign Impossible Meat are completely foreign Impossible Meat are completely foreign to me. No, not today. go to the website to me. No, not today. go to the website to me. No, not today. go to the website right now and look at the ingredient right now and look at the ingredient right now and look at the ingredient list. Okay. Well, initially it was it list. Okay. Well, initially it was it list. Okay. Well, initially it was it was overwhelming. It was overwhelming was overwhelming. It was overwhelming was overwhelming. It was overwhelming responded to that. Great. And they've responded to that. Great. And they've responded to that. Great. And they've reformulated because of that. It's quite reformulated because of that. It's quite reformulated because of that. It's quite clean. And let me go back to your meat. clean. And let me go back to your meat. clean. And let me go back to your meat. So in the ingredients in the meat, is So in the ingredients in the meat, is So in the ingredients in the meat, is there antibiotics? Is there hormones? Is there antibiotics? Is there hormones? Is there antibiotics? Is there hormones? Is there corn? Is there soy? So it's a there corn? Is there soy? So it's a there corn? Is there soy? So it's a really easy argument to make when you really easy argument to make when you really easy argument to make when you slaughtered the beef and you took a kite slaughtered the beef and you took a kite slaughtered the beef and you took a kite and here it is. It is only beef. That is and here it is. It is only beef. That is and here it is. It is only beef. That is not everything that went into it. So I not everything that went into it. So I not everything that went into it. So I actually am writing a book and I have a actually am writing a book and I have a actually am writing a book and I have a chapter where I got some guy who had chapter where I got some guy who had chapter where I got some guy who had done this whole assessment of meat and done this whole assessment of meat and done this whole assessment of meat and the list is longer than beyond meats of the list is longer than beyond meats of the list is longer than beyond meats of all the things that went into the beef all the things that went into the beef all the things that went into the beef that you would find at the store to get that you would find at the store to get that you would find at the store to get that thing to market. So it's an that thing to market. So it's an that thing to market. So it's an artificial argument. But just because artificial argument. But just because artificial argument. But just because the cow um was fed something, how the cow um was fed something, how the cow um was fed something, how much of that is making it into the meat? much of that is making it into the meat? much of that is making it into the meat? Because that's the issue is how much am Because that's the issue is how much am Because that's the issue is how much am I consuming? Right? But you would be I consuming? Right? But you would be I consuming? Right? But you would be concerned with all the things that went concerned with all the things that went concerned with all the things that went into making that meat unless it was into making that meat unless it was into making that meat unless it was sourced the way I would like, which is sourced the way I would like, which is sourced the way I would like, which is grass-fed uh pasture-raised, which is grass-fed uh pasture-raised, which is grass-fed uh pasture-raised, which is only 1% of the meat. Right. So that's only 1% of the meat. Right. So that's only 1% of the meat. Right. So that's the point where I personally make an the point where I personally make an the point where I personally make an effort to eat grass-fed meat whenever effort to eat grass-fed meat whenever effort to eat grass-fed meat whenever possible. I do, you know, but the possible. I do, you know, but the possible. I do, you know, but the average person average person average person can't. So is the argument that beyond can't. So is the argument that beyond can't. So is the argument that beyond and impossible are the better option. and impossible are the better option. and impossible are the better option. Let's set aside the cardio metabolic Let's set aside the cardio metabolic Let's set aside the cardio metabolic metrics even though that's very metrics even though that's very metrics even though that's very important. um that it's better in terms important. um that it's better in terms important. um that it's better in terms of quality of what you're consuming in of quality of what you're consuming in of quality of what you're consuming in terms of I don't know sort of health terms of I don't know sort of health terms of I don't know sort of health status of the of the animal health status of the of the animal health status of the of the animal versus um health status of what came out versus um health status of what came out versus um health status of what came out of the Beyond Impossible of the Beyond Impossible of the Beyond Impossible Factory. My contention here is so two of Factory. My contention here is so two of Factory. My contention here is so two of my favorite sayings are instead of what my favorite sayings are instead of what my favorite sayings are instead of what and with what and so the instead of what and with what and so the instead of what and with what and so the instead of what we did a study of beyond meat versus red we did a study of beyond meat versus red we did a study of beyond meat versus red meat. Bunch of people said I can't meat. Bunch of people said I can't meat. Bunch of people said I can't believe you're saying beyond meat is believe you're saying beyond meat is believe you're saying beyond meat is healthy. Don't you want them to eat the healthy. Don't you want them to eat the healthy. Don't you want them to eat the beans and the lentils and the other beans and the lentils and the other beans and the lentils and the other things? Said, I sure as hell do for 30 things? Said, I sure as hell do for 30 things? Said, I sure as hell do for 30 years I've been asking to people to eat years I've been asking to people to eat years I've been asking to people to eat more beans and lentils and they're not. more beans and lentils and they're not. more beans and lentils and they're not. They're still having fast food They're still having fast food They're still having fast food hamburgers. We didn't even use fast food hamburgers. We didn't even use fast food hamburgers. We didn't even use fast food hamburgers. We used like regenerative hamburgers. We used like regenerative hamburgers. We used like regenerative meat stuff and we got cardioabolic meat stuff and we got cardioabolic meat stuff and we got cardioabolic benefits. I'm just saying sort of for benefits. I'm just saying sort of for benefits. I'm just saying sort of for the average American who has access to the average American who has access to the average American who has access to the meat that's out there, Beyond Meat the meat that's out there, Beyond Meat the meat that's out there, Beyond Meat is healthier. If you were if you had So healthier. If you were if you had So healthier. If you were if you had So again, when I do a study, I have to have again, when I do a study, I have to have again, when I do a study, I have to have a preset number of outcomes and I have a preset number of outcomes and I have a preset number of outcomes and I have to have a defined exposure. So at the to have a defined exposure. So at the to have a defined exposure. So at the same dose, same dose, same dose, uh LDL cholesterol went down, TMAO went uh LDL cholesterol went down, TMAO went uh LDL cholesterol went down, TMAO went down, weight went down, blood pressure down, weight went down, blood pressure down, weight went down, blood pressure didn't go up. So here's sort of a funny didn't go up. So here's sort of a funny didn't go up. So here's sort of a funny little sideline. A lot of people were little sideline. A lot of people were little sideline. A lot of people were trashing them for being processed foods trashing them for being processed foods trashing them for being processed foods with high sodium. And what we found in with high sodium. And what we found in with high sodium. And what we found in the study was when we delivered raw meat the study was when we delivered raw meat the study was when we delivered raw meat and raw ground beef and patties, the and raw ground beef and patties, the and raw ground beef and patties, the participants salted them. I definitely participants salted them. I definitely participants salted them. I definitely salt my food. And so when we did it, the salt my food. And so when we did it, the salt my food. And so when we did it, the sodium was identical and the blood sodium was identical and the blood sodium was identical and the blood pressure was identical in the two groups pressure was identical in the two groups pressure was identical in the two groups in the study. So the sodium comment is in the study. So the sodium comment is in the study. So the sodium comment is fair that they have more sodium than is fair that they have more sodium than is fair that they have more sodium than red meat. But when you take this to red meat. But when you take this to red meat. But when you take this to people that are eating food, they salt people that are eating food, they salt people that are eating food, they salt it and it ended up being the same level it and it ended up being the same level it and it ended up being the same level of salt. So, it's not a fair criticism of salt. So, it's not a fair criticism of salt. So, it's not a fair criticism of the way people actually eat it. Yeah, of the way people actually eat it. Yeah, of the way people actually eat it. Yeah, I would agree. You swept their knees on I would agree. You swept their knees on I would agree. You swept their knees on that one. Um, I'd like to talk about that one. Um, I'd like to talk about that one. Um, I'd like to talk about this study that you did. I think it's this study that you did. I think it's this study that you did. I think it's called the twin study. Um, yes. Where, called the twin study. Um, yes. Where, called the twin study. Um, yes. Where, correct me, um, for any errors here. Um, correct me, um, for any errors here. Um, correct me, um, for any errors here. Um, but you basically gave twins, identical but you basically gave twins, identical but you basically gave twins, identical twins, the opportunity to follow one twins, the opportunity to follow one twins, the opportunity to follow one diet or was it a pure vegan diet? Vegan. diet or was it a pure vegan diet? Vegan. diet or was it a pure vegan diet? Vegan. Totally vegan. Totally vegan diet. I'm Totally vegan. Totally vegan diet. I'm Totally vegan. Totally vegan diet. I'm going to tell you at the outset um, uh, going to tell you at the outset um, uh, going to tell you at the outset um, uh, what my takeaway from that study was and what my takeaway from that study was and what my takeaway from that study was and then I'm going to let you tell us what then I'm going to let you tell us what then I'm going to let you tell us what actually happened. I'm doing it in this actually happened. I'm doing it in this actually happened. I'm doing it in this order on order on order on purpose. My takeaway was, wow, um, what purpose. My takeaway was, wow, um, what purpose. My takeaway was, wow, um, what a cool study. you know, having studied a cool study. you know, having studied a cool study. you know, having studied uh rodents for years that are on the uh rodents for years that are on the uh rodents for years that are on the same genetic background, you'd love to same genetic background, you'd love to same genetic background, you'd love to be able to do this in humans. You be able to do this in humans. You be able to do this in humans. You studied humans with the same genetic uh studied humans with the same genetic uh studied humans with the same genetic uh essentially the same genes as close to essentially the same genes as close to essentially the same genes as close to it as possible. Um identical twins, it as possible. Um identical twins, it as possible. Um identical twins, awesome study. And the takeaway, and forgive me, study. And the takeaway, and forgive me, study. And the takeaway, and forgive me, I'm not trying to pick on you or I'm not trying to pick on you or I'm not trying to pick on you or this study. What I grabbed from the news this study. What I grabbed from the news this study. What I grabbed from the news articles about this was at the end of articles about this was at the end of articles about this was at the end of the study, the group that followed the study, the group that followed the study, the group that followed the vegan diet said,"Great, a bunch of vegan diet said,"Great, a bunch of vegan diet said,"Great, a bunch of things improved and you know, but I things improved and you know, but I things improved and you know, but I don't think I can stick to this. I'm not don't think I can stick to this. I'm not don't think I can stick to this. I'm not going to stick to it going forward." It going to stick to it going forward." It going to stick to it going forward." It was, this was reported by Stanford media was, this was reported by Stanford media was, this was reported by Stanford media that the takeaway was that they thought that the takeaway was that they thought that the takeaway was that they thought it was great, but that they didn't see it was great, but that they didn't see it was great, but that they didn't see themselves sticking with it, that it's themselves sticking with it, that it's themselves sticking with it, that it's too hard to stay with. Okay, so that was too hard to stay with. Okay, so that was too hard to stay with. Okay, so that was my takeaway. It's this adherence issue. my takeaway. It's this adherence issue. my takeaway. It's this adherence issue. like you know if people you can give like you know if people you can give like you know if people you can give people the ideal circumstance but the people the ideal circumstance but the people the ideal circumstance but the question is will they follow it in the question is will they follow it in the question is will they follow it in the real world um and that's a tough one real world um and that's a tough one real world um and that's a tough one because we're but a critical question because we're but a critical question because we're but a critical question because what we're talking about here is because what we're talking about here is because what we're talking about here is how to scale health right I mean that's how to scale health right I mean that's how to scale health right I mean that's why we're here right we're not here to why we're here right we're not here to why we're here right we're not here to argue beef versus vegetables frankly I argue beef versus vegetables frankly I argue beef versus vegetables frankly I don't care what you eat as long as it don't care what you eat as long as it don't care what you eat as long as it works for you I know what works for me works for you I know what works for me works for you I know what works for me but I'm willing to modify it based on but I'm willing to modify it based on but I'm willing to modify it based on the evidence so the reason we sit down the evidence so the reason we sit down the evidence so the reason we sit down is to try and help people make better is to try and help people make better is to try and help people make better decisions on their health and that was decisions on their health and that was decisions on their health and that was my takeaway. Now tell me what the study my takeaway. Now tell me what the study my takeaway. Now tell me what the study was with a bit more detail and if I'm was with a bit more detail and if I'm was with a bit more detail and if I'm completely wrong about this like I like completely wrong about this like I like completely wrong about this like I like to think like any good scientist I'm to think like any good scientist I'm to think like any good scientist I'm happy to be completely wrong. So let's happy to be completely wrong. So let's happy to be completely wrong. So let's talk about the study but let me address talk about the study but let me address talk about the study but let me address that upfront. So none of those metrics that upfront. So none of those metrics that upfront. So none of those metrics were part of the study. There's no were part of the study. There's no were part of the study. There's no followup in the study. No, this was followup in the study. No, this was followup in the study. No, this was interviews this was interviews with the interviews this was interviews with the interviews this was interviews with the with the participants. So that's not with the participants. So that's not with the participants. So that's not scientific. No, but that's anecdotal. So scientific. No, but that's anecdotal. So scientific. No, but that's anecdotal. So I'll tell you anecdotal. It was eight I'll tell you anecdotal. It was eight I'll tell you anecdotal. It was eight twins. How many twins were in this? 22 twins. How many twins were in this? 22 twins. How many twins were in this? 22 pairs of twins. 22 pairs of twins. And pairs of twins. 22 pairs of twins. And pairs of twins. 22 pairs of twins. And so each one was assigned to either so each one was assigned to either so each one was assigned to either omnivorous versus vegan. They get omnivorous versus vegan. They get omnivorous versus vegan. They get randomized. Okay. So I will tell you randomized. Okay. So I will tell you randomized. Okay. So I will tell you that there was a Stanford media that there was a Stanford media that there was a Stanford media report on three pairs of twins. Uh and report on three pairs of twins. Uh and report on three pairs of twins. Uh and one pair said, "No, we back went back to one pair said, "No, we back went back to one pair said, "No, we back went back to our other diet." One pair said, "Yeah, our other diet." One pair said, "Yeah, our other diet." One pair said, "Yeah, we're both vegetarian now." And one pair we're both vegetarian now." And one pair we're both vegetarian now." And one pair was sort of in the middle of that. was sort of in the middle of that. was sort of in the middle of that. There's another two of the featured There's another two of the featured There's another two of the featured twins in the movie uh Michael and twins in the movie uh Michael and twins in the movie uh Michael and Charlie contacted us afterward and the Charlie contacted us afterward and the Charlie contacted us afterward and the one who was omnivore said, "We're both one who was omnivore said, "We're both one who was omnivore said, "We're both trying to be more vegetarian. Can you trying to be more vegetarian. Can you trying to be more vegetarian. Can you give us more resources?" So they give us more resources?" So they give us more resources?" So they shifted. Yeah. Okay. So I had So two of shifted. Yeah. Okay. So I had So two of shifted. Yeah. Okay. So I had So two of the pairs that I know of that we had the pairs that I know of that we had the pairs that I know of that we had anecdotal followup with shifted more anecdotal followup with shifted more anecdotal followup with shifted more toward it and one was intermediate and toward it and one was intermediate and toward it and one was intermediate and one just completely blew it off. That's one just completely blew it off. That's one just completely blew it off. That's an N of four pairs out of 22. Not an N of four pairs out of 22. Not an N of four pairs out of 22. Not science. I'm only going to answer it that way. My I'm only going to answer it that way. My I'm only going to answer it that way. My anecdotal evidence said some yes, some anecdotal evidence said some yes, some anecdotal evidence said some yes, some no. Great. No, and you would know you no. Great. No, and you would know you no. Great. No, and you would know you ran the study. Yeah. And not part of the ran the study. Yeah. And not part of the ran the study. Yeah. And not part of the study. So, let's go back to the design study. So, let's go back to the design study. So, let's go back to the design because we can have some fun with this. because we can have some fun with this. because we can have some fun with this. Um, and there's a really fun part. Uh, I Um, and there's a really fun part. Uh, I Um, and there's a really fun part. Uh, I would love to have the chance to address would love to have the chance to address would love to have the chance to address a critique that we we've received that's a critique that we we've received that's a critique that we we've received that's part of uh the challenge of that's part of uh the challenge of that's part of uh the challenge of communicating this to the public and it communicating this to the public and it communicating this to the public and it has to do with lean mass uh and dexes, has to do with lean mass uh and dexes, has to do with lean mass uh and dexes, dual energy x-ray absorb geometry. So um dual energy x-ray absorb geometry. So um dual energy x-ray absorb geometry. So um the story starts with this is all funded the story starts with this is all funded the story starts with this is all funded by a producer who comes to see us in by a producer who comes to see us in by a producer who comes to see us in 2021 and ask Justin Sonnenberg the 2021 and ask Justin Sonnenberg the 2021 and ask Justin Sonnenberg the microbiome expert that you've had on microbiome expert that you've had on microbiome expert that you've had on your show and I if we would consider your show and I if we would consider your show and I if we would consider doing a study uh the parameters being it doing a study uh the parameters being it doing a study uh the parameters being it had to be identical twins and one arm of had to be identical twins and one arm of had to be identical twins and one arm of the study has to be vegan. His name is the study has to be vegan. His name is the study has to be vegan. His name is Luis Sei Hoyos. He got an Academy Award Luis Sei Hoyos. He got an Academy Award Luis Sei Hoyos. He got an Academy Award a decade ago for The Cove, which was a decade ago for The Cove, which was a decade ago for The Cove, which was a documentary about dolphin slaughter in documentary about dolphin slaughter in documentary about dolphin slaughter in Japan, mercuryladen dolphins who were Japan, mercuryladen dolphins who were Japan, mercuryladen dolphins who were being fed to school children. He also being fed to school children. He also being fed to school children. He also did Game Changers, which was elite did Game Changers, which was elite did Game Changers, which was elite athletes on plant-based athletes on plant-based athletes on plant-based diets. And he wanted to do another one diets. And he wanted to do another one diets. And he wanted to do another one test out like the health of the diet, test out like the health of the diet, test out like the health of the diet, not in elite athletes, but in the not in elite athletes, but in the not in elite athletes, but in the general population. And he said, "I have general population. And he said, "I have general population. And he said, "I have a donor who has the money and I have a donor who has the money and I have a donor who has the money and I have a contract with Netflix. uh they like my contract with Netflix. uh they like my contract with Netflix. uh they like my idea. Um and it would have to be idea. Um and it would have to be idea. Um and it would have to be identical twins for the science of it. identical twins for the science of it. identical twins for the science of it. And it would and one diet has to be And it would and one diet has to be And it would and one diet has to be vegan. Can you design a study? What vegan. Can you design a study? What vegan. Can you design a study? What would it cost? How long would it take? would it cost? How long would it take? would it cost? How long would it take? etc., etc. And we said, "Wow, that etc., etc. And we said, "Wow, that etc., etc. And we said, "Wow, that is fascinating. Um identical twins is fascinating. Um identical twins is fascinating. Um identical twins is going to be a bitch." And he said, "Oh, going to be a bitch." And he said, "Oh, going to be a bitch." And he said, "Oh, no, no. I'm really gonna I'm totally no, no. I'm really gonna I'm totally no, no. I'm really gonna I'm totally going to help you. So, I'm not going to going to help you. So, I'm not going to going to help you. So, I'm not going to hold you to the recruitment. We've hold you to the recruitment. We've hold you to the recruitment. We've already found a whole bunch of identical already found a whole bunch of identical already found a whole bunch of identical twins for you." I said, "Well, wow. twins for you." I said, "Well, wow. twins for you." I said, "Well, wow. Recruiting is the hardest thing." Okay. Recruiting is the hardest thing." Okay. Recruiting is the hardest thing." Okay. So, we're going to make a good vegan So, we're going to make a good vegan So, we're going to make a good vegan diet and we're making going to make a diet and we're making going to make a diet and we're making going to make a good omnivorous diet and we're going to good omnivorous diet and we're going to good omnivorous diet and we're going to randomize each pair of twins one at a randomize each pair of twins one at a randomize each pair of twins one at a time to one versus the time to one versus the time to one versus the other. And we don't have enough money to other. And we don't have enough money to other. And we don't have enough money to do this for a long time. We budget it do this for a long time. We budget it do this for a long time. We budget it out and you have enough for like eight out and you have enough for like eight out and you have enough for like eight weeks of doing the study. And it would weeks of doing the study. And it would weeks of doing the study. And it would be important that people catch on to the be important that people catch on to the be important that people catch on to the vegan part quickly, the omnivorous thing vegan part quickly, the omnivorous thing vegan part quickly, the omnivorous thing they already do. So, what about the they already do. So, what about the they already do. So, what about the other group? Ah, we'll deliver food for other group? Ah, we'll deliver food for other group? Ah, we'll deliver food for the first four weeks and then for the first four weeks and then for the first four weeks and then for the last four weeks we'll have them cook on last four weeks we'll have them cook on last four weeks we'll have them cook on their own now that they have enough their own now that they have enough their own now that they have enough ideas from having been fed for four ideas from having been fed for four ideas from having been fed for four weeks. And so that's how it started to weeks. And so that's how it started to weeks. And so that's how it started to be designed. And we got blood and poop be designed. And we got blood and poop be designed. And we got blood and poop in the microbiome and we got epigenetic in the microbiome and we got epigenetic in the microbiome and we got epigenetic data and tie length and things like this data and tie length and things like this data and tie length and things like this and adherence. And we have a whole new and adherence. And we have a whole new and adherence. And we have a whole new paper on adherence coming out. And so we paper on adherence coming out. And so we paper on adherence coming out. And so we randomize them. And as part of this, the randomize them. And as part of this, the randomize them. And as part of this, the producer kept asking for more and more producer kept asking for more and more producer kept asking for more and more things. And eventually we said, "Okay, things. And eventually we said, "Okay, things. And eventually we said, "Okay, we're measuring a lot of stuff. We have we're measuring a lot of stuff. We have we're measuring a lot of stuff. We have blood and poop and genes and but we blood and poop and genes and but we blood and poop and genes and but we can't measure anything else." He says, can't measure anything else." He says, can't measure anything else." He says, "I want DEXA. I want body composition." "I want DEXA. I want body composition." "I want DEXA. I want body composition." I said, "I don't have enough money." And I said, "I don't have enough money." And I said, "I don't have enough money." And he said, "Well, we're going to go ahead. he said, "Well, we're going to go ahead. he said, "Well, we're going to go ahead. There's four featured pairs that are There's four featured pairs that are There's four featured pairs that are going to be in the documentary that we going to be in the documentary that we going to be in the documentary that we selected ahead of time, and that means selected ahead of time, and that means selected ahead of time, and that means there's 18 pairs that aren't involved in there's 18 pairs that aren't involved in there's 18 pairs that aren't involved in the documentary. and we have this super the documentary. and we have this super the documentary. and we have this super studly Nei Delgado who is a medalinning studly Nei Delgado who is a medalinning studly Nei Delgado who is a medalinning vegan bodybuilder and he will train vegan bodybuilder and he will train vegan bodybuilder and he will train them. And so Neimi had access to the them. And so Neimi had access to the them. And so Neimi had access to the four pairs, the eight twins and nobody four pairs, the eight twins and nobody four pairs, the eight twins and nobody else did it. And I actually never got else did it. And I actually never got else did it. And I actually never got those decks of data. It's not even part those decks of data. It's not even part those decks of data. It's not even part of the study. Uh jumping to the end when of the study. Uh jumping to the end when of the study. Uh jumping to the end when we finished this study, the vegans lost we finished this study, the vegans lost we finished this study, the vegans lost a little weight more than the other a little weight more than the other a little weight more than the other group and they lowered their LDL group and they lowered their LDL group and they lowered their LDL cholesterol and they lowered their cholesterol and they lowered their cholesterol and they lowered their fasting insulin. In the main paper that got insulin. In the main paper that got insulin. In the main paper that got published in JAMA network open on the published in JAMA network open on the published in JAMA network open on the side because we measured a ton of crap side because we measured a ton of crap side because we measured a ton of crap and now this has to be anecdotal or an and now this has to be anecdotal or an and now this has to be anecdotal or an exploratory because it wasn't the main exploratory because it wasn't the main exploratory because it wasn't the main outcome. LDL was the main outcome on outcome. LDL was the main outcome on outcome. LDL was the main outcome on clinical trials.gov. A group that does clinical trials.gov. A group that does clinical trials.gov. A group that does telmir length and epigenetic clocks telmir length and epigenetic clocks telmir length and epigenetic clocks published a whole separate paper and the published a whole separate paper and the published a whole separate paper and the vegans according to biological clocks vegans according to biological clocks vegans according to biological clocks were younger than their omnivorous twins were younger than their omnivorous twins were younger than their omnivorous twins just eight weeks later by epigenetic just eight weeks later by epigenetic just eight weeks later by epigenetic clocks not my specialty how much younger clocks not my specialty how much younger clocks not my specialty how much younger it wasn't even so you can't even it wasn't even so you can't even it wasn't even so you can't even statistically significant so it's not statistically significant so it's not statistically significant so it's not like in eight weeks you got four years like in eight weeks you got four years like in eight weeks you got four years younger it's more like statistically younger it's more like statistically younger it's more like statistically significant and their telomeir caps were significant and their telomeir caps were significant and their telomeir caps were longer in just eight weeks which I just longer in just eight weeks which I just longer in just eight weeks which I just remind people what that means. I remind people what that means. I remind people what that means. I just we can Sure. So on all just we can Sure. So on all just we can Sure. So on all our chromosomes there there's sort of a our chromosomes there there's sort of a our chromosomes there there's sort of a hot new topic which is there's these hot new topic which is there's these hot new topic which is there's these protective caps on the ends of our protective caps on the ends of our protective caps on the ends of our chromosomes and as we age they shorten. chromosomes and as we age they shorten. chromosomes and as we age they shorten. And some people are sort of looking at And some people are sort of looking at And some people are sort of looking at biological age versus chronological age. biological age versus chronological age. biological age versus chronological age. It would be a good thing to have a It would be a good thing to have a It would be a good thing to have a longer tillamir cap on the ends of your longer tillamir cap on the ends of your longer tillamir cap on the ends of your chromosomes. And I said no way in eight chromosomes. And I said no way in eight chromosomes. And I said no way in eight weeks they were. So both of those were weeks they were. So both of those were weeks they were. So both of those were statistically significant. And just as a statistically significant. And just as a statistically significant. And just as a side note, that's a little bit fun. How side note, that's a little bit fun. How side note, that's a little bit fun. How familiar are you with altmetric scores? familiar are you with altmetric scores? familiar are you with altmetric scores? I mean, in terms of paper I mean, in terms of paper I mean, in terms of paper recognition. Yes. So the altmetric score recognition. Yes. So the altmetric score recognition. Yes. So the altmetric score for the listeners is my currency and for the listeners is my currency and for the listeners is my currency and yours as an academic is like how many yours as an academic is like how many yours as an academic is like how many people site our work? If no one cited people site our work? If no one cited people site our work? If no one cited it, who cares? And it takes a while. It it, who cares? And it takes a while. It it, who cares? And it takes a while. It could take like five or 10 years for could take like five or 10 years for could take like five or 10 years for people to site your work. Yeah. Um the people to site your work. Yeah. Um the people to site your work. Yeah. Um the altmetric score is all based on social altmetric score is all based on social altmetric score is all based on social and traditional media. So it appears the and traditional media. So it appears the and traditional media. So it appears the week that your paper comes out and week that your paper comes out and week that your paper comes out and there's some correlation if it got a lot there's some correlation if it got a lot there's some correlation if it got a lot of media coverage it maybe will get of media coverage it maybe will get of media coverage it maybe will get cited later on. So the funny thing is a cited later on. So the funny thing is a cited later on. So the funny thing is a good altmetric score if you Google it is good altmetric score if you Google it is good altmetric score if you Google it is 20. The Jamba network open paper had an 20. The Jamba network open paper had an 20. The Jamba network open paper had an almetric score of 2,000. The main paper almetric score of 2,000. The main paper almetric score of 2,000. The main paper the biological clock epigenetic data and the biological clock epigenetic data and the biological clock epigenetic data and the tie length had an altmetric score of the tie length had an altmetric score of the tie length had an altmetric score of 3,000. It was more widely broadcast than 3,000. It was more widely broadcast than 3,000. It was more widely broadcast than the main paper. The Sonnenbergs have the main paper. The Sonnenbergs have the main paper. The Sonnenbergs have another paper under review right now and another paper under review right now and another paper under review right now and I can say this because it's on pre it's I can say this because it's on pre it's I can say this because it's on pre it's already been published pre-print. The already been published pre-print. The already been published pre-print. The vegans had better microbiome vegans had better microbiome vegans had better microbiome results. And so now we've got results. And so now we've got results. And so now we've got cardioabolic benefits, biological clock cardioabolic benefits, biological clock cardioabolic benefits, biological clock length, microbiome benefits on the twins length, microbiome benefits on the twins length, microbiome benefits on the twins who did this for eight weeks. So those who did this for eight weeks. So those who did this for eight weeks. So those are the scientific are the scientific are the scientific results. And that was a strict vegan results. And that was a strict vegan results. And that was a strict vegan diet. Strict vegan. Not a single not a diet. Strict vegan. Not a single not a diet. Strict vegan. Not a single not a single egg. Yeah. Versus omnivore. Okay. single egg. Yeah. Versus omnivore. Okay. single egg. Yeah. Versus omnivore. Okay. Now part of this is think is my message Now part of this is think is my message Now part of this is think is my message I want the whole world to go vegan. No. I want the whole world to go vegan. No. I want the whole world to go vegan. No. My idea is if I only have eight weeks, I My idea is if I only have eight weeks, I My idea is if I only have eight weeks, I need to make a big difference in these need to make a big difference in these need to make a big difference in these diets so that if I get a signal, I can diets so that if I get a signal, I can diets so that if I get a signal, I can see it in eight weeks. Would there be see it in eight weeks. Would there be see it in eight weeks. Would there be disadvantages or advantages to doing disadvantages or advantages to doing disadvantages or advantages to doing this? And part of the fun of this is the this? And part of the fun of this is the this? And part of the fun of this is the producer approached us in 2021. He said, producer approached us in 2021. He said, producer approached us in 2021. He said, "My contract with Netflix is I'm going "My contract with Netflix is I'm going "My contract with Netflix is I'm going to release this on New Year's Day when to release this on New Year's Day when to release this on New Year's Day when people are making their resolutions, not people are making their resolutions, not people are making their resolutions, not knowing the results ahead of time, knowing the results ahead of time, knowing the results ahead of time, 2024." And that means we would have to 2024." And that means we would have to 2024." And that means we would have to do this study in the first six months of do this study in the first six months of do this study in the first six months of 2022, analyze them all in the second 2022, analyze them all in the second 2022, analyze them all in the second half of 2022, let the producer film the half of 2022, let the producer film the half of 2022, let the producer film the participants in the study, and give them participants in the study, and give them participants in the study, and give them a year to edit it. a year to edit it. a year to edit it. So, we did all this fastest study we've So, we did all this fastest study we've So, we did all this fastest study we've ever run actually and he filmed a lot of ever run actually and he filmed a lot of ever run actually and he filmed a lot of other things and we weren't actually other things and we weren't actually other things and we weren't actually sure how much we would be in the docu sure how much we would be in the docu sure how much we would be in the docu series and it it's like holiday time series and it it's like holiday time series and it it's like holiday time 2023 at the end of the year and he says 2023 at the end of the year and he says 2023 at the end of the year and he says there's a there's a showing of the there's a there's a showing of the there's a there's a showing of the Netflix thing. Come. And I said, I can't Netflix thing. Come. And I said, I can't Netflix thing. Come. And I said, I can't I can't come. I'm not even available. I can't come. I'm not even available. I can't come. I'm not even available. So, I never actually even saw it before So, I never actually even saw it before So, I never actually even saw it before it was released. And so I wake up uh in it was released. And so I wake up uh in it was released. And so I wake up uh in Hawaii in the first week of January and Hawaii in the first week of January and Hawaii in the first week of January and my wife says, "Holy you're number my wife says, "Holy you're number my wife says, "Holy you're number three on Netflix. Uh 50 million people three on Netflix. Uh 50 million people three on Netflix. Uh 50 million people watched the docue series in January watched the docue series in January watched the docue series in January alone." It's a lot of people. Biggest alone." It's a lot of people. Biggest alone." It's a lot of people. Biggest impact anything I've ever done. I impact anything I've ever done. I impact anything I've ever done. I can't tell you how many people said they can't tell you how many people said they can't tell you how many people said they changed their diet from watching the changed their diet from watching the changed their diet from watching the movie. But it also elicited criticisms. movie. But it also elicited criticisms. movie. But it also elicited criticisms. Anytime you get that many eyes on Anytime you get that many eyes on Anytime you get that many eyes on something, you're going to get critique. something, you're going to get critique. something, you're going to get critique. It's also a beautiful demonstration of It's also a beautiful demonstration of It's also a beautiful demonstration of how, you know, science and new form how, you know, science and new form how, you know, science and new form media are starting to intersect. And so media are starting to intersect. And so media are starting to intersect. And so this is really I've actually done been this is really I've actually done been this is really I've actually done been asked to do a whole bunch of talks now asked to do a whole bunch of talks now asked to do a whole bunch of talks now on health science communication. And on health science communication. And on health science communication. And when I get the chance to describe it, when I get the chance to describe it, when I get the chance to describe it, it's pretty fun to look into. Such it's pretty fun to look into. Such it's pretty fun to look into. Such as in the docu series, the producer made as in the docu series, the producer made as in the docu series, the producer made a big deal of the DEXA data. And it a big deal of the DEXA data. And it a big deal of the DEXA data. And it seems odd that he made a big deal of it seems odd that he made a big deal of it seems odd that he made a big deal of it because the vegans that were featured, because the vegans that were featured, because the vegans that were featured, in particular Michael and Charlie, one in particular Michael and Charlie, one in particular Michael and Charlie, one of them lost lean mass. The vegan lost of them lost lean mass. The vegan lost of them lost lean mass. The vegan lost lean mass. And who wants to lose muscle? lean mass. And who wants to lose muscle? lean mass. And who wants to lose muscle? That sucks. But that wasn't even an average sucks. But that wasn't even an average sucks. But that wasn't even an average data point. That was one data point. data point. That was one data point. data point. That was one data point. Turns out Charlie moved three times Turns out Charlie moved three times Turns out Charlie moved three times during the eight weeks of the study and during the eight weeks of the study and during the eight weeks of the study and he didn't follow Neimi's uh advice he didn't follow Neimi's uh advice he didn't follow Neimi's uh advice anyway and he was having a hard time anyway and he was having a hard time anyway and he was having a hard time eating. So that's why you have more than eating. So that's why you have more than eating. So that's why you have more than one person in a study. You have lots of one person in a study. You have lots of one person in a study. You have lots of people never saw those data. People saw people never saw those data. People saw people never saw those data. People saw it featured on Netflix. And the reason it featured on Netflix. And the reason it featured on Netflix. And the reason it was featured on Netflix because then it was featured on Netflix because then it was featured on Netflix because then he got to show off Nei who's this he got to show off Nei who's this he got to show off Nei who's this totally ripped buff vegan dude on there. totally ripped buff vegan dude on there. totally ripped buff vegan dude on there. But people saw that. Ah, I saw the But people saw that. Ah, I saw the But people saw that. Ah, I saw the Charlie data. He lost lean muscle. Charlie data. He lost lean muscle. Charlie data. He lost lean muscle. Gardner, you are so unethical. You left Gardner, you are so unethical. You left Gardner, you are so unethical. You left that out of the JAMA paper. You are that out of the JAMA paper. You are that out of the JAMA paper. You are you're manipulative. I can't believe you you're manipulative. I can't believe you you're manipulative. I can't believe you left data out of the paper to only show left data out of the paper to only show left data out of the paper to only show the things that were positive. And my the things that were positive. And my the things that were positive. And my response was, I wish you could have said response was, I wish you could have said response was, I wish you could have said it was like only in the eight people. I it was like only in the eight people. I it was like only in the eight people. I never saw the data. I didn't have them. never saw the data. I didn't have them. never saw the data. I didn't have them. I reported all the data that I said I reported all the data that I said I reported all the data that I said I would report. So that's sort of one. would report. So that's sort of one. would report. So that's sort of one. Yeah, that's the challenge with merging Yeah, that's the challenge with merging Yeah, that's the challenge with merging with forms of media where there aren't with forms of media where there aren't with forms of media where there aren't preset criteria. Yeah. This true preset criteria. Yeah. This true preset criteria. Yeah. This true of social media. I mean, we've of social media. I mean, we've of social media. I mean, we've decentralized public health discussion. decentralized public health discussion. decentralized public health discussion. people no longer look to what's coming people no longer look to what's coming people no longer look to what's coming no longer just look to what's coming no longer just look to what's coming no longer just look to what's coming from universities. Yeah. The word expert from universities. Yeah. The word expert from universities. Yeah. The word expert doesn't mean anything anymore because no doesn't mean anything anymore because no doesn't mean anything anymore because no one knows um who to call an expert and one knows um who to call an expert and one knows um who to call an expert and who not to call who's the better expert. who not to call who's the better expert. who not to call who's the better expert. The experts don't agree. As soon as The experts don't agree. As soon as The experts don't agree. As soon as people heard the experts don't people heard the experts don't people heard the experts don't agree enough times they basically um agree enough times they basically um agree enough times they basically um that went from capital E expert to that went from capital E expert to that went from capital E expert to lowercase E toalicized to in quotes to lowercase E toalicized to in quotes to lowercase E toalicized to in quotes to yeah what's an expert? Now I'm not yeah what's an expert? Now I'm not yeah what's an expert? Now I'm not saying science doesn't matter. I'm a saying science doesn't matter. I'm a saying science doesn't matter. I'm a scientist. I care about science scientist. I care about science scientist. I care about science obviously, but I think that new form obviously, but I think that new form obviously, but I think that new form media can be leveraged in both media can be leveraged in both media can be leveraged in both directions. And I will say that um directions. And I will say that um directions. And I will say that um Game Changers did something very um Game Changers did something very um Game Changers did something very um clever. I disagree with the with the clever. I disagree with the with the clever. I disagree with the with the conclusion, but you know, you know what conclusion, but you know, you know what conclusion, but you know, you know what most people took away from Game most people took away from Game most people took away from Game Changers? The penis thing. The penis Changers? The penis thing. The penis Changers? The penis thing. The penis thing. The penis thing. I know, right? thing. The penis thing. I know, right? thing. The penis thing. I know, right? Which is horrible science, right? Which is horrible science, right? Which is horrible science, right? Which is it's not even science. It's not even is it's not even science. It's not even is it's not even science. It's not even science. It wasn't science. And anyone science. It wasn't science. And anyone science. It wasn't science. And anyone that knows anything about the that knows anything about the that knows anything about the relationship between, you know, relationship between, you know, relationship between, you know, nutrition and testosterone, testosterone nutrition and testosterone, testosterone nutrition and testosterone, testosterone and erections, by the way, it's also and erections, by the way, it's also and erections, by the way, it's also important that estrogen levels be important that estrogen levels be important that estrogen levels be sufficiently high in men as well for sufficiently high in men as well for sufficiently high in men as well for libido. You know, you know, it's like libido. You know, you know, it's like libido. You know, you know, it's like there's so many misconceptions about all there's so many misconceptions about all there's so many misconceptions about all of that. But what did they take away? of that. But what did they take away? of that. But what did they take away? They took away the penis stuff. Um, They took away the penis stuff. Um, They took away the penis stuff. Um, which just speaks to the um slippery which just speaks to the um slippery which just speaks to the um slippery slope of any kind of public health slope of any kind of public health slope of any kind of public health discussion. I would say you're doing discussion. I would say you're doing discussion. I would say you're doing awesome. Um, given that given that awesome. Um, given that given that awesome. Um, given that given that people hear vegan and it's going to make people hear vegan and it's going to make people hear vegan and it's going to make 90% of people um, kind of brace because 90% of people um, kind of brace because 90% of people um, kind of brace because they think they're going to get an they think they're going to get an they think they're going to get an earful of a bunch of things that they earful of a bunch of things that they earful of a bunch of things that they should be doing and about how they're should be doing and about how they're should be doing and about how they're evil because of all the animals that are evil because of all the animals that are evil because of all the animals that are being tortured. And look, again, factory being tortured. And look, again, factory being tortured. And look, again, factory farms terrible. I just want to just farms terrible. I just want to just farms terrible. I just want to just say before I forget, um, earlier you say before I forget, um, earlier you say before I forget, um, earlier you used the term uh, protein flip. I used the term uh, protein flip. I used the term uh, protein flip. I actually think that's a great way to actually think that's a great way to actually think that's a great way to describe the diet because it includes describe the diet because it includes describe the diet because it includes and you notice there's nothing about and you notice there's nothing about and you notice there's nothing about plants in there and it has protein plants in there and it has protein plants in there and it has protein there. So, I don't know how many Google there. So, I don't know how many Google there. So, I don't know how many Google employees it takes to come up with a employees it takes to come up with a employees it takes to come up with a discussion um where everyone can agree, discussion um where everyone can agree, discussion um where everyone can agree, but I'm putting in a vote for the but I'm putting in a vote for the but I'm putting in a vote for the protein flip diet. Yeah. Because it also protein flip diet. Yeah. Because it also protein flip diet. Yeah. Because it also has a kind of a it sets a conceptual has a kind of a it sets a conceptual has a kind of a it sets a conceptual idea of what you're trying to do. You idea of what you're trying to do. You idea of what you're trying to do. You put the meat on the outside as opposed put the meat on the outside as opposed put the meat on the outside as opposed to central. So, I'm voting for protein to central. So, I'm voting for protein to central. So, I'm voting for protein flip. I'm not sure I'm going to do it, flip. I'm not sure I'm going to do it, flip. I'm not sure I'm going to do it, but um I like protein flip. Okay. That but um I like protein flip. Okay. That but um I like protein flip. Okay. That sounds really good. Okay, so we were sounds really good. Okay, so we were sounds really good. Okay, so we were never pushing the vegan diet as a whole never pushing the vegan diet as a whole never pushing the vegan diet as a whole thing. It's just like this is the study thing. It's just like this is the study thing. It's just like this is the study design we have to do this. So another of design we have to do this. So another of design we have to do this. So another of the critiques comes from Peter Aia and the critiques comes from Peter Aia and the critiques comes from Peter Aia and this is going to go back to a parking this is going to go back to a parking this is going to go back to a parking lot item from the beginning of our lot item from the beginning of our lot item from the beginning of our discussion when we were talking about discussion when we were talking about discussion when we were talking about ultrarocessed foods and the need in ultrarocessed foods and the need in ultrarocessed foods and the need in science to isolate a variable. Are you science to isolate a variable. Are you science to isolate a variable. Are you going to make me defend my good friend going to make me defend my good friend going to make me defend my good friend Peter? Sure. Yeah. Okay. So, Peter? Sure. Yeah. Okay. So, Peter? Sure. Yeah. Okay. So, interestingly, when it came to those interestingly, when it came to those interestingly, when it came to those ultrarocessed foods, that was an ultrarocessed foods, that was an ultrarocessed foods, that was an important point because there's 150 important point because there's 150 important point because there's 150 chemicals and in so many ultrarocessed chemicals and in so many ultrarocessed chemicals and in so many ultrarocessed foods, they're in combinations. So, it's foods, they're in combinations. So, it's foods, they're in combinations. So, it's really hard to call out one of them it's really hard to call out one of them it's really hard to call out one of them or identify one and then put them all or identify one and then put them all or identify one and then put them all together. So, you're right, at one together. So, you're right, at one together. So, you're right, at one level, science needs to be isolationist level, science needs to be isolationist level, science needs to be isolationist and reductionist. In the nutrition and reductionist. In the nutrition and reductionist. In the nutrition world, we've actually moved from world, we've actually moved from world, we've actually moved from nutrients to foods to food patterns. So, nutrients to foods to food patterns. So, nutrients to foods to food patterns. So, one of the things that the dietary one of the things that the dietary one of the things that the dietary guidelines for Americans actually did 10 guidelines for Americans actually did 10 guidelines for Americans actually did 10 years ago was they said, "God, you know, years ago was they said, "God, you know, years ago was they said, "God, you know, we've been praising fiber and we've been we've been praising fiber and we've been we've been praising fiber and we've been slamming saturated fat forever." And so, slamming saturated fat forever." And so, slamming saturated fat forever." And so, if you say, "Hey, patient of mine, go if you say, "Hey, patient of mine, go if you say, "Hey, patient of mine, go get fiber and avoid saturated fat." It's get fiber and avoid saturated fat." It's get fiber and avoid saturated fat." It's like, "That's not helpful. I go to the like, "That's not helpful. I go to the like, "That's not helpful. I go to the grocery store to buy food." And they grocery store to buy food." And they grocery store to buy food." And they say, "Ah, okay, go buy avocados and stop say, "Ah, okay, go buy avocados and stop say, "Ah, okay, go buy avocados and stop buying lunch and meats." Uh, okay. buying lunch and meats." Uh, okay. buying lunch and meats." Uh, okay. That's a little more helpful. Um, and That's a little more helpful. Um, and That's a little more helpful. Um, and then what we would find is people heard then what we would find is people heard then what we would find is people heard about the Mediterranean diet, and I'm about the Mediterranean diet, and I'm about the Mediterranean diet, and I'm going to be ridiculous here, but they'd going to be ridiculous here, but they'd going to be ridiculous here, but they'd have their Egg McMuffin for breakfast have their Egg McMuffin for breakfast have their Egg McMuffin for breakfast and their Whopper for lunch and a Big and their Whopper for lunch and a Big and their Whopper for lunch and a Big Mac for dinner, and by their nightstand Mac for dinner, and by their nightstand Mac for dinner, and by their nightstand they put a little of olive oil they put a little of olive oil they put a little of olive oil and they chug that before they went to and they chug that before they went to and they chug that before they went to bed and said, "I'm Mediterranean." I bed and said, "I'm Mediterranean." I bed and said, "I'm Mediterranean." I don't know if it was that extreme, but don't know if it was that extreme, but don't know if it was that extreme, but my point is then they said, "Ah, so you my point is then they said, "Ah, so you my point is then they said, "Ah, so you know, some people are gaming this sort know, some people are gaming this sort know, some people are gaming this sort of identifying a food. Maybe what we of identifying a food. Maybe what we of identifying a food. Maybe what we need to talk about is patterns." So need to talk about is patterns." So need to talk about is patterns." So there's back to there've been a shift in there's back to there've been a shift in there's back to there've been a shift in the public health community in nutrition the public health community in nutrition the public health community in nutrition about dealing with patterns. So Peter about dealing with patterns. So Peter about dealing with patterns. So Peter called me out and he said that vegan called me out and he said that vegan called me out and he said that vegan study is so stupid. He didn't say so study is so stupid. He didn't say so study is so stupid. He didn't say so stupid. He said it's violated the stupid. He said it's violated the stupid. He said it's violated the principles of science. They not only principles of science. They not only principles of science. They not only manipulated the saturated fat, they manipulated the saturated fat, they manipulated the saturated fat, they manipulated the fiber. They they didn't manipulated the fiber. They they didn't manipulated the fiber. They they didn't isolate this. You have failed the basics isolate this. You have failed the basics isolate this. You have failed the basics of science 101. The header of the of science 101. The header of the of science 101. The header of the critique for me was that I had critique for me was that I had critique for me was that I had compromised science 101 by failing to compromised science 101 by failing to compromised science 101 by failing to isolate a single variable. Was this on isolate a single variable. Was this on isolate a single variable. Was this on YouTube or something? it's in his post YouTube or something? it's in his post YouTube or something? it's in his post that he does wherever I don't know it is that he does wherever I don't know it is that he does wherever I don't know it is it LinkedIn or is his letter and um the it LinkedIn or is his letter and um the it LinkedIn or is his letter and um the response is if you were going to test response is if you were going to test response is if you were going to test a vegan diet versus an omnivore a vegan diet versus an omnivore a vegan diet versus an omnivore diet it would have to be different in diet it would have to be different in diet it would have to be different in saturated fat and fiber B12 and saturated fat and fiber B12 and saturated fat and fiber B12 and cholesterol eggs and lentils it would cholesterol eggs and lentils it would cholesterol eggs and lentils it would have to be different in a in many have to be different in a in many have to be different in a in many categories and so to circle back to your categories and so to circle back to your categories and so to circle back to your original comment And good science has to original comment And good science has to original comment And good science has to isolate the variable. It depends. If the isolate the variable. It depends. If the isolate the variable. It depends. If the question is the vegan diet versus an question is the vegan diet versus an question is the vegan diet versus an alternative pattern, then the variable you're pattern, then the variable you're pattern, then the variable you're isolating is the diet pattern. And so it isolating is the diet pattern. And so it isolating is the diet pattern. And so it would have to be absent in meat and eggs would have to be absent in meat and eggs would have to be absent in meat and eggs and chicken and everything. And that and chicken and everything. And that and chicken and everything. And that doesn't undermine the science. So I got doesn't undermine the science. So I got doesn't undermine the science. So I got crap for not publishing the DEXA data, crap for not publishing the DEXA data, crap for not publishing the DEXA data, which I didn't have. Peter gave me crap which I didn't have. Peter gave me crap which I didn't have. Peter gave me crap for that. And I got one other piece of for that. And I got one other piece of for that. And I got one other piece of crap that I really addressed really well crap that I really addressed really well crap that I really addressed really well on Twitter. And I'm super proud of this. on Twitter. And I'm super proud of this. on Twitter. And I'm super proud of this. Somebody went to the supplement where Somebody went to the supplement where Somebody went to the supplement where many of the tables were because they many of the tables were because they many of the tables were because they didn't fit in the main paper. And they didn't fit in the main paper. And they didn't fit in the main paper. And they saw the caloric distribution in the two saw the caloric distribution in the two saw the caloric distribution in the two arms during the feeding period and when arms during the feeding period and when arms during the feeding period and when they were um eating on their own. And they were um eating on their own. And they were um eating on their own. And what they noticed was during the phase what they noticed was during the phase what they noticed was during the phase where we were feeding people and where we were feeding people and where we were feeding people and delivering food to them, the vegans were delivering food to them, the vegans were delivering food to them, the vegans were eating fewer calories. And the criticism eating fewer calories. And the criticism eating fewer calories. And the criticism on Twitter was when you fed them, you on Twitter was when you fed them, you on Twitter was when you fed them, you gained the study by delivering less food gained the study by delivering less food gained the study by delivering less food to the vegans. They lost weight because to the vegans. They lost weight because to the vegans. They lost weight because you delivered you underdelivered you delivered you underdelivered you delivered you underdelivered calories to them. And maybe all the calories to them. And maybe all the calories to them. And maybe all the differences that we're seeing are just a differences that we're seeing are just a differences that we're seeing are just a caloric difference. They're not the diet caloric difference. They're not the diet caloric difference. They're not the diet type. That would undermine the whole type. That would undermine the whole type. That would undermine the whole study. And it was great. I had the study. And it was great. I had the study. And it was great. I had the chance to respond. So I used to do a lot chance to respond. So I used to do a lot chance to respond. So I used to do a lot more on it. I don't anymore, but I did more on it. I don't anymore, but I did more on it. I don't anymore, but I did tutorials back when it was Twitter tutorials back when it was Twitter tutorials back when it was Twitter Twitter. And I said, 'Th that is a great Twitter. And I said, 'Th that is a great Twitter. And I said, 'Th that is a great catch that you saw this. Thanks for catch that you saw this. Thanks for catch that you saw this. Thanks for going to the supplement. That's pretty going to the supplement. That's pretty going to the supplement. That's pretty cool. So let me explain something else. cool. So let me explain something else. cool. So let me explain something else. So for the food company that delivered So for the food company that delivered So for the food company that delivered the food, we absolutely match the food, we absolutely match the food, we absolutely match the caloric intake that we were caloric intake that we were caloric intake that we were delivering. But in a nutrition study, it delivering. But in a nutrition study, it delivering. But in a nutrition study, it doesn't come with a gavage. You can't doesn't come with a gavage. You can't doesn't come with a gavage. You can't cram the food down their throats. You cram the food down their throats. You cram the food down their throats. You have to let them eat what they want of have to let them eat what they want of have to let them eat what they want of what So we didn't actually publish what So we didn't actually publish what So we didn't actually publish what we delivered. We published what they we delivered. We published what they we delivered. We published what they said they ate. and they ate slightly said they ate. and they ate slightly said they ate. and they ate slightly fewer calories and they lost a small fewer calories and they lost a small fewer calories and they lost a small amount of weight on the side. So, good amount of weight on the side. So, good amount of weight on the side. So, good for you for catching that, but let me for you for catching that, but let me for you for catching that, but let me have the chance to show you this. And have the chance to show you this. And have the chance to show you this. And there's actually another Twitter there's actually another Twitter there's actually another Twitter person named Dr. Trow who trolls me and person named Dr. Trow who trolls me and person named Dr. Trow who trolls me and gives me grief for some of my and gives me grief for some of my and gives me grief for some of my studies. And he wasn't the one who studies. And he wasn't the one who studies. And he wasn't the one who critiqued me. It was someone else. And critiqued me. It was someone else. And critiqued me. It was someone else. And apparently, he did critique me and I apparently, he did critique me and I apparently, he did critique me and I didn't see it. And the next day, I got a didn't see it. And the next day, I got a didn't see it. And the next day, I got a Twitter video apology from Dr. Trow. He Twitter video apology from Dr. Trow. He Twitter video apology from Dr. Trow. He said, "I read your response to the said, "I read your response to the said, "I read your response to the criticism. I admit I'm wrong. I criticism. I admit I'm wrong. I criticism. I admit I'm wrong. I retract my critique." This is one of the retract my critique." This is one of the retract my critique." This is one of the great things about social media. And if great things about social media. And if great things about social media. And if it could be more civil like that, it could be more civil like that, it could be more civil like that, it wasn't even just a message. It was a wasn't even just a message. It was a wasn't even just a message. It was a video retraction. And and I've been to video retraction. And and I've been to video retraction. And and I've been to be to be fair, he said something the be to be fair, he said something the be to be fair, he said something the year before where I wrote back and said, year before where I wrote back and said, year before where I wrote back and said, "This is so cool. We agree on this. I'm "This is so cool. We agree on this. I'm "This is so cool. We agree on this. I'm sure we don't disagree on I'm sure we don't disagree on I'm sure we don't disagree on everything. Thanks for calling this out. everything. Thanks for calling this out. everything. Thanks for calling this out. And I want to call out you and agree And I want to call out you and agree And I want to call out you and agree that what you said I think is true. that what you said I think is true. that what you said I think is true. Let's let's try to make this social Let's let's try to make this social Let's let's try to make this social media discourse more civil and more media discourse more civil and more media discourse more civil and more complete. So that was almost better complete. So that was almost better complete. So that was almost better than doing the study for me was to see than doing the study for me was to see than doing the study for me was to see this social this social this social media exchange where we said ah I sort media exchange where we said ah I sort media exchange where we said ah I sort of misunderstood that point. Thanks for of misunderstood that point. Thanks for of misunderstood that point. Thanks for clarifying. Wow. Now we can move on and clarifying. Wow. Now we can move on and clarifying. Wow. Now we can move on and deal with some of the real substantive deal with some of the real substantive deal with some of the real substantive differences that we have. Yeah. having differences that we have. Yeah. having differences that we have. Yeah. having been involved in various online um you been involved in various online um you been involved in various online um you know points of friction and uh know points of friction and uh know points of friction and uh subsequent relief um resolution I should subsequent relief um resolution I should subsequent relief um resolution I should say. Um it's a very satisfying feeling say. Um it's a very satisfying feeling say. Um it's a very satisfying feeling when that happens. In fact, that's how when that happens. In fact, that's how when that happens. In fact, that's how Lane Norton and I got to know one Lane Norton and I got to know one Lane Norton and I got to know one another. He critiqued something I said another. He critiqued something I said another. He critiqued something I said and we disagreed about it. I wrote back. and we disagreed about it. I wrote back. and we disagreed about it. I wrote back. I invited him on the podcast. This I invited him on the podcast. This I invited him on the podcast. This happened in a discussion around happened in a discussion around happened in a discussion around cannabis. I did an episode on cannabis cannabis. I did an episode on cannabis cannabis. I did an episode on cannabis that I still hold to, you know, what's that I still hold to, you know, what's that I still hold to, you know, what's in there. There was some critique from in there. There was some critique from in there. There was some critique from the cannabis research community. I the cannabis research community. I the cannabis research community. I invited the guy on. He came on here. We invited the guy on. He came on here. We invited the guy on. He came on here. We debated those things. Turns out the debated those things. Turns out the debated those things. Turns out the discrepancy in interpretation turned out discrepancy in interpretation turned out discrepancy in interpretation turned out to be relatively minor. Yes. Overall, to be relatively minor. Yes. Overall, to be relatively minor. Yes. Overall, that's how science is done. And um that's how science is done. And um that's how science is done. And um social media has that opportunity, but social media has that opportunity, but social media has that opportunity, but um it has far more opportunity to just um it has far more opportunity to just um it has far more opportunity to just kind of, you know, cast stones over kind of, you know, cast stones over kind of, you know, cast stones over walls and that kind of thing. Um I'm walls and that kind of thing. Um I'm walls and that kind of thing. Um I'm glad you highlighted those uh points of glad you highlighted those uh points of glad you highlighted those uh points of rebuttal and um resolution. I want to rebuttal and um resolution. I want to rebuttal and um resolution. I want to make sure that we talk about fermented make sure that we talk about fermented make sure that we talk about fermented food, but in the context of fiber also, food, but in the context of fiber also, food, but in the context of fiber also, I think by now everyone knows fiber is I think by now everyone knows fiber is I think by now everyone knows fiber is super important. Anyone that disagrees super important. Anyone that disagrees super important. Anyone that disagrees with that to me should see a with that to me should see a with that to me should see a neurologist. Um because it's just so neurologist. Um because it's just so neurologist. Um because it's just so very clear that if you follow the very clear that if you follow the very clear that if you follow the protein flip diet or the um more meat, protein flip diet or the um more meat, protein flip diet or the um more meat, less vegetables, whatever, you need less vegetables, whatever, you need less vegetables, whatever, you need fiber. It's anti-cancer. It's pro fiber. It's anti-cancer. It's pro fiber. It's anti-cancer. It's pro digestion. It's it's all sorts of great digestion. It's it's all sorts of great digestion. It's it's all sorts of great things. But you did the study with our things. But you did the study with our things. But you did the study with our colleague Justin Sonnenberg. I love colleague Justin Sonnenberg. I love colleague Justin Sonnenberg. I love this study and there's some love this study and there's some love this study and there's some interesting footnotes about fiber in interesting footnotes about fiber in interesting footnotes about fiber in there. But maybe you could just there. But maybe you could just there. But maybe you could just highlight the uh top contour of the highlight the uh top contour of the highlight the uh top contour of the study for people. And I will say this study for people. And I will say this study for people. And I will say this study convinced me to eat low sugar study convinced me to eat low sugar study convinced me to eat low sugar fermented foods every single day. Nice. fermented foods every single day. Nice. fermented foods every single day. Nice. And I have been ever since. And I And I have been ever since. And I And I have been ever since. And I recommend that as uh to everyone who recommend that as uh to everyone who recommend that as uh to everyone who asks me for health advice. Um I think asks me for health advice. Um I think asks me for health advice. Um I think it's extremely important and effective. it's extremely important and effective. it's extremely important and effective. Okay, cool. Love this. Love the Okay, cool. Love this. Love the Okay, cool. Love this. Love the Sonbergs. Um Justin and Eric are two of Sonbergs. Um Justin and Eric are two of Sonbergs. Um Justin and Eric are two of the greatest scientists that I've ever the greatest scientists that I've ever the greatest scientists that I've ever worked with. They're practical. They're worked with. They're practical. They're worked with. They're practical. They're very rigorous scientists. So we um very rigorous scientists. So we um very rigorous scientists. So we um there's a little backstory that's kind there's a little backstory that's kind there's a little backstory that's kind of fun. much as this is the first time of fun. much as this is the first time of fun. much as this is the first time I've met you even though you're at I've met you even though you're at I've met you even though you're at Stanford. Justin and I had never met at Stanford. Justin and I had never met at Stanford. Justin and I had never met at Stanford and we went to a conference in Stanford and we went to a conference in Stanford and we went to a conference in Seattle and met one another because we Seattle and met one another because we Seattle and met one another because we were presenting after one another. And were presenting after one another. And were presenting after one another. And uh he said, "Oh my god, Christopher, I uh he said, "Oh my god, Christopher, I uh he said, "Oh my god, Christopher, I just saw your presentation where you just saw your presentation where you just saw your presentation where you showed how much you change people's showed how much you change people's showed how much you change people's diets. I have colleagues who told me diets. I have colleagues who told me diets. I have colleagues who told me never to go near humans, like only do never to go near humans, like only do never to go near humans, like only do mice because humans are a pain in the mice because humans are a pain in the mice because humans are a pain in the ass and I'm terrified of humans. I was ass and I'm terrified of humans. I was ass and I'm terrified of humans. I was only going to do mice, but all the stuff only going to do mice, but all the stuff only going to do mice, but all the stuff I find in mice looks like it's diet I find in mice looks like it's diet I find in mice looks like it's diet related. And I said, "Oh, poop is icky. related. And I said, "Oh, poop is icky. related. And I said, "Oh, poop is icky. I do not want to do poop, but uh I fear I do not want to do poop, but uh I fear I do not want to do poop, but uh I fear poop. If you fear humans and I fear poop. If you fear humans and I fear poop. If you fear humans and I fear poop, we could get poop, we could get poop, we could get together." And he said, "Great. Let's do together." And he said, "Great. Let's do together." And he said, "Great. Let's do some stuff together. What should we do?" some stuff together. What should we do?" some stuff together. What should we do?" And he really found fiber to be the big And he really found fiber to be the big And he really found fiber to be the big deal for his mice. And he said, "Let's deal for his mice. And he said, "Let's deal for his mice. And he said, "Let's do a fiber study with humans." And I do a fiber study with humans." And I do a fiber study with humans." And I said, "Ah, it seems like the public is said, "Ah, it seems like the public is said, "Ah, it seems like the public is really confused about probiotic and really confused about probiotic and really confused about probiotic and prebiotic. Probiotic being live bacteria prebiotic. Probiotic being live bacteria prebiotic. Probiotic being live bacteria and prebiotic being the fibers that feed and prebiotic being the fibers that feed and prebiotic being the fibers that feed them. And I heard him say this on your them. And I heard him say this on your them. And I heard him say this on your show. So if anybody saw this show, he uh show. So if anybody saw this show, he uh show. So if anybody saw this show, he uh your podcast with him. He said, "All your podcast with him. He said, "All your podcast with him. He said, "All right, we're just going to humor you and right, we're just going to humor you and right, we're just going to humor you and we're going to have a fermented food we're going to have a fermented food we're going to have a fermented food arm, not just a fiber arm." So we got 18 arm, not just a fiber arm." So we got 18 arm, not just a fiber arm." So we got 18 people to eat as much fiber as humanly people to eat as much fiber as humanly people to eat as much fiber as humanly possible and 18 people to eat as much possible and 18 people to eat as much possible and 18 people to eat as much fermented food as humanly possible. And fermented food as humanly possible. And fermented food as humanly possible. And so we didn't actually set an upper limit so we didn't actually set an upper limit so we didn't actually set an upper limit on these. We just said more. You need to on these. We just said more. You need to on these. We just said more. You need to We're only going to do this study for We're only going to do this study for We're only going to do this study for four weeks of ramp up so you can get four weeks of ramp up so you can get four weeks of ramp up so you can get accustomed to this new stuff in your accustomed to this new stuff in your accustomed to this new stuff in your diet and then six weeks of maintenance diet and then six weeks of maintenance diet and then six weeks of maintenance and then we'll even go back four weeks and then we'll even go back four weeks and then we'll even go back four weeks later after the study ends and see how later after the study ends and see how later after the study ends and see how you're doing. And we will look at the you're doing. And we will look at the you're doing. And we will look at the microbiome to see if we can change the microbiome to see if we can change the microbiome to see if we can change the diversity of the microbiome, the diversity of the microbiome, the diversity of the microbiome, the characteristic of the microbes that are characteristic of the microbes that are characteristic of the microbes that are in there. and we'll go to this human in there. and we'll go to this human in there. and we'll go to this human immune monitoring center that Mark immune monitoring center that Mark immune monitoring center that Mark Davis, an immunologist, runs at Davis, an immunologist, runs at Davis, an immunologist, runs at Stanford, and we'll look at multiple Stanford, and we'll look at multiple Stanford, and we'll look at multiple measures of measures of measures of inflammation. So, we did it. We got we inflammation. So, we did it. We got we inflammation. So, we did it. We got we got the people randomized of fermented got the people randomized of fermented got the people randomized of fermented food who previously had been eating less food who previously had been eating less food who previously had been eating less than half a serving a day to get six than half a serving a day to get six than half a serving a day to get six servings a day on average. And I will servings a day on average. And I will servings a day on average. And I will pause just for a moment there in case pause just for a moment there in case pause just for a moment there in case that seems obscene. So picture that one that seems obscene. So picture that one that seems obscene. So picture that one bottle of kombucha that I have right bottle of kombucha that I have right bottle of kombucha that I have right under the table here is two servings. under the table here is two servings. under the table here is two servings. It's only 50 calories. And a serving of It's only 50 calories. And a serving of It's only 50 calories. And a serving of sauerkraut or kimchi is likewise very sauerkraut or kimchi is likewise very sauerkraut or kimchi is likewise very few calories. It's mostly just cabbage. few calories. It's mostly just cabbage. few calories. It's mostly just cabbage. So actually six servings a day was about So actually six servings a day was about So actually six servings a day was about 300 calories a day. It's not like most 300 calories a day. It's not like most 300 calories a day. It's not like most of their food was fermented. But given of their food was fermented. But given of their food was fermented. But given that they hadn't eaten any fermented that they hadn't eaten any fermented that they hadn't eaten any fermented food hardly at all before, six servings food hardly at all before, six servings food hardly at all before, six servings a day was a lot. Yogurt, kafir, a day was a lot. Yogurt, kafir, a day was a lot. Yogurt, kafir, kombucha, kimchi, and sauerkraut. Those kombucha, kimchi, and sauerkraut. Those kombucha, kimchi, and sauerkraut. Those are the five main things. Low sugar are the five main things. Low sugar are the five main things. Low sugar fermented foods. Yeah. In my opin I've fermented foods. Yeah. In my opin I've fermented foods. Yeah. In my opin I've tacked low sugar onto it because when tacked low sugar onto it because when tacked low sugar onto it because when people hear fermented food, they go, people hear fermented food, they go, people hear fermented food, they go, "Oh, yogurt. Yum." Cherry sugar "Oh, yogurt. Yum." Cherry sugar "Oh, yogurt. Yum." Cherry sugar flavored, you know? Right. There you go. flavored, you know? Right. There you go. flavored, you know? Right. There you go. Plain yogurt. So, of these, we actually Plain yogurt. So, of these, we actually Plain yogurt. So, of these, we actually looked at 90 different inflammatory looked at 90 different inflammatory looked at 90 different inflammatory markers because that's where the field markers because that's where the field markers because that's where the field is. We could go to inflammation as a is. We could go to inflammation as a is. We could go to inflammation as a whole separate topic if you want. 20 of whole separate topic if you want. 20 of whole separate topic if you want. 20 of the inflammatory markers dropped and got the inflammatory markers dropped and got the inflammatory markers dropped and got better in the fermented food group. when better in the fermented food group. when better in the fermented food group. when we went to the fiber group. Oh, plus I'm we went to the fiber group. Oh, plus I'm we went to the fiber group. Oh, plus I'm sorry. Wait, this is super important. sorry. Wait, this is super important. sorry. Wait, this is super important. Their microbial diversity increased, Their microbial diversity increased, Their microbial diversity increased, which is a good thing. Not always, but which is a good thing. Not always, but which is a good thing. Not always, but if it's the good microbes that are if it's the good microbes that are if it's the good microbes that are increasing, that's a good thing. But the increasing, that's a good thing. But the increasing, that's a good thing. But the other funny thing is the Sonnenberg lab other funny thing is the Sonnenberg lab other funny thing is the Sonnenberg lab was concerned that the only thing that was concerned that the only thing that was concerned that the only thing that was increasing or they wanted to was increasing or they wanted to was increasing or they wanted to characterize it are the microbes coming characterize it are the microbes coming characterize it are the microbes coming from the foods they're eating. So, they from the foods they're eating. So, they from the foods they're eating. So, they went and bought all the different foods went and bought all the different foods went and bought all the different foods that people were eating and that people were eating and that people were eating and characterized them. And the majority of characterized them. And the majority of characterized them. And the majority of microbes contributing to the increased microbes contributing to the increased microbes contributing to the increased diversity were not in the foods that diversity were not in the foods that diversity were not in the foods that they were buying. So this is a little they were buying. So this is a little they were buying. So this is a little side statement that they made in the side statement that they made in the side statement that they made in the paper. Wow, this is super cool. When you paper. Wow, this is super cool. When you paper. Wow, this is super cool. When you change the millia of the environment of change the millia of the environment of change the millia of the environment of the gut microbiome, you might actually the gut microbiome, you might actually the gut microbiome, you might actually see some microbes appear that you see some microbes appear that you see some microbes appear that you weren't even feeding them. They might weren't even feeding them. They might weren't even feeding them. They might have been in such small concentrations have been in such small concentrations have been in such small concentrations that when you change that gut that when you change that gut that when you change that gut environment, some of them bloom that you environment, some of them bloom that you environment, some of them bloom that you didn't even know were there. So it's didn't even know were there. So it's didn't even know were there. So it's very fascinating that the microbial very fascinating that the microbial very fascinating that the microbial diversity increased, the markers of diversity increased, the markers of diversity increased, the markers of inflammation decreased. Great. It's like inflammation decreased. Great. It's like inflammation decreased. Great. It's like a clinical outcome benefit. And on the a clinical outcome benefit. And on the a clinical outcome benefit. And on the fiber side, the microbiome diversity fiber side, the microbiome diversity fiber side, the microbiome diversity didn't increase and as a whole, the um didn't increase and as a whole, the um didn't increase and as a whole, the um inflammatory markers didn't change. And inflammatory markers didn't change. And inflammatory markers didn't change. And in some cases, as I recall, they even in some cases, as I recall, they even in some cases, as I recall, they even increased increased. But so part of that increased increased. But so part of that increased increased. But so part of that was fascinating because what they did is fascinating because what they did is fascinating because what they did is they said, "Ah, God, this is all that they said, "Ah, God, this is all that they said, "Ah, God, this is all that mouse study stuff. We thought the fiber mouse study stuff. We thought the fiber mouse study stuff. We thought the fiber was going to be the only one who won. was going to be the only one who won. was going to be the only one who won. Christopher, we were only humoring you Christopher, we were only humoring you Christopher, we were only humoring you that the fermented foods would have an that the fermented foods would have an that the fermented foods would have an impact. We thought it was going to be impact. We thought it was going to be impact. We thought it was going to be all fiber. Now we got to God, we are all fiber. Now we got to God, we are all fiber. Now we got to God, we are scratching our heads here. Let's see scratching our heads here. Let's see scratching our heads here. Let's see what we can figure out. And they what we can figure out. And they what we can figure out. And they actually separated the 18 people into actually separated the 18 people into actually separated the 18 people into roughly three groups of six. And they roughly three groups of six. And they roughly three groups of six. And they said, let's look at the data in a little said, let's look at the data in a little said, let's look at the data in a little more detail and let's see if we can see more detail and let's see if we can see more detail and let's see if we can see anything like there's a range of anything like there's a range of anything like there's a range of response in the inflammatory markers. response in the inflammatory markers. response in the inflammatory markers. Some got worse, but some did get better. Some got worse, but some did get better. Some got worse, but some did get better. But that's why you do multiple people. But that's why you do multiple people. But that's why you do multiple people. You see if it cancels out in the study. You see if it cancels out in the study. You see if it cancels out in the study. We wanted to see the average We wanted to see the average We wanted to see the average difference. But they looked at what difference. But they looked at what difference. But they looked at what might be predictors of those might be predictors of those might be predictors of those differences. And the key factor that differences. And the key factor that differences. And the key factor that came out was the baseline microbial came out was the baseline microbial came out was the baseline microbial diversity. And so the idea here was that diversity. And so the idea here was that diversity. And so the idea here was that people who had low diversity, like a people who had low diversity, like a people who had low diversity, like a compromised western diet, depleted compromised western diet, depleted compromised western diet, depleted diversity, when they stuffed all that diversity, when they stuffed all that diversity, when they stuffed all that fiber down their gullet, they actually fiber down their gullet, they actually fiber down their gullet, they actually had an adverse reaction to it. It's like had an adverse reaction to it. It's like had an adverse reaction to it. It's like fire hose of fiber. Can't handle this. fire hose of fiber. Can't handle this. fire hose of fiber. Can't handle this. Going to actually have more of an Going to actually have more of an Going to actually have more of an inflammatory response to that, not less. inflammatory response to that, not less. inflammatory response to that, not less. But the people with the highest But the people with the highest But the people with the highest microbial diversity at baseline were microbial diversity at baseline were microbial diversity at baseline were more like the fermented food folks and more like the fermented food folks and more like the fermented food folks and they had a benefit. And so this is where they had a benefit. And so this is where they had a benefit. And so this is where I thought they were brilliant in writing I thought they were brilliant in writing I thought they were brilliant in writing this paper is that what they said was this paper is that what they said was this paper is that what they said was sort of from a general population sort of from a general population sort of from a general population standpoint, fermented foods are good. standpoint, fermented foods are good. standpoint, fermented foods are good. Like no matter whether they're eating Like no matter whether they're eating Like no matter whether they're eating the yogurt or the kimchi or the yogurt or the kimchi or the yogurt or the kimchi or the sauerkraut because not everybody ate the sauerkraut because not everybody ate the sauerkraut because not everybody ate the same proportions of the different same proportions of the different same proportions of the different things. It's like across the things. It's like across the things. It's like across the whole group the benefits were clear. the whole group the benefits were clear. the whole group the benefits were clear. the fiber was much more nuanced. And this is fiber was much more nuanced. And this is fiber was much more nuanced. And this is more like a personalized nutrition more like a personalized nutrition more like a personalized nutrition thing. So, one was a general health thing. So, one was a general health thing. So, one was a general health recommendation and one was if you're recommendation and one was if you're recommendation and one was if you're going to go for more fiber, you might going to go for more fiber, you might going to go for more fiber, you might need to make sure your microbial need to make sure your microbial need to make sure your microbial diversity is up first. That might be diversity is up first. That might be diversity is up first. That might be part of what we have to figure out or part of what we have to figure out or part of what we have to figure out or warn the people with a compromised or warn the people with a compromised or warn the people with a compromised or depleted microbial diversity that you depleted microbial diversity that you depleted microbial diversity that you won't do well right now with more won't do well right now with more won't do well right now with more microbes. Super fun paper to work on. A microbes. Super fun paper to work on. A microbes. Super fun paper to work on. A geeky science thing because I know geeky science thing because I know geeky science thing because I know you're a data science guy. That's fun. you're a data science guy. That's fun. you're a data science guy. That's fun. The primary outcome for that study was The primary outcome for that study was The primary outcome for that study was the cytoine response score. So in the cytoine response score. So in the cytoine response score. So in the world of inflammation, nobody has a world of inflammation, nobody has a world of inflammation, nobody has a single thing that they all like. Not C single thing that they all like. Not C single thing that they all like. Not C reactive protein, not interlucan 6, not reactive protein, not interlucan 6, not reactive protein, not interlucan 6, not trimethylamine oxide. There's all kinds trimethylamine oxide. There's all kinds trimethylamine oxide. There's all kinds of things floating out there, but there of things floating out there, but there of things floating out there, but there isn't one that clinicians agree on and isn't one that clinicians agree on and isn't one that clinicians agree on and measure in the clinic. So Mark Davis had measure in the clinic. So Mark Davis had measure in the clinic. So Mark Davis had found a sort of cluster of 14 different found a sort of cluster of 14 different found a sort of cluster of 14 different things in a paper that they found things in a paper that they found things in a paper that they found looking within that population. and they looking within that population. and they looking within that population. and they said maybe people should be looking at said maybe people should be looking at said maybe people should be looking at the cytoine response score and then on the cytoine response score and then on the cytoine response score and then on clinical trials.gov of we said that's clinical trials.gov of we said that's clinical trials.gov of we said that's our primary outcome and we're going to our primary outcome and we're going to our primary outcome and we're going to look at all this other stuff and in the look at all this other stuff and in the look at all this other stuff and in the cell paper cytoine response score didn't cell paper cytoine response score didn't cell paper cytoine response score didn't change and since then Mark Davis has change and since then Mark Davis has change and since then Mark Davis has kind of abandoned this score kind of abandoned this score kind of abandoned this score because it hasn't been reproduced in because it hasn't been reproduced in because it hasn't been reproduced in other populations but I think it's other populations but I think it's other populations but I think it's really interesting from a paper really interesting from a paper really interesting from a paper publishing point of view that the publishing point of view that the publishing point of view that the reviewers caught it they said look in reviewers caught it they said look in reviewers caught it they said look in this paper your primary outcome didn't this paper your primary outcome didn't this paper your primary outcome didn't change all the changes you're seeing are change all the changes you're seeing are change all the changes you're seeing are secondary and exploratory but we kind secondary and exploratory but we kind secondary and exploratory but we kind admit that you have 90 markers and 20 admit that you have 90 markers and 20 admit that you have 90 markers and 20 get better and nothing gets worse. get better and nothing gets worse. get better and nothing gets worse. That's probably worth talking about. So That's probably worth talking about. So That's probably worth talking about. So this is how nuanced that is. And the this is how nuanced that is. And the this is how nuanced that is. And the fiber story is nuanced. It wasn't a 100 fiber story is nuanced. It wasn't a 100 fiber story is nuanced. It wasn't a 100 people. It was 18 people and we divide people. It was 18 people and we divide people. It was 18 people and we divide them into groups of them into groups of them into groups of six. Very exploratory. And yet that six. Very exploratory. And yet that six. Very exploratory. And yet that paper's now been cited a thousand times. paper's now been cited a thousand times. paper's now been cited a thousand times. It's a really influential paper. I mean It's a really influential paper. I mean It's a really influential paper. I mean I talk about it as often as I get the I talk about it as often as I get the I talk about it as often as I get the opportunity. I think uh few papers have opportunity. I think uh few papers have opportunity. I think uh few papers have changed my behavior so radically. Um we changed my behavior so radically. Um we changed my behavior so radically. Um we should probably talk about the six should probably talk about the six should probably talk about the six servings per day. Do you think people servings per day. Do you think people servings per day. Do you think people can benefit from a couple spoonfuls of can benefit from a couple spoonfuls of can benefit from a couple spoonfuls of Yes. of uh kimchi or sauerkraut? By the Yes. of uh kimchi or sauerkraut? By the Yes. of uh kimchi or sauerkraut? By the way, it's got to be the stuff that you way, it's got to be the stuff that you way, it's got to be the stuff that you need to keep refrigerated. Yes. Um need to keep refrigerated. Yes. Um need to keep refrigerated. Yes. Um because you can find many things like because you can find many things like because you can find many things like sauerkraut and kimchi on the probably sauerkraut and kimchi on the probably sauerkraut and kimchi on the probably more sauerkraut and pickles on the more sauerkraut and pickles on the more sauerkraut and pickles on the shelf, not refrigerated. That's not shelf, not refrigerated. That's not shelf, not refrigerated. That's not going to benefit for anyone. There's no going to benefit for anyone. There's no going to benefit for anyone. There's no live cultures in there. Um, and they're live cultures in there. Um, and they're live cultures in there. Um, and they're often um paired with sugar and the stuff often um paired with sugar and the stuff often um paired with sugar and the stuff that's um kept at room temp. I'm a that's um kept at room temp. I'm a that's um kept at room temp. I'm a fan of salt. I like salt. I drink enough fan of salt. I like salt. I drink enough fan of salt. I like salt. I drink enough water. My blood pressure is low. So, I water. My blood pressure is low. So, I water. My blood pressure is low. So, I benefit from having salt. I have a lot benefit from having salt. I have a lot benefit from having salt. I have a lot of family members that unless they get of family members that unless they get of family members that unless they get enough salt, they feel a little enough salt, they feel a little enough salt, they feel a little lightheaded. I think maybe low blood lightheaded. I think maybe low blood lightheaded. I think maybe low blood pressure runs in our family a little pressure runs in our family a little pressure runs in our family a little bit. Um, so I'm a fan of salt, but you bit. Um, so I'm a fan of salt, but you bit. Um, so I'm a fan of salt, but you make a good point for people with make a good point for people with make a good point for people with hypertension. Uh, they should be hypertension. Uh, they should be hypertension. Uh, they should be cautious about that. Look out for that. cautious about that. Look out for that. cautious about that. Look out for that. So an interesting part of this stud is So an interesting part of this stud is So an interesting part of this stud is again because it's a six-w weekek again because it's a six-w weekek again because it's a six-w weekek maintenance phase of this thing. Um you maintenance phase of this thing. Um you maintenance phase of this thing. Um you know we had to make a big difference. So know we had to make a big difference. So know we had to make a big difference. So if there's a if there's a if there's a signal you don't want to miss a small signal you don't want to miss a small signal you don't want to miss a small signal. So in some of our studies we signal. So in some of our studies we signal. So in some of our studies we kind of exaggerate. We go vegan even kind of exaggerate. We go vegan even kind of exaggerate. We go vegan even though we're not expecting the world to though we're not expecting the world to though we're not expecting the world to go vegan. We just want them to eat more go vegan. We just want them to eat more go vegan. We just want them to eat more plants. We went to six servings because plants. We went to six servings because plants. We went to six servings because they were eating a half a serving they were eating a half a serving they were eating a half a serving before. And to just say why don't you before. And to just say why don't you before. And to just say why don't you double that to one? It's like, okay, double that to one? It's like, okay, double that to one? It's like, okay, we're not going to get a perturbation we're not going to get a perturbation we're not going to get a perturbation of metabolism with one. Let's go to six. of metabolism with one. Let's go to six. of metabolism with one. Let's go to six. The interesting thing was four weeks The interesting thing was four weeks The interesting thing was four weeks after the study ended, this group of 18 after the study ended, this group of 18 after the study ended, this group of 18 that were eating basically no fermented that were eating basically no fermented that were eating basically no fermented food at first were still eating three food at first were still eating three food at first were still eating three servings a day. They taste great. I love servings a day. They taste great. I love servings a day. They taste great. I love I love low sugar fermented foods. I love low sugar fermented foods. I love low sugar fermented foods. They're a little bit costly for many They're a little bit costly for many They're a little bit costly for many people. I'm fortunate that I can afford people. I'm fortunate that I can afford people. I'm fortunate that I can afford them. Like a really good Bulgarian or them. Like a really good Bulgarian or them. Like a really good Bulgarian or Greek yogurt. Um kombucha can be Greek yogurt. Um kombucha can be Greek yogurt. Um kombucha can be expensive. Um, I say that because many expensive. Um, I say that because many expensive. Um, I say that because many of the listeners, you know, have a there of the listeners, you know, have a there of the listeners, you know, have a there there's a range of disposable income, there's a range of disposable income, there's a range of disposable income, but I will say that most processed foods but I will say that most processed foods but I will say that most processed foods are actually pretty expensive when you are actually pretty expensive when you are actually pretty expensive when you look at what's going into, you know, look at what's going into, you know, look at what's going into, you know, like a latte that you purchase or like a latte that you purchase or like a latte that you purchase or something like that. Anyway, people love something like that. Anyway, people love something like that. Anyway, people love their lattes. I'm not trying to take their lattes. I'm not trying to take their lattes. I'm not trying to take away anyone's lattes, but um I will say away anyone's lattes, but um I will say away anyone's lattes, but um I will say that eating low sugar fermented food, I that eating low sugar fermented food, I that eating low sugar fermented food, I strive to do it every day. You ate some strive to do it every day. You ate some strive to do it every day. You ate some before our talk today. I watched I did. before our talk today. I watched I did. before our talk today. I watched I did. I gulped down some scoops of kimchi. I gulped down some scoops of kimchi. I gulped down some scoops of kimchi. Have it with breakfast. Sometimes I Have it with breakfast. Sometimes I Have it with breakfast. Sometimes I have found it has made me feel from a have found it has made me feel from a have found it has made me feel from a level digestion just sort of general level digestion just sort of general level digestion just sort of general feelings of like gut feeling nice and feelings of like gut feeling nice and feelings of like gut feeling nice and happy after a meal but also um and this happy after a meal but also um and this happy after a meal but also um and this is correlation this isn't causation of is correlation this isn't causation of is correlation this isn't causation of course but um just overall levels of course but um just overall levels of course but um just overall levels of energy and immune function. I mean I energy and immune function. I mean I energy and immune function. I mean I haven't been sick in ages. I do a bunch haven't been sick in ages. I do a bunch haven't been sick in ages. I do a bunch of other things but I see significant of other things but I see significant of other things but I see significant improvements in my health when I travel. improvements in my health when I travel. improvements in my health when I travel. So, I have this rule that when I travel, So, I have this rule that when I travel, So, I have this rule that when I travel, I double down on my health practices. My I double down on my health practices. My I double down on my health practices. My team knows when we arrive in a city the team knows when we arrive in a city the team knows when we arrive in a city the first time, I won't eat in a restaurant. first time, I won't eat in a restaurant. first time, I won't eat in a restaurant. I'm finding a Whole Foods and I'm just I'm finding a Whole Foods and I'm just I'm finding a Whole Foods and I'm just eating raw foods in my room. And eating raw foods in my room. And eating raw foods in my room. And people always think it's crazy. It's people always think it's crazy. It's people always think it's crazy. It's kind of antisocial. But then I can go kind of antisocial. But then I can go kind of antisocial. But then I can go through an entire meeting or week through an entire meeting or week through an entire meeting or week feeling really good. I never miss feeling really good. I never miss feeling really good. I never miss workouts when I travel ever. I believe workouts when I travel ever. I believe workouts when I travel ever. I believe that when you're at home, you have all that when you're at home, you have all that when you're at home, you have all these conditions that make sleep easier. these conditions that make sleep easier. these conditions that make sleep easier. When you travel, some of the things are When you travel, some of the things are When you travel, some of the things are outside your control, so control what outside your control, so control what outside your control, so control what you can. Anyway, I love the low sugar you can. Anyway, I love the low sugar you can. Anyway, I love the low sugar fermented food thing. Um, and thank you fermented food thing. Um, and thank you fermented food thing. Um, and thank you and thank Justin uh for doing that and thank Justin uh for doing that and thank Justin uh for doing that study. Justin and Erica actually did study. Justin and Erica actually did study. Justin and Erica actually did look at that weight loss study that diet look at that weight loss study that diet look at that weight loss study that diet fits and saw some microbial diversity fits and saw some microbial diversity fits and saw some microbial diversity changes at 6 months that disappeared at changes at 6 months that disappeared at changes at 6 months that disappeared at 12. The term that they use that I 12. The term that they use that I 12. The term that they use that I probably can't explain effectively is probably can't explain effectively is probably can't explain effectively is residence. So if you eat yogurt every residence. So if you eat yogurt every residence. So if you eat yogurt every day, then that microbe is there because day, then that microbe is there because day, then that microbe is there because you ate it every day. But if you ate it every day. But if you ate it every day. But if you stopped, the benefit would probably come stopped, the benefit would probably come stopped, the benefit would probably come if the microbe took up residence and was if the microbe took up residence and was if the microbe took up residence and was there without you eating it again, which there without you eating it again, which there without you eating it again, which isn't always the case. So sometimes you isn't always the case. So sometimes you isn't always the case. So sometimes you might have to actually eat the yogurt might have to actually eat the yogurt might have to actually eat the yogurt every day. The cooler thing, like a every day. The cooler thing, like a every day. The cooler thing, like a fecal transplant, would be somehow you fecal transplant, would be somehow you fecal transplant, would be somehow you got somebody to adopt that microbe and got somebody to adopt that microbe and got somebody to adopt that microbe and take it up regardless of what you eat take it up regardless of what you eat take it up regardless of what you eat and it changed the environment for good. and it changed the environment for good. and it changed the environment for good. That's another place where the field is That's another place where the field is That's another place where the field is still exploring how to help people is still exploring how to help people is still exploring how to help people the most. I would love for you guys to the most. I would love for you guys to the most. I would love for you guys to do a study about ferment low sugar do a study about ferment low sugar do a study about ferment low sugar fermented food intake microbial fermented food intake microbial fermented food intake microbial diversity and mental health depression diversity and mental health depression diversity and mental health depression symptoms because everyone here is like symptoms because everyone here is like symptoms because everyone here is like 90% of the serotonin is in your gut like 90% of the serotonin is in your gut like 90% of the serotonin is in your gut like you know the gut is influencing you know the gut is influencing you know the gut is influencing neurotransmitter levels but I've never neurotransmitter levels but I've never neurotransmitter levels but I've never seen a quality study maybe I just didn't seen a quality study maybe I just didn't seen a quality study maybe I just didn't find it a quality study of okay you find it a quality study of okay you find it a quality study of okay you eat some low sugar kimchi or you eat some low sugar kimchi or you eat some low sugar kimchi or you eat drink some kombucha and kefir and you do drink some kombucha and kefir and you do drink some kombucha and kefir and you do that five six servings a day for six that five six servings a day for six that five six servings a day for six weeks and look at depressive symptoms. I weeks and look at depressive symptoms. I weeks and look at depressive symptoms. I would love for that study to be done. would love for that study to be done. would love for that study to be done. Love it. Yeah, we're always looking for Love it. Yeah, we're always looking for Love it. Yeah, we're always looking for new ideas. Thanks. We'll make you a new ideas. Thanks. We'll make you a new ideas. Thanks. We'll make you a co-investigator. All right. Well, or um co-investigator. All right. Well, or um co-investigator. All right. Well, or um consultant, we have a philanthropy arm consultant, we have a philanthropy arm consultant, we have a philanthropy arm of this podcast that funds science with of this podcast that funds science with of this podcast that funds science with collection of donors through our uh collection of donors through our uh collection of donors through our uh premium channel uh that we could talk premium channel uh that we could talk premium channel uh that we could talk about offline, but bring it. about offline, but bring it. about offline, but bring it. Christopher, this was awesome. I confess Christopher, this was awesome. I confess Christopher, this was awesome. I confess I was a little braced for the uh vegan I was a little braced for the uh vegan I was a little braced for the uh vegan versus uh son of an Argentine who likes versus uh son of an Argentine who likes versus uh son of an Argentine who likes steak. um conflict, but we didn't do steak. um conflict, but we didn't do steak. um conflict, but we didn't do that. Actually, I credit you for that. Actually, I credit you for that. Actually, I credit you for navigating this really difficult space navigating this really difficult space navigating this really difficult space that used to be called nutrition that is that used to be called nutrition that is that used to be called nutrition that is now called food patterns um with now called food patterns um with now called food patterns um with incredible grace and incredible grace and incredible grace and incredible dedication to figuring out what people dedication to figuring out what people dedication to figuring out what people can do to make themselves healthier. can do to make themselves healthier. can do to make themselves healthier. It's so clear from today's discussion It's so clear from today's discussion It's so clear from today's discussion that you're not trying to ram veganism that you're not trying to ram veganism that you're not trying to ram veganism down people's throats, nor are you down people's throats, nor are you down people's throats, nor are you disparaging of people's food choices. I disparaging of people's food choices. I disparaging of people's food choices. I you've really highlighted how the food you've really highlighted how the food you've really highlighted how the food supply and these kind of systemic issues supply and these kind of systemic issues supply and these kind of systemic issues are problematic, but they you pointed to are problematic, but they you pointed to are problematic, but they you pointed to some real um potential solutions and um some real um potential solutions and um some real um potential solutions and um I'll be amplifying all of those I'll be amplifying all of those I'll be amplifying all of those solutions as broadly as I can because solutions as broadly as I can because solutions as broadly as I can because I agree with them. I also um love this I agree with them. I also um love this I agree with them. I also um love this notion of the protein flip if I may. Um notion of the protein flip if I may. Um notion of the protein flip if I may. Um plant-based has got to go. Protein flip plant-based has got to go. Protein flip plant-based has got to go. Protein flip is coming in. Um, is coming in. Um, is coming in. Um, and I think it's really important that and I think it's really important that and I think it's really important that people think not just about what they people think not just about what they people think not just about what they eat in terms of calories, but in terms eat in terms of calories, but in terms eat in terms of calories, but in terms of everything from sourcing to how they of everything from sourcing to how they of everything from sourcing to how they interact with food. And as you interact with food. And as you interact with food. And as you highlighted so beautifully, taste is highlighted so beautifully, taste is highlighted so beautifully, taste is vital. So if this conversation and vital. So if this conversation and vital. So if this conversation and others that are sure to stem from it, others that are sure to stem from it, others that are sure to stem from it, um, get people thinking about um, get people thinking about um, get people thinking about interacting with their food differently interacting with their food differently interacting with their food differently and thereby eating more healthily, that and thereby eating more healthily, that and thereby eating more healthily, that would be great. Um, so thanks for taking would be great. Um, so thanks for taking would be great. Um, so thanks for taking time out of your busy schedule time out of your busy schedule time out of your busy schedule tackling the hardest issue in science in tackling the hardest issue in science in tackling the hardest issue in science in my opinion to get your arms around my opinion to get your arms around my opinion to get your arms around and uh coming down here and having a and uh coming down here and having a and uh coming down here and having a conversation. I really enjoyed it. It conversation. I really enjoyed it. It conversation. I really enjoyed it. It was great fun. I just love nutrition. was great fun. I just love nutrition. was great fun. I just love nutrition. It's really complicated. Um, but it It's really complicated. Um, but it It's really complicated. Um, but it doesn't have to be. There can really be doesn't have to be. There can really be doesn't have to be. There can really be a lot more consensus than controversy if a lot more consensus than controversy if a lot more consensus than controversy if you can have this kind of exchange and you can have this kind of exchange and you can have this kind of exchange and explain some of the nuance behind it. explain some of the nuance behind it. explain some of the nuance behind it. And there really is a lot that we don't And there really is a lot that we don't And there really is a lot that we don't know. And so there's a room for a lot of know. And so there's a room for a lot of know. And so there's a room for a lot of different diets out there and you should different diets out there and you should different diets out there and you should find the one that works best for you. find the one that works best for you. find the one that works best for you. But I hope we can help people with some But I hope we can help people with some But I hope we can help people with some of the foundational principles and there of the foundational principles and there of the foundational principles and there are many of them that don't change. are many of them that don't change. are many of them that don't change. There are some basics to nutrition and There are some basics to nutrition and There are some basics to nutrition and many people don't follow the basics. many people don't follow the basics. many people don't follow the basics. They eat too much crappy food. So let's They eat too much crappy food. So let's They eat too much crappy food. So let's aspire to eat a healthful, aspire to eat a healthful, aspire to eat a healthful, environmentally sound, environmentally sound, environmentally sound, tasty diet. Amen to that. Thanks tasty diet. Amen to that. Thanks tasty diet. Amen to that. Thanks Christopher. Pleasure. Thank you for Christopher. Pleasure. Thank you for Christopher. Pleasure. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Christopher Gardner. To learn more Dr. Christopher Gardner. To learn more Dr. Christopher Gardner. To learn more about Dr. Gardner's work and to find about Dr. Gardner's work and to find about Dr. Gardner's work and to find links to the various resources we links to the various resources we links to the various resources we discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from andor captions. If you're learning from andor captions. If you're learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social not already following me on social not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Christopher today's discussion with Dr. Christopher today's discussion with Dr. Christopher Gardner. And last, but certainly not Gardner. And last, but certainly not Gardner. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]