Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring you zero-cost to effort to bring you zero-cost to effort to bring you zero-cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. reach your health goals. reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting regular blood tests, and the simple regular blood tests, and the simple regular blood tests, and the simple reason for that is that so many of the reason for that is that so many of the reason for that is that so many of the factors that impact our immediate and factors that impact our immediate and factors that impact our immediate and long-term health and well-being can only long-term health and well-being can only long-term health and well-being can only be analyzed from blood. And now, with be analyzed from blood. And now, with be analyzed from blood. And now, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can the advent of modern DNA tests, you can the advent of modern DNA tests, you can get additional layers of information get additional layers of information get additional layers of information that can really support your that can really support your that can really support your understanding about what's going on deep understanding about what's going on deep understanding about what's going on deep under the hood, so to speak, inside your under the hood, so to speak, inside your under the hood, so to speak, inside your body and brain, and what to do about it. body and brain, and what to do about it. body and brain, and what to do about it. And I think that's really where And I think that's really where And I think that's really where InsideTracker sets itself apart from InsideTracker sets itself apart from InsideTracker sets itself apart from other similar tests. other similar tests. other similar tests. What InsideTracker offers is, first of What InsideTracker offers is, first of What InsideTracker offers is, first of all, they make the tests very easy. They all, they make the tests very easy. They all, they make the tests very easy. They can come to your home to take your blood can come to your home to take your blood can come to your home to take your blood and DNA test, or you can go to a testing and DNA test, or you can go to a testing and DNA test, or you can go to a testing center nearby you. center nearby you. center nearby you. Then you get the information back, and Then you get the information back, and Then you get the information back, and rather than just getting information rather than just getting information rather than just getting information about whether or not the levels of about whether or not the levels of about whether or not the levels of various things are high or low, various things are high or low, various things are high or low, you also get to find out what to do you also get to find out what to do you also get to find out what to do about it. So, it offers directives about it. So, it offers directives about it. So, it offers directives related to nutrition, to exercise, and related to nutrition, to exercise, and related to nutrition, to exercise, and so forth. It really allow you to be in so forth. It really allow you to be in so forth. It really allow you to be in control of your overall health, both control of your overall health, both control of your overall health, both where you are now and its long-term where you are now and its long-term where you are now and its long-term trajectory. With InsideTracker, With InsideTracker, With InsideTracker, they also have something which is it can they also have something which is it can they also have something which is it can give you a read out of your inner age. give you a read out of your inner age. give you a read out of your inner age. They have something called the inner age They have something called the inner age They have something called the inner age test that really compares your test that really compares your test that really compares your biological age to your chronological biological age to your chronological biological age to your chronological age, something that's of extreme age, something that's of extreme age, something that's of extreme importance and interest because it has importance and interest because it has importance and interest because it has to do with lifespan or predicted to do with lifespan or predicted to do with lifespan or predicted lifespan. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman can visit insidetracker.com/huberman can visit insidetracker.com/huberman and if you do that, you'll get 25% off and if you do that, you'll get 25% off and if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout. That's code Huberman at checkout. That's code Huberman at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans and use the code Huberman at plans and use the code Huberman at plans and use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also checkout. Today's episode is also checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep is a company that makes mattresses Sleep is a company that makes mattresses Sleep is a company that makes mattresses and pillows ideally suited to your sleep and pillows ideally suited to your sleep and pillows ideally suited to your sleep needs. I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress for the last 6 months and I can honestly for the last 6 months and I can honestly for the last 6 months and I can honestly say it's the best sleep that I've ever say it's the best sleep that I've ever say it's the best sleep that I've ever gotten. Helix Sleep has a quiz that can match Helix Sleep has a quiz that can match Helix Sleep has a quiz that can match you to the ideal mattress and pillows you to the ideal mattress and pillows you to the ideal mattress and pillows for you. for you. for you. It's a quiz that takes just about 2 It's a quiz that takes just about 2 It's a quiz that takes just about 2 minutes, asks you questions like do you minutes, asks you questions like do you minutes, asks you questions like do you tend to sleep on your side or your back tend to sleep on your side or your back tend to sleep on your side or your back or on your stomach or maybe you don't or on your stomach or maybe you don't or on your stomach or maybe you don't know whether or not you tend to wake up know whether or not you tend to wake up know whether or not you tend to wake up feeling too warm or too cold, various feeling too warm or too cold, various feeling too warm or too cold, various questions about your sleep habits. questions about your sleep habits. questions about your sleep habits. At the end of that quiz, it matches you At the end of that quiz, it matches you At the end of that quiz, it matches you to a specific mattress that's perfect to a specific mattress that's perfect to a specific mattress that's perfect for your sleep needs. For me, it matched for your sleep needs. For me, it matched for your sleep needs. For me, it matched me to the Dusk, DUSK, because I wanted a me to the Dusk, DUSK, because I wanted a me to the Dusk, DUSK, because I wanted a mattress that wasn't too for firm nor mattress that wasn't too for firm nor mattress that wasn't too for firm nor too soft and I really love the mattress. too soft and I really love the mattress. too soft and I really love the mattress. As I mentioned, I've been sleeping As I mentioned, I've been sleeping As I mentioned, I've been sleeping terrifically well ever since I got that terrifically well ever since I got that terrifically well ever since I got that mattress. If you're interested in upgrading your If you're interested in upgrading your If you're interested in upgrading your mattress, you can go to mattress, you can go to mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their 2-minute sleep quiz and take their 2-minute sleep quiz and take their 2-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized mattress and then you'll get up to $200 mattress and then you'll get up to $200 mattress and then you'll get up to $200 off all mattresses and you'll get two off all mattresses and you'll get two off all mattresses and you'll get two free pillows. free pillows. free pillows. They have a 10-year warranty. You get to They have a 10-year warranty. You get to They have a 10-year warranty. You get to try it out for 100 nights risk-free. If try it out for 100 nights risk-free. If try it out for 100 nights risk-free. If you don't like it, they'll even pick it you don't like it, they'll even pick it you don't like it, they'll even pick it up for free, take it away. up for free, take it away. up for free, take it away. Uh but I really think you will. I Uh but I really think you will. I Uh but I really think you will. I certainly love mine. Again, if you're certainly love mine. Again, if you're certainly love mine. Again, if you're interested, you can go to interested, you can go to interested, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. for up to $200 off and two free pillows. for up to $200 off and two free pillows. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Theragun. Theragun is a handheld Theragun. Theragun is a handheld Theragun. Theragun is a handheld percussive therapy device that releases percussive therapy device that releases percussive therapy device that releases deep muscle tension. deep muscle tension. deep muscle tension. I first learned about Theragun on a lab I first learned about Theragun on a lab I first learned about Theragun on a lab expedition. We're actually headed out to expedition. We're actually headed out to expedition. We're actually headed out to ocean where we were doing diving with ocean where we were doing diving with ocean where we were doing diving with great white sharks, filming those for great white sharks, filming those for great white sharks, filming those for our VR fear experiments in the our VR fear experiments in the our VR fear experiments in the laboratory. And it was very long days of laboratory. And it was very long days of laboratory. And it was very long days of carrying Pelican cases. Those are cases, carrying Pelican cases. Those are cases, carrying Pelican cases. Those are cases, these hard uh plastic cases with these hard uh plastic cases with these hard uh plastic cases with equipment. It was diving. We were all equipment. It was diving. We were all equipment. It was diving. We were all sore and tired all the time. And someone sore and tired all the time. And someone sore and tired all the time. And someone had brought along a Theragun. It was the had brought along a Theragun. It was the had brought along a Theragun. It was the first time I had seen one. And pretty first time I had seen one. And pretty first time I had seen one. And pretty soon that thing was getting passed along soon that thing was getting passed along soon that thing was getting passed along and became one of the more coveted and became one of the more coveted and became one of the more coveted devices on board. Everyone wanted time devices on board. Everyone wanted time devices on board. Everyone wanted time with this thing because it was great. with this thing because it was great. with this thing because it was great. You could give yourself a really You could give yourself a really You could give yourself a really terrific massage terrific massage terrific massage and get deep into the tissue and relieve and get deep into the tissue and relieve and get deep into the tissue and relieve soreness. When I got back, I got a Theragun. And When I got back, I got a Theragun. And When I got back, I got a Theragun. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. the podcast. the podcast. Whether or not you want to treat your Whether or not you want to treat your Whether or not you want to treat your muscles because they're tense from muscles because they're tense from muscles because they're tense from working out or whether or not you just working out or whether or not you just working out or whether or not you just want to release stress, it's a terrific want to release stress, it's a terrific want to release stress, it's a terrific tool. Many of you are familiar probably with Many of you are familiar probably with Many of you are familiar probably with professional massages, but uh Theragun professional massages, but uh Theragun professional massages, but uh Theragun is interesting because you can basically is interesting because you can basically is interesting because you can basically give yourself a deep tissue massage give yourself a deep tissue massage give yourself a deep tissue massage anytime, anywhere. It's also very quiet. anytime, anywhere. It's also very quiet. anytime, anywhere. It's also very quiet. If you want to try Theragun, you can try If you want to try Theragun, you can try If you want to try Theragun, you can try it for 30 days. They start at only $199. it for 30 days. They start at only $199. it for 30 days. They start at only $199. You can go to theragun.com/huberman You can go to theragun.com/huberman You can go to theragun.com/huberman right now and you can get your Gen 4 right now and you can get your Gen 4 right now and you can get your Gen 4 Theragun today. That's the one that I Theragun today. That's the one that I Theragun today. That's the one that I use or another one of their models. use or another one of their models. use or another one of their models. That's theragun.com/huberman That's theragun.com/huberman That's theragun.com/huberman to try Theragun. to try Theragun. to try Theragun. This episode marks the beginning of a This episode marks the beginning of a This episode marks the beginning of a new topic for the Huberman Lab podcast. new topic for the Huberman Lab podcast. new topic for the Huberman Lab podcast. As many of you already know, we go deep As many of you already know, we go deep As many of you already know, we go deep into a particular topic over four, into a particular topic over four, into a particular topic over four, sometimes even five episodes. We just sometimes even five episodes. We just sometimes even five episodes. We just closed out the episodes on hormones. Now closed out the episodes on hormones. Now closed out the episodes on hormones. Now we are going to talk about how to we are going to talk about how to we are going to talk about how to optimize physical performance and skill optimize physical performance and skill optimize physical performance and skill learning. We're going to look deep at the science We're going to look deep at the science We're going to look deep at the science behind this as well as specific behind this as well as specific behind this as well as specific practices. In fact, today you're going practices. In fact, today you're going practices. In fact, today you're going to hear about specific tools that you to hear about specific tools that you to hear about specific tools that you can use to improve endurance and can use to improve endurance and can use to improve endurance and strength by up to, I'm not making this strength by up to, I'm not making this strength by up to, I'm not making this up, three or four times your current up, three or four times your current up, three or four times your current capacity. This is based on studies that were done This is based on studies that were done This is based on studies that were done at Stanford and are currently in use by at Stanford and are currently in use by at Stanford and are currently in use by collegiate and professional teams. collegiate and professional teams. collegiate and professional teams. If you're not a professional athlete or If you're not a professional athlete or If you're not a professional athlete or a serious athlete, that's okay. The a serious athlete, that's okay. The a serious athlete, that's okay. The topics this month and all the topics this month and all the topics this month and all the information we are going to cover are information we are going to cover are information we are going to cover are going to make you a better recreational going to make you a better recreational going to make you a better recreational exerciser as well. exerciser as well. exerciser as well. If you're not an exerciser and you're If you're not an exerciser and you're If you're not an exerciser and you're thinking about getting into that, or if thinking about getting into that, or if thinking about getting into that, or if you live in the northern hemisphere and you live in the northern hemisphere and you live in the northern hemisphere and you're just thinking about the beach you're just thinking about the beach you're just thinking about the beach this summer, fat loss, muscle building, this summer, fat loss, muscle building, this summer, fat loss, muscle building, that sort of thing, this month we're that sort of thing, this month we're that sort of thing, this month we're going to cover all of that as well. going to cover all of that as well. going to cover all of that as well. There's so much confusion out there There's so much confusion out there There's so much confusion out there about how to optimize fat loss, muscle about how to optimize fat loss, muscle about how to optimize fat loss, muscle building, improvements in flexibility building, improvements in flexibility building, improvements in flexibility for instance, or skill learning. I know for instance, or skill learning. I know for instance, or skill learning. I know many of you aren't so focused on the many of you aren't so focused on the many of you aren't so focused on the cosmetic aspects of physical exercise, cosmetic aspects of physical exercise, cosmetic aspects of physical exercise, but are interested in actual skill but are interested in actual skill but are interested in actual skill learning. We're going to talk about learning. We're going to talk about learning. We're going to talk about that, too. that, too. that, too. I want to just take us moment to reflect I want to just take us moment to reflect I want to just take us moment to reflect on something that came up last episode. on something that came up last episode. on something that came up last episode. If you didn't see that episode, that's If you didn't see that episode, that's If you didn't see that episode, that's quite all right. But, last episode we quite all right. But, last episode we quite all right. But, last episode we were talking about the hormones were talking about the hormones were talking about the hormones adrenaline and cortisol and how to adrenaline and cortisol and how to adrenaline and cortisol and how to leverage those towards attention and leverage those towards attention and leverage those towards attention and learning. And there was a little bit of learning. And there was a little bit of learning. And there was a little bit of confusion that I want to clarify. I confusion that I want to clarify. I confusion that I want to clarify. I mentioned an optimal protocol for mentioned an optimal protocol for mentioned an optimal protocol for learning that involved leveraging learning that involved leveraging learning that involved leveraging adrenaline, also called epinephrine. And adrenaline, also called epinephrine. And adrenaline, also called epinephrine. And it involved four steps. The four steps it involved four steps. The four steps it involved four steps. The four steps that I spelled out were to be calm and that I spelled out were to be calm and that I spelled out were to be calm and focused while one is trying to acquire focused while one is trying to acquire focused while one is trying to acquire or learn the new skill, cognitive skill or learn the new skill, cognitive skill or learn the new skill, cognitive skill or motor skill. Then to have a spike in or motor skill. Then to have a spike in or motor skill. Then to have a spike in adrenaline. I mentioned ways to do that adrenaline. I mentioned ways to do that adrenaline. I mentioned ways to do that using cold or breathing or other tools. using cold or breathing or other tools. using cold or breathing or other tools. Immediately after the learning episode, Immediately after the learning episode, Immediately after the learning episode, then to incorporate what I call then to incorporate what I call then to incorporate what I call non-sleep deep rest, a 20-minute episode non-sleep deep rest, a 20-minute episode non-sleep deep rest, a 20-minute episode of a shallow nap or some other protocol of a shallow nap or some other protocol of a shallow nap or some other protocol like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocol, like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocol, like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocol, of which we always provide links in the of which we always provide links in the of which we always provide links in the captions. And then to try and optimize sleep later And then to try and optimize sleep later And then to try and optimize sleep later that night and the subsequent night. that night and the subsequent night. that night and the subsequent night. Some of you heard this and it sunk in Some of you heard this and it sunk in Some of you heard this and it sunk in right away and it was straightforward. right away and it was straightforward. right away and it was straightforward. Others said, "Wait, I thought from a Others said, "Wait, I thought from a Others said, "Wait, I thought from a previous episode even before that, you previous episode even before that, you previous episode even before that, you said you're supposed to do non-sleep said you're supposed to do non-sleep said you're supposed to do non-sleep deep rest immediately after learning." deep rest immediately after learning." deep rest immediately after learning." No. We added another step. The logic still We added another step. The logic still We added another step. The logic still follows that you want to be calm and follows that you want to be calm and follows that you want to be calm and focused during learning. Then you want focused during learning. Then you want focused during learning. Then you want to spike adrenaline at the end. Most to spike adrenaline at the end. Most to spike adrenaline at the end. Most people get that backward. They're people get that backward. They're people get that backward. They're drinking too much coffee or even taking drinking too much coffee or even taking drinking too much coffee or even taking nootropics and things trying to be nootropics and things trying to be nootropics and things trying to be really focused while learning. Some really focused while learning. Some really focused while learning. Some people are taking Adderall people are taking Adderall people are taking Adderall recreationally, something I don't recreationally, something I don't recreationally, something I don't recommend. That's actually getting the recommend. That's actually getting the recommend. That's actually getting the whole process backwards if you look at whole process backwards if you look at whole process backwards if you look at the data and the physiology. You want to the data and the physiology. You want to the data and the physiology. You want to spike adrenaline at the end or spike adrenaline at the end or spike adrenaline at the end or immediately after a learning episode and immediately after a learning episode and immediately after a learning episode and then non-sleep deep rest and then sleep then non-sleep deep rest and then sleep then non-sleep deep rest and then sleep itself. Okay, four steps. Hope that itself. Okay, four steps. Hope that itself. Okay, four steps. Hope that clarifies things for you. If you have clarifies things for you. If you have clarifies things for you. If you have any additional questions, please put any additional questions, please put any additional questions, please put them in the comments section below. them in the comments section below. them in the comments section below. Okay, so let's talk about physical Okay, so let's talk about physical Okay, so let's talk about physical performance. There are so many variables performance. There are so many variables performance. There are so many variables to physical performance to physical performance to physical performance and we can manage physical performance and we can manage physical performance and we can manage physical performance and skill learning from a variety of and skill learning from a variety of and skill learning from a variety of contexts. I made just a short list of some of the I made just a short list of some of the I made just a short list of some of the things that come to mind that can things that come to mind that can things that come to mind that can powerfully impact physical performance powerfully impact physical performance powerfully impact physical performance and skill learning. and skill learning. and skill learning. Some of them are what I would consider Some of them are what I would consider Some of them are what I would consider foundational. They allow you to show up foundational. They allow you to show up foundational. They allow you to show up with your current ability. And if you with your current ability. And if you with your current ability. And if you were to disrupt those, you would perform were to disrupt those, you would perform were to disrupt those, you would perform less well. So things like getting a good less well. So things like getting a good less well. So things like getting a good night's sleep, things like being night's sleep, things like being night's sleep, things like being properly hydrated, things like being properly hydrated, things like being properly hydrated, things like being well nourished, whatever that means to well nourished, whatever that means to well nourished, whatever that means to you. I know some of you like to exercise you. I know some of you like to exercise you. I know some of you like to exercise fasted. Some of you prefer to have food fasted. Some of you prefer to have food fasted. Some of you prefer to have food in your stomach or have eaten a couple in your stomach or have eaten a couple in your stomach or have eaten a couple hours before. hours before. hours before. There are supplements. There are drugs. There are supplements. There are drugs. There are supplements. There are drugs. There are different ways to breathe. There are different ways to breathe. There are different ways to breathe. There are so many tools related to There are so many tools related to There are so many tools related to mindset, visualization. There are mindset, visualization. There are mindset, visualization. There are machines and devices. It's just a vast machines and devices. It's just a vast machines and devices. It's just a vast space, but it's not infinite. but it's not infinite. but it's not infinite. And there are a few things And there are a few things And there are a few things in the list of things that can impact in the list of things that can impact in the list of things that can impact and even optimize physical performance and even optimize physical performance and even optimize physical performance and skill learning that have an outsized and skill learning that have an outsized and skill learning that have an outsized effect that any of you can use. Many of effect that any of you can use. Many of effect that any of you can use. Many of them, most of them are low to zero cost. them, most of them are low to zero cost. them, most of them are low to zero cost. So, today we are going to focus on what So, today we are going to focus on what So, today we are going to focus on what I believe to be one of the most powerful I believe to be one of the most powerful I believe to be one of the most powerful tools to improve physical performance tools to improve physical performance tools to improve physical performance and skill learning and recovery. We'll and skill learning and recovery. We'll and skill learning and recovery. We'll talk about why that's important. talk about why that's important. talk about why that's important. And that's temperature. And that's temperature. And that's temperature. Now, many of you might think, "Oh, well, Now, many of you might think, "Oh, well, Now, many of you might think, "Oh, well, that's kind of boring. I want to know that's kind of boring. I want to know that's kind of boring. I want to know about the magic pill that I can take about the magic pill that I can take about the magic pill that I can take that's going to allow me to dunk a that's going to allow me to dunk a that's going to allow me to dunk a basketball if I currently can't, or I basketball if I currently can't, or I basketball if I currently can't, or I want to know about the thing that's want to know about the thing that's want to know about the thing that's going to let me run further and faster, going to let me run further and faster, going to let me run further and faster, is going to shed fat." Believe it or is going to shed fat." Believe it or is going to shed fat." Believe it or not, temperature is the most powerful not, temperature is the most powerful not, temperature is the most powerful variable for improving physical performance and for improving physical performance and for improving physical performance and for recovery. for recovery. for recovery. I would argue it's even more important I would argue it's even more important I would argue it's even more important than sleep because temperature itself is than sleep because temperature itself is than sleep because temperature itself is going to dictate how well and when you going to dictate how well and when you going to dictate how well and when you sleep and the depth of your total sleep and the depth of your total sleep and the depth of your total recovery. There are two aspects to temperature, of There are two aspects to temperature, of There are two aspects to temperature, of course. There's heat and there's cold. There's heat and there's cold. There's heat and there's cold. We are mainly going to focus on cold as We are mainly going to focus on cold as We are mainly going to focus on cold as a way to buffer heat. In a previous a way to buffer heat. In a previous a way to buffer heat. In a previous podcast episode, I talked all about podcast episode, I talked all about podcast episode, I talked all about growth hormone. You can find that growth hormone. You can find that growth hormone. You can find that episode about thyroid and growth hormone episode about thyroid and growth hormone episode about thyroid and growth hormone and how heat can be a powerful stimulus and how heat can be a powerful stimulus and how heat can be a powerful stimulus for increasing growth hormone, which is for increasing growth hormone, which is for increasing growth hormone, which is involved in tissue repair and etc., can involved in tissue repair and etc., can involved in tissue repair and etc., can burn fat and improve metabolism in burn fat and improve metabolism in burn fat and improve metabolism in various ways. various ways. various ways. However, cold, I would argue, is even However, cold, I would argue, is even However, cold, I would argue, is even more powerful than heat as a tool, and more powerful than heat as a tool, and more powerful than heat as a tool, and I'm not just talking about putting ice I'm not just talking about putting ice I'm not just talking about putting ice packs on sore muscles or slightly packs on sore muscles or slightly packs on sore muscles or slightly sprained limbs and ankles and things of sprained limbs and ankles and things of sprained limbs and ankles and things of that sort. We're going to talk about that sort. We're going to talk about that sort. We're going to talk about cold from the standpoint of thermal cold from the standpoint of thermal cold from the standpoint of thermal physiology. This is a literature that's physiology. This is a literature that's physiology. This is a literature that's rich in scientific information that goes rich in scientific information that goes rich in scientific information that goes back very deep into the last century back very deep into the last century back very deep into the last century where physiologists and neuroscientists where physiologists and neuroscientists where physiologists and neuroscientists figured out that there are different figured out that there are different figured out that there are different compartments in your body that heat and compartments in your body that heat and compartments in your body that heat and cool you differently and that you can cool you differently and that you can cool you differently and that you can leverage those in order to double and as leverage those in order to double and as leverage those in order to double and as I mentioned before even triple or I mentioned before even triple or I mentioned before even triple or quadruple your work output both quadruple your work output both quadruple your work output both strength, repetitions and endurance. So strength, repetitions and endurance. So strength, repetitions and endurance. So this is not weak sauces they say this is this is not weak sauces they say this is this is not weak sauces they say this is the stuff that can really shift the stuff that can really shift the stuff that can really shift the needle quite a bit and it's not just needle quite a bit and it's not just needle quite a bit and it's not just about performing well once. about performing well once. about performing well once. It's about being able to perform well It's about being able to perform well It's about being able to perform well and recover from that performance so and recover from that performance so and recover from that performance so that you do even better when you're not that you do even better when you're not that you do even better when you're not incorporating these tools. incorporating these tools. incorporating these tools. On days where for instance you can't On days where for instance you can't On days where for instance you can't access cold or an ice pack or an ice access cold or an ice pack or an ice access cold or an ice pack or an ice bath or things of that sort. Okay, so bath or things of that sort. Okay, so bath or things of that sort. Okay, so we're going to cover cold. We're going we're going to cover cold. We're going we're going to cover cold. We're going to talk a little bit about the to talk a little bit about the to talk a little bit about the physiology of cold and heat and how they physiology of cold and heat and how they physiology of cold and heat and how they work because work because work because as you've probably heard me say before as you've probably heard me say before as you've probably heard me say before if you can understand some mechanism, if you can understand some mechanism, if you can understand some mechanism, if you can just push yourself through a you can just push yourself through a you can just push yourself through a little bit of new knowledge into little bit of new knowledge into little bit of new knowledge into understanding a little bit of mechanism understanding a little bit of mechanism understanding a little bit of mechanism about how you work, you will be in a far about how you work, you will be in a far about how you work, you will be in a far better position to implement the tools better position to implement the tools better position to implement the tools in the best and most flexible ways for in the best and most flexible ways for in the best and most flexible ways for your needs. This is why at the Huberman your needs. This is why at the Huberman your needs. This is why at the Huberman Lab Podcast I never ever do a just list Lab Podcast I never ever do a just list Lab Podcast I never ever do a just list of the things that you should do. I of the things that you should do. I of the things that you should do. I don't believe in the just tell me what don't believe in the just tell me what don't believe in the just tell me what to do. First I tell you why you should to do. First I tell you why you should to do. First I tell you why you should do something. What's the logical do something. What's the logical do something. What's the logical framework that it's grounded in and then framework that it's grounded in and then framework that it's grounded in and then we distill that down to specific we distill that down to specific we distill that down to specific protocols. For those of you that are too protocols. For those of you that are too protocols. For those of you that are too impatient for that there are impatient for that there are impatient for that there are millions if not billions of other millions if not billions of other millions if not billions of other resources out there that will take you resources out there that will take you resources out there that will take you into the cul-de-sac of one protocol that into the cul-de-sac of one protocol that into the cul-de-sac of one protocol that will work and then stop working or might will work and then stop working or might will work and then stop working or might work for you indefinitely. That's not work for you indefinitely. That's not work for you indefinitely. That's not how we work here. This is about really how we work here. This is about really how we work here. This is about really understanding the mechanism so that you understanding the mechanism so that you understanding the mechanism so that you can tweak things and modify things, can tweak things and modify things, can tweak things and modify things, adjust the timing and the dosage of adjust the timing and the dosage of adjust the timing and the dosage of things and really get the most out of things and really get the most out of things and really get the most out of these tools and protocols. these tools and protocols. these tools and protocols. Everything I'm going to talk about Everything I'm going to talk about Everything I'm going to talk about pertains to both endurance exercise and pertains to both endurance exercise and pertains to both endurance exercise and strength and speed type exercise. So strength and speed type exercise. So strength and speed type exercise. So sprints, weightlifting, endurance work sprints, weightlifting, endurance work sprints, weightlifting, endurance work and to some extent flexibility, but we and to some extent flexibility, but we and to some extent flexibility, but we are going to cover flexibility in depth, are going to cover flexibility in depth, are going to cover flexibility in depth, as well as another feature that's not as well as another feature that's not as well as another feature that's not often talked about, which is suppleness often talked about, which is suppleness often talked about, which is suppleness or smoothness of movement over different or smoothness of movement over different or smoothness of movement over different ranges of movement in a subsequent ranges of movement in a subsequent ranges of movement in a subsequent episode. Let's start by talking about Let's start by talking about Let's start by talking about temperature. What is temperature? temperature. What is temperature? temperature. What is temperature? How does temperature impact the body and How does temperature impact the body and How does temperature impact the body and its ability to perform, including learn its ability to perform, including learn its ability to perform, including learn new skills? new skills? new skills? So, everyone probably remembers or has So, everyone probably remembers or has So, everyone probably remembers or has at least heard of the word homeostasis, at least heard of the word homeostasis, at least heard of the word homeostasis, right? That the body wants to remain in right? That the body wants to remain in right? That the body wants to remain in a particular range of temperatures. That a particular range of temperatures. That a particular range of temperatures. That it doesn't like to be too hot or too it doesn't like to be too hot or too it doesn't like to be too hot or too cold. And I want to emphasize from the cold. And I want to emphasize from the cold. And I want to emphasize from the outset that there are many mechanisms that are that there are many mechanisms that are that there are many mechanisms that are installed into us by way of our installed into us by way of our installed into us by way of our evolutionary design and our genome, evolutionary design and our genome, evolutionary design and our genome, meaning we were just born with meaning we were just born with meaning we were just born with this stuff ready to keep our body this stuff ready to keep our body this stuff ready to keep our body temperature in a particular narrow temperature in a particular narrow temperature in a particular narrow range. Heating up too much is just plain bad. Heating up too much is just plain bad. Heating up too much is just plain bad. It's not just bad for physical It's not just bad for physical It's not just bad for physical performance, it's bad for all tissue performance, it's bad for all tissue performance, it's bad for all tissue health. If your brain heats up too much, neurons If your brain heats up too much, neurons If your brain heats up too much, neurons start dying, start dying, start dying, and those neurons don't come back. Okay? and those neurons don't come back. Okay? and those neurons don't come back. Okay? You may have heard about neurogenesis, You may have heard about neurogenesis, You may have heard about neurogenesis, the ability for the brain to regenerate the ability for the brain to regenerate the ability for the brain to regenerate itself or generate new neurons in itself or generate new neurons in itself or generate new neurons in adulthood. There's very little neurogen- adulthood. There's very little neurogen- adulthood. There's very little neurogen- neurogenesis, excuse me, neurogenesis, excuse me, neurogenesis, excuse me, in adulthood, even after anytime after in adulthood, even after anytime after in adulthood, even after anytime after puberty, really. puberty, really. puberty, really. And you don't want to lose neurons in the you don't want to lose neurons in the you don't want to lose neurons in the central nervous system. If you get too central nervous system. If you get too central nervous system. If you get too hot, that'll happen. It's called hot, that'll happen. It's called hot, that'll happen. It's called hyperthermia. You want to avoid hyperthermia. You want to avoid hyperthermia. You want to avoid hyperthermia, and you have many hyperthermia, and you have many hyperthermia, and you have many mechanisms that are built into you to mechanisms that are built into you to mechanisms that are built into you to avoid becoming hyperthermic. avoid becoming hyperthermic. avoid becoming hyperthermic. The other thing that happens when we get The other thing that happens when we get The other thing that happens when we get too warm is that we have in all of our too warm is that we have in all of our too warm is that we have in all of our cells what are called enzymes. cells what are called enzymes. cells what are called enzymes. You generally know if something's an You generally know if something's an You generally know if something's an enzyme because it ends in the letters A enzyme because it ends in the letters A enzyme because it ends in the letters A S E, right? So, lipase is an enzyme that S E, right? So, lipase is an enzyme that S E, right? So, lipase is an enzyme that exists to digest fats. exists to digest fats. exists to digest fats. You have proteases that are there to You have proteases that are there to You have proteases that are there to digest proteins, right? So, anytime you digest proteins, right? So, anytime you digest proteins, right? So, anytime you see ASE, chances are it's an enzyme. see ASE, chances are it's an enzyme. see ASE, chances are it's an enzyme. Enzymes are proteins and they have a particular structure and they have a particular structure and they have a particular structure and their structure becomes modified when their structure becomes modified when their structure becomes modified when heat increases and that's not good. You heat increases and that's not good. You heat increases and that's not good. You want their structure to be of a want their structure to be of a want their structure to be of a particular type. Imagine a car with four particular type. Imagine a car with four particular type. Imagine a car with four wheels. Let's just say the car is the wheels. Let's just say the car is the wheels. Let's just say the car is the enzyme. If it gets too hot, enzyme. If it gets too hot, enzyme. If it gets too hot, it's like two of the wheels fall off and it's like two of the wheels fall off and it's like two of the wheels fall off and that thing can't function. So, one of that thing can't function. So, one of that thing can't function. So, one of the reasons why the body and nature goes the reasons why the body and nature goes the reasons why the body and nature goes through so much effort to build in through so much effort to build in through so much effort to build in mechanisms to make sure that we don't mechanisms to make sure that we don't mechanisms to make sure that we don't become too warm is because when we get become too warm is because when we get become too warm is because when we get too warm, these enzymes don't function, too warm, these enzymes don't function, too warm, these enzymes don't function, cells stop functioning, they stop being cells stop functioning, they stop being cells stop functioning, they stop being able to generate energy, they stop being able to generate energy, they stop being able to generate energy, they stop being able to digest things, you stop being able to digest things, you stop being able to digest things, you stop being able to think and able to think and able to think and eventually those cells start dying off eventually those cells start dying off eventually those cells start dying off entirely. So, keeping temperature in a entirely. So, keeping temperature in a entirely. So, keeping temperature in a particular range is really good. You particular range is really good. You particular range is really good. You don't want to get too hot. We have much don't want to get too hot. We have much don't want to get too hot. We have much more flexibility in terms of getting more flexibility in terms of getting more flexibility in terms of getting cold. Now, you don't want to become cold. Now, you don't want to become cold. Now, you don't want to become hypothermic, either. You can die from hypothermic, either. You can die from hypothermic, either. You can die from hypothermia just like you can die from hypothermia just like you can die from hypothermia just like you can die from hyperthermia. However, that you have a lot more that you have a lot more that you have a lot more range to be cold than you do to be too warm. to be cold than you do to be too warm. to be cold than you do to be too warm. Okay? And in general, Okay? And in general, Okay? And in general, the idea is to keep the body and brain the idea is to keep the body and brain the idea is to keep the body and brain in a particular range, but anytime we do in a particular range, but anytime we do in a particular range, but anytime we do anything, our body temperature can shift. So, for our body temperature can shift. So, for our body temperature can shift. So, for instance, if you were to stand next to a campfire if you were to stand next to a campfire if you were to stand next to a campfire or you were outside on a hot day, or you were outside on a hot day, or you were outside on a hot day, various things would happen to dump heat various things would happen to dump heat various things would happen to dump heat from your body. from your body. from your body. If you were outside on a cold day or you If you were outside on a cold day or you If you were outside on a cold day or you would get into a cold shower or cold would get into a cold shower or cold would get into a cold shower or cold lake, various things would happen to lake, various things would happen to lake, various things would happen to insulate heat within your body. This is insulate heat within your body. This is insulate heat within your body. This is all pretty straightforward and obvious, all pretty straightforward and obvious, all pretty straightforward and obvious, I realize. Now, what are those things? I realize. Now, what are those things? I realize. Now, what are those things? Well, there are a huge category of them. Well, there are a huge category of them. Well, there are a huge category of them. When you get into cold water, you When you get into cold water, you When you get into cold water, you secrete adrenaline. secrete adrenaline. secrete adrenaline. On a hot day, if it's really hot or in a On a hot day, if it's really hot or in a On a hot day, if it's really hot or in a very hot sauna or in the hot desert, you very hot sauna or in the hot desert, you very hot sauna or in the hot desert, you will generate what are called heat shock will generate what are called heat shock will generate what are called heat shock proteins, which will set off other sets proteins, which will set off other sets proteins, which will set off other sets of cascades, metabolic cascades, of cascades, metabolic cascades, of cascades, metabolic cascades, biological cascades. biological cascades. biological cascades. But, the simplest way to think about But, the simplest way to think about But, the simplest way to think about this process is that when we get cold, this process is that when we get cold, this process is that when we get cold, we tend to vasoconstrict. We tend our we tend to vasoconstrict. We tend our we tend to vasoconstrict. We tend our blood vessels tend to constrict and we blood vessels tend to constrict and we blood vessels tend to constrict and we tend to push energy toward the core of tend to push energy toward the core of tend to push energy toward the core of our body to preserve our core organs. our body to preserve our core organs. our body to preserve our core organs. Okay? So, our periphery, our hands and Okay? So, our periphery, our hands and Okay? So, our periphery, our hands and our feet and our toes and our legs our feet and our toes and our legs our feet and our toes and our legs become colder and our core therefore can become colder and our core therefore can become colder and our core therefore can maintain blood to that area and we are maintain blood to that area and we are maintain blood to that area and we are insulating our core. insulating our core. insulating our core. Conversely, when we heat up, our blood Conversely, when we heat up, our blood Conversely, when we heat up, our blood vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit and more blood flows to our periphery and more blood flows to our periphery and more blood flows to our periphery and more blood can move throughout the and more blood can move throughout the and more blood can move throughout the body generally and we will perspire. We body generally and we will perspire. We body generally and we will perspire. We will sweat. Water will actually get will sweat. Water will actually get will sweat. Water will actually get pulled out of the blood to some extent, pulled out of the blood to some extent, pulled out of the blood to some extent, moved up through sweat glands and will moved up through sweat glands and will moved up through sweat glands and will be brought to the skin surface so that be brought to the skin surface so that be brought to the skin surface so that it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. Animals, as you know, vary in their Animals, as you know, vary in their Animals, as you know, vary in their capacity to sweat. Some animals like capacity to sweat. Some animals like capacity to sweat. Some animals like camels won't start sweating at first if camels won't start sweating at first if camels won't start sweating at first if they heat up. What they'll do is they'll they heat up. What they'll do is they'll they heat up. What they'll do is they'll spit. They'll dump heat by spitting. spit. They'll dump heat by spitting. spit. They'll dump heat by spitting. Okay? Dogs pant. Okay? Dogs pant. Okay? Dogs pant. Costello is off to my left here. He Costello is off to my left here. He Costello is off to my left here. He pants when he gets too warm. He can't pants when he gets too warm. He can't pants when he gets too warm. He can't sweat or if dogs can maybe sweat a sweat or if dogs can maybe sweat a sweat or if dogs can maybe sweat a little bit. But, little bit. But, little bit. But, we can sweat and you've probably noticed we can sweat and you've probably noticed we can sweat and you've probably noticed that on a humid hot day, that on a humid hot day, that on a humid hot day, you'll feel much warmer just walking or you'll feel much warmer just walking or you'll feel much warmer just walking or running than you would with the running than you would with the running than you would with the equivalent exercise or movement that you equivalent exercise or movement that you equivalent exercise or movement that you would on a cold day. And some of you would on a cold day. And some of you would on a cold day. And some of you probably know this, but if you don't, probably know this, but if you don't, probably know this, but if you don't, the reason is you sweat on a cold day, the reason is you sweat on a cold day, the reason is you sweat on a cold day, but because the air is dry, typically, but because the air is dry, typically, but because the air is dry, typically, you will you will you will bring that sweat to the surface, and bring that sweat to the surface, and bring that sweat to the surface, and provided you're wearing clothes that provided you're wearing clothes that provided you're wearing clothes that allow some allow some allow some air to get out away from the body, so air to get out away from the body, so air to get out away from the body, so you're not wearing, you know, really you're not wearing, you know, really you're not wearing, you know, really tight, you know, spandex type clothing tight, you know, spandex type clothing tight, you know, spandex type clothing or something like that, or or, you know, or something like that, or or, you know, or something like that, or or, you know, seal type Saran Wrap type clothing, seal type Saran Wrap type clothing, seal type Saran Wrap type clothing, that sweat will evaporate off into the that sweat will evaporate off into the that sweat will evaporate off into the dry atmosphere. Whereas on a humid day, dry atmosphere. Whereas on a humid day, dry atmosphere. Whereas on a humid day, the reason you see people in, you know, the reason you see people in, you know, the reason you see people in, you know, New York and Florida on a humid summer New York and Florida on a humid summer New York and Florida on a humid summer day, and they're like moving their day, and they're like moving their day, and they're like moving their shirts off themselves, and you see shirts off themselves, and you see shirts off themselves, and you see people with, you know, big sweat stains, people with, you know, big sweat stains, people with, you know, big sweat stains, and back sweat stains, and all this kind and back sweat stains, and all this kind and back sweat stains, and all this kind of stuff, of stuff, of stuff, is because they're sweating as they is because they're sweating as they is because they're sweating as they normally would, but it's humid, and so normally would, but it's humid, and so normally would, but it's humid, and so there is the humidity the air doesn't there is the humidity the air doesn't there is the humidity the air doesn't allow transfer of that sweat into the allow transfer of that sweat into the allow transfer of that sweat into the atmosphere as readily, and so you're atmosphere as readily, and so you're atmosphere as readily, and so you're hot. Okay? So, hot. Okay? So, hot. Okay? So, without the evaporation, you're going to without the evaporation, you're going to without the evaporation, you're going to be warmer. So, we evaporate off sweat, be warmer. So, we evaporate off sweat, be warmer. So, we evaporate off sweat, we sweat, and we vasodilate when we want we sweat, and we vasodilate when we want we sweat, and we vasodilate when we want to dump heat. When we want to maintain to dump heat. When we want to maintain to dump heat. When we want to maintain heat, we vasoconstrict, and we tend to heat, we vasoconstrict, and we tend to heat, we vasoconstrict, and we tend to not sweat. The other thing that happens not sweat. The other thing that happens not sweat. The other thing that happens is you'll get goosebumps, so-called is you'll get goosebumps, so-called is you'll get goosebumps, so-called goose pimples, they're sometimes called. goose pimples, they're sometimes called. goose pimples, they're sometimes called. Those are a throwback to the time where Those are a throwback to the time where Those are a throwback to the time where we had fur over most, not all, of our we had fur over most, not all, of our we had fur over most, not all, of our body. All mammals body. All mammals body. All mammals in the cold have a process whereby in the cold have a process whereby in the cold have a process whereby adrenaline is released at low levels, adrenaline is released at low levels, adrenaline is released at low levels, typically, into the body. That typically, into the body. That typically, into the body. That adrenaline activates adrenaline activates adrenaline activates what are called sympathetic fibers, they what are called sympathetic fibers, they what are called sympathetic fibers, they have nothing to do with sympathy. Those have nothing to do with sympathy. Those have nothing to do with sympathy. Those little fibers, which are neurons, those little fibers, which are neurons, those little fibers, which are neurons, those fibers that what I'm saying are fibers that what I'm saying are fibers that what I'm saying are fibers are neurons, not clothing fibers, are neurons, not clothing fibers, are neurons, not clothing fibers, reach up into the skin, so your whole reach up into the skin, so your whole reach up into the skin, so your whole body is covered with these little tiny body is covered with these little tiny body is covered with these little tiny neurons that reach up into the skin, and neurons that reach up into the skin, and neurons that reach up into the skin, and when we are cold, when we are cold, when we are cold, they actually mechanically take the hair they actually mechanically take the hair they actually mechanically take the hair follicle and follicle and follicle and bend it up. It's a process called bend it up. It's a process called bend it up. It's a process called piloerection, p i l o erection. Okay? piloerection, p i l o erection. Okay? piloerection, p i l o erection. Okay? So, on a hot day, So, on a hot day, So, on a hot day, you want to dump heat. Okay? So, on a you want to dump heat. Okay? So, on a you want to dump heat. Okay? So, on a hot day, what would happen is you'd hot day, what would happen is you'd hot day, what would happen is you'd actually not see those goose pimples actually not see those goose pimples actually not see those goose pimples because you want the hairs lying down, because you want the hairs lying down, because you want the hairs lying down, which actually you would think that which actually you would think that which actually you would think that might insulate you more, but would might insulate you more, but would might insulate you more, but would actually let more heat dissipate out actually let more heat dissipate out actually let more heat dissipate out through the skin. through the skin. through the skin. On a cold day, you get these goose On a cold day, you get these goose On a cold day, you get these goose pimples or goose bumps, which are really pimples or goose bumps, which are really pimples or goose bumps, which are really just an ancient carryover from the just an ancient carryover from the just an ancient carryover from the body's attempt to make hair stand up on body's attempt to make hair stand up on body's attempt to make hair stand up on end, and when hair step stand up on end end, and when hair step stand up on end end, and when hair step stand up on end and they're very close together, that and they're very close together, that and they're very close together, that traps air in between them and actually traps air in between them and actually traps air in between them and actually creates a sort of insulated blanket of creates a sort of insulated blanket of creates a sort of insulated blanket of warm air. If you've ever seen an animal warm air. If you've ever seen an animal warm air. If you've ever seen an animal like a uh a malamute or a uh husky, you like a uh a malamute or a uh husky, you like a uh a malamute or a uh husky, you might think, "Oh, that poor thing on a might think, "Oh, that poor thing on a might think, "Oh, that poor thing on a hot day, what does it do?" You know, hot day, what does it do?" You know, hot day, what does it do?" You know, with all that hair. Well, it can be with all that hair. Well, it can be with all that hair. Well, it can be warm, so the animal will typically pant, warm, so the animal will typically pant, warm, so the animal will typically pant, and its hair will lay down, which you and its hair will lay down, which you and its hair will lay down, which you might think would act as more of a might think would act as more of a might think would act as more of a blanket, but on a cold day, what'll blanket, but on a cold day, what'll blanket, but on a cold day, what'll happen is their they'll become very happen is their they'll become very happen is their they'll become very puffy. They'll their hair will stand up puffy. They'll their hair will stand up puffy. They'll their hair will stand up on end, and that's actually trapping on end, and that's actually trapping on end, and that's actually trapping heat between the hairs, and they're heat between the hairs, and they're heat between the hairs, and they're actually quite well insulated. So, it's actually quite well insulated. So, it's actually quite well insulated. So, it's very important that if you want to very important that if you want to very important that if you want to understand how you can leverage understand how you can leverage understand how you can leverage temperature for physical performance, temperature for physical performance, temperature for physical performance, you have to understand that you have you have to understand that you have you have to understand that you have vasoconstriction to conserve heat, vasoconstriction to conserve heat, vasoconstriction to conserve heat, vasodilation to dump heat, that you have vasodilation to dump heat, that you have vasodilation to dump heat, that you have sweating to dump heat, and you have sweating to dump heat, and you have sweating to dump heat, and you have conservation of fluids conservation of fluids conservation of fluids in order to preserve heat. in order to preserve heat. in order to preserve heat. That's the most important thing in terms That's the most important thing in terms That's the most important thing in terms of understanding the mechanisms of understanding the mechanisms of understanding the mechanisms of maintaining and dumping heat. And now, maintaining and dumping heat. And now, maintaining and dumping heat. And now, the most important thing to understand the most important thing to understand the most important thing to understand is that if you get too hot, not only do is that if you get too hot, not only do is that if you get too hot, not only do those enzymes stop working, but your those enzymes stop working, but your those enzymes stop working, but your ability to contract your muscles stops. ability to contract your muscles stops. ability to contract your muscles stops. Okay? I'm going to repeat this because Okay? I'm going to repeat this because Okay? I'm going to repeat this because it's vitally important. it's vitally important. it's vitally important. ATP is involved in the process of generating is involved in the process of generating is involved in the process of generating muscle contractions. Doesn't matter if muscle contractions. Doesn't matter if muscle contractions. Doesn't matter if you're running a marathon, doesn't you're running a marathon, doesn't you're running a marathon, doesn't matter if you're doing a yoga class, matter if you're doing a yoga class, matter if you're doing a yoga class, doesn't matter if you're going for a doesn't matter if you're going for a doesn't matter if you're going for a 700-lb squat. 700-lb squat. 700-lb squat. The range of temperatures within which The range of temperatures within which The range of temperatures within which ATP can function and muscles can ATP can function and muscles can ATP can function and muscles can contract is very narrow. Somewhere contract is very narrow. Somewhere contract is very narrow. Somewhere around 39 or 40°C, around 39 or 40°C, around 39 or 40°C, it drops off and you will not be able to it drops off and you will not be able to it drops off and you will not be able to generate more contractions. generate more contractions. generate more contractions. Now, that's pretty hot, but it can that Now, that's pretty hot, but it can that Now, that's pretty hot, but it can that temperature can be generated locally temperature can be generated locally temperature can be generated locally really fast. Now, if you're too cold, really fast. Now, if you're too cold, really fast. Now, if you're too cold, it's true, it's hard to generate muscle it's true, it's hard to generate muscle it's true, it's hard to generate muscle contractions. I got into doing some cold contractions. I got into doing some cold contractions. I got into doing some cold water swimming water swimming water swimming a little while ago, and we would joke a little while ago, and we would joke a little while ago, and we would joke that, you know, you come out of the that, you know, you come out of the that, you know, you come out of the water. We do no wet suits. I'm not water. We do no wet suits. I'm not water. We do no wet suits. I'm not recommending people do this necessarily recommending people do this necessarily recommending people do this necessarily unless you're with certainly with unless you're with certainly with unless you're with certainly with somebody else who's skilled at doing it, somebody else who's skilled at doing it, somebody else who's skilled at doing it, which I was. which I was. which I was. And you come out and you feel like you And you come out and you feel like you And you come out and you feel like you have claws for hands. You can, you know, have claws for hands. You can, you know, have claws for hands. You can, you know, you could never text on a phone for the you could never text on a phone for the you could never text on a phone for the first few minutes. I mean, the water was first few minutes. I mean, the water was first few minutes. I mean, the water was very, very cold, and you can't even move very, very cold, and you can't even move very, very cold, and you can't even move your face. And so, muscles will become your face. And so, muscles will become your face. And so, muscles will become rigid, but heating up muscles causes rigid, but heating up muscles causes rigid, but heating up muscles causes them to fail to be able to generate more them to fail to be able to generate more them to fail to be able to generate more contractions. Put simply, if you get too contractions. Put simply, if you get too contractions. Put simply, if you get too hot, you stop exercising. hot, you stop exercising. hot, you stop exercising. You may not even realize it, but your You may not even realize it, but your You may not even realize it, but your will to exercise further, your ability will to exercise further, your ability will to exercise further, your ability to push harder to push harder to push harder is entirely dependent on the heat of the is entirely dependent on the heat of the is entirely dependent on the heat of the muscle, both locally and your whole muscle, both locally and your whole muscle, both locally and your whole system. So, let's talk about your whole system, let's talk about your whole system, let's talk about your whole system, because I just described heat dumping because I just described heat dumping because I just described heat dumping and heat maintaining. and heat maintaining. and heat maintaining. I told you that increasing heat makes it I told you that increasing heat makes it I told you that increasing heat makes it hard for muscles to contract. It will hard for muscles to contract. It will hard for muscles to contract. It will stop you from being able to run further stop you from being able to run further stop you from being able to run further and faster. It will stop you from being and faster. It will stop you from being and faster. It will stop you from being able to lift more weights, more sets, able to lift more weights, more sets, able to lift more weights, more sets, more repetitions. more repetitions. more repetitions. If you can keep temperature in range, If you can keep temperature in range, If you can keep temperature in range, however, in a proper range, you will be however, in a proper range, you will be however, in a proper range, you will be able to do more work. You will be able to do more work. You will be able to do more work. You will be able to create greater output. You'll be able to create greater output. You'll be able to create greater output. You'll be able to lift more weight, more sets, more to lift more weight, more sets, more to lift more weight, more sets, more reps. And you'll be able to run further. And you'll be able to run further. And you'll be able to run further. Now, there are data that I'm going to Now, there are data that I'm going to Now, there are data that I'm going to talk about in a little bit that are talk about in a little bit that are talk about in a little bit that are absolutely striking that underscore that absolutely striking that underscore that absolutely striking that underscore that statement. They are data from my statement. They are data from my statement. They are data from my colleague Craig Heller's lab in the colleague Craig Heller's lab in the colleague Craig Heller's lab in the Department of Biology at Stanford. And Department of Biology at Stanford. And Department of Biology at Stanford. And they are data that are now being they are data that are now being they are data that are now being implemented, they were first implemented implemented, they were first implemented implemented, they were first implemented in a grant funded by DARPA, but now in a grant funded by DARPA, but now in a grant funded by DARPA, but now in professional sports teams. Many, if not professional sports teams. Many, if not professional sports teams. Many, if not all the NFL teams are now using this all the NFL teams are now using this all the NFL teams are now using this technology as well as military uses it, technology as well as military uses it, technology as well as military uses it, and not just for sports performance, but and not just for sports performance, but and not just for sports performance, but also firefighters, construction workers, also firefighters, construction workers, also firefighters, construction workers, other professions where elevated heat other professions where elevated heat other professions where elevated heat becomes a barrier to performance. And becomes a barrier to performance. And becomes a barrier to performance. And you can leverage this to really improve you can leverage this to really improve you can leverage this to really improve your workouts. And when I say really your workouts. And when I say really your workouts. And when I say really improve, it is striking. I'm going to improve, it is striking. I'm going to improve, it is striking. I'm going to give away a little hint of this now and give away a little hint of this now and give away a little hint of this now and then I'm going to tell you a little bit then I'm going to tell you a little bit then I'm going to tell you a little bit more of the data later after I tell you more of the data later after I tell you more of the data later after I tell you the protocols. the protocols. the protocols. Proper cooling Proper cooling Proper cooling of the body, which has to be done in a of the body, which has to be done in a of the body, which has to be done in a very specific way, very specific way, very specific way, has allowed recreational athletes, uh has allowed recreational athletes, uh has allowed recreational athletes, uh college students, and typical adults, as college students, and typical adults, as college students, and typical adults, as well as professional athletes to go from well as professional athletes to go from well as professional athletes to go from doing their usual output, in this case doing their usual output, in this case doing their usual output, in this case the what comes to mind best would be a the what comes to mind best would be a the what comes to mind best would be a particular professional athlete, a particular professional athlete, a particular professional athlete, a member of the 49ers at the time, was member of the 49ers at the time, was member of the 49ers at the time, was able to do 40 dips on his first set, 30, able to do 40 dips on his first set, 30, able to do 40 dips on his first set, 30, 20, 20. Basically did 10 sets of dips 20, 20. Basically did 10 sets of dips 20, 20. Basically did 10 sets of dips unassisted with anything else. That's unassisted with anything else. That's unassisted with anything else. That's that's an impressive impressive, that's an impressive impressive, that's an impressive impressive, especially since he's a really large especially since he's a really large especially since he's a really large guy. 40 dips is a respectable. These are 40 dips is a respectable. These are 40 dips is a respectable. These are strict, full range dips. strict, full range dips. strict, full range dips. And then by the 10th set, there's a And then by the 10th set, there's a And then by the 10th set, there's a steep drop-off. Using proper cooling of steep drop-off. Using proper cooling of steep drop-off. Using proper cooling of particular body compartments, particular body compartments, particular body compartments, he was able to triple that within he was able to triple that within he was able to triple that within less than a week. And maintain that less than a week. And maintain that less than a week. And maintain that performance even without the cooling performance even without the cooling performance even without the cooling approach. So, it was actually a approach. So, it was actually a approach. So, it was actually a conditioning effect, all right? conditioning effect, all right? conditioning effect, all right? I'll get back to this in a little bit, I'll get back to this in a little bit, I'll get back to this in a little bit, but there are other fantastic leaps of but there are other fantastic leaps of but there are other fantastic leaps of effort and leaps of performance that effort and leaps of performance that effort and leaps of performance that were demonstrated, including endurance were demonstrated, including endurance were demonstrated, including endurance running. Before I continue any further, I just Before I continue any further, I just Before I continue any further, I just want to underscore again that want to underscore again that want to underscore again that overheating is terrible. There's a overheating is terrible. There's a overheating is terrible. There's a famous example of this. example of this. example of this. This was about 10-15 years ago when a This was about 10-15 years ago when a This was about 10-15 years ago when a number of dietary supplements that number of dietary supplements that number of dietary supplements that included things like epinephrine, which included things like epinephrine, which included things like epinephrine, which is a stimulant. It's a beta is a stimulant. It's a beta is a stimulant. It's a beta beta-adrenergic stimulant. Um, drugs beta-adrenergic stimulant. Um, drugs beta-adrenergic stimulant. Um, drugs like clenbuterol, which were then banned like clenbuterol, which were then banned like clenbuterol, which were then banned from the Olympics, which are still out from the Olympics, which are still out from the Olympics, which are still out there and have been in recreational use, there and have been in recreational use, there and have been in recreational use, which were beta-adrenergic which were beta-adrenergic which were beta-adrenergic agonists. So, these are drugs that sort agonists. So, these are drugs that sort agonists. So, these are drugs that sort of mimic of mimic of mimic epinephrine adrenaline to some extent. epinephrine adrenaline to some extent. epinephrine adrenaline to some extent. I'm I know I'm oversimplifying this I'm I know I'm oversimplifying this I'm I know I'm oversimplifying this here. They improve fat loss because the here. They improve fat loss because the here. They improve fat loss because the effects on metabolism, effects on metabolism, effects on metabolism, but they heat up the body. And what but they heat up the body. And what but they heat up the body. And what happened was, this hit the press very happened was, this hit the press very happened was, this hit the press very widely is high school football widely is high school football widely is high school football players and various professional players and various professional players and various professional athletes were dropping dead because they athletes were dropping dead because they athletes were dropping dead because they were overheating during practice or in were overheating during practice or in were overheating during practice or in competition. So much so that clenbuterol competition. So much so that clenbuterol competition. So much so that clenbuterol was banned, although every once in a was banned, although every once in a was banned, although every once in a while somebody gets while somebody gets while somebody gets in trouble for using this. This There in trouble for using this. This There in trouble for using this. This There was an instance of this recently in was an instance of this recently in was an instance of this recently in professional boxing, which was professional boxing, which was professional boxing, which was attributed to a bad meat that attributed to a bad meat that attributed to a bad meat that contained the clenbuterol. I don't know contained the clenbuterol. I don't know contained the clenbuterol. I don't know what the source was. Um, what the source was. Um, what the source was. Um, I don't have any commentary about that, I don't have any commentary about that, I don't have any commentary about that, but it still is in use, but these drugs but it still is in use, but these drugs but it still is in use, but these drugs increase body temperature, increase body temperature, increase body temperature, increase fat loss, increase fat loss, increase fat loss, but carry a severe danger. And that's but carry a severe danger. And that's but carry a severe danger. And that's the danger of hyperthermia. the danger of hyperthermia. the danger of hyperthermia. In fact, I would argue and I think in In fact, I would argue and I think in In fact, I would argue and I think in talking to some folks uh, in various talking to some folks uh, in various talking to some folks uh, in various professional fighting organizations, professional fighting organizations, professional fighting organizations, it's very clear that a lot of the deaths it's very clear that a lot of the deaths it's very clear that a lot of the deaths that one sees in professional combat that one sees in professional combat that one sees in professional combat sports may have to do as much with dehydration may have to do as much with dehydration may have to do as much with dehydration and overheating as it does with getting and overheating as it does with getting and overheating as it does with getting hit in the head, which is also bad, but hit in the head, which is also bad, but hit in the head, which is also bad, but that things can compound, they can have that things can compound, they can have that things can compound, they can have a synergistic effect. a synergistic effect. a synergistic effect. And just a note about that and And just a note about that and And just a note about that and hyperthermia and its dangers as well. My hyperthermia and its dangers as well. My hyperthermia and its dangers as well. My first project ever in science was to first project ever in science was to first project ever in science was to evaluate the thermogenic effects of MDMA evaluate the thermogenic effects of MDMA evaluate the thermogenic effects of MDMA of ecstasy. That was my uh, senior of ecstasy. That was my uh, senior of ecstasy. That was my uh, senior thesis in college actually. And so, thesis in college actually. And so, thesis in college actually. And so, thermo What we found was that indeed thermo What we found was that indeed thermo What we found was that indeed drugs that remove your understanding of drugs that remove your understanding of drugs that remove your understanding of how warm you are how warm you are how warm you are cause you to not take on the appropriate cause you to not take on the appropriate cause you to not take on the appropriate behaviors to cool yourself, right? So, behaviors to cool yourself, right? So, behaviors to cool yourself, right? So, your vasoconstriction and your sweating, your vasoconstriction and your sweating, your vasoconstriction and your sweating, those are autonomic. Those are going to those are autonomic. Those are going to those are autonomic. Those are going to happen no matter what, unless you happen no matter what, unless you happen no matter what, unless you happen to take something that blocks that to take something that blocks that to take something that blocks that effect. However, there are a lot of effect. However, there are a lot of effect. However, there are a lot of things that we as humans do to prevent things that we as humans do to prevent things that we as humans do to prevent ourselves from overheating, and the main ourselves from overheating, and the main ourselves from overheating, and the main one is stop. one is stop. one is stop. When we are running in the desert, or When we are running in the desert, or When we are running in the desert, or when we're running very hard, and when we're running very hard, and when we're running very hard, and suddenly we stop, often times that's suddenly we stop, often times that's suddenly we stop, often times that's because the muscles are overheating. because the muscles are overheating. because the muscles are overheating. It's a subconscious thing. We won't It's a subconscious thing. We won't It's a subconscious thing. We won't often think, "Oh, I'm really much too often think, "Oh, I'm really much too often think, "Oh, I'm really much too warm." It's just that we stop, and it's warm." It's just that we stop, and it's warm." It's just that we stop, and it's a self-preservation mechanism. Sometimes a self-preservation mechanism. Sometimes a self-preservation mechanism. Sometimes it kicks in too early, sometimes it kicks in too early, sometimes it kicks in too early, sometimes it kicks in too late. kicks in too late. kicks in too late. Kicks in too late, you can die. There's Kicks in too late, you can die. There's Kicks in too late, you can die. There's an instance in the 1984 Olympics where an instance in the 1984 Olympics where an instance in the 1984 Olympics where the That was the first year, I believe, the That was the first year, I believe, the That was the first year, I believe, that there were There was a women's that there were There was a women's that there were There was a women's marathon. I think that's correct. And marathon. I think that's correct. And marathon. I think that's correct. And one of the front-runners or one of the front-runners or one of the front-runners or top picks for winning was heading into top picks for winning was heading into top picks for winning was heading into the stadium, and all of a sudden, it the stadium, and all of a sudden, it the stadium, and all of a sudden, it seemed as if she was lost. She was kind seemed as if she was lost. She was kind seemed as if she was lost. She was kind of wandering around not knowing where of wandering around not knowing where of wandering around not knowing where she should go. And in fact, she was in a she should go. And in fact, she was in a she should go. And in fact, she was in a position to win, or at least take second position to win, or at least take second position to win, or at least take second place, at least take silver. Got totally place, at least take silver. Got totally place, at least take silver. Got totally disoriented and did miserably in the disoriented and did miserably in the disoriented and did miserably in the race, and she was hyperthermic. She was race, and she was hyperthermic. She was race, and she was hyperthermic. She was running against that reflex to stop. running against that reflex to stop. running against that reflex to stop. So, dumping heat is key. So, how do you So, dumping heat is key. So, how do you So, dumping heat is key. So, how do you dump heat in order to perform longer dump heat in order to perform longer dump heat in order to perform longer safely? Well, in order to understand that, you Well, in order to understand that, you Well, in order to understand that, you have to understand that the body has have to understand that the body has have to understand that the body has three main compartments for regulating three main compartments for regulating three main compartments for regulating temperature. Okay? We don't just have a temperature. Okay? We don't just have a temperature. Okay? We don't just have a center and a periphery, we have three center and a periphery, we have three center and a periphery, we have three main compartments. And there's one main compartments. And there's one main compartments. And there's one compartment in particular that compartment in particular that compartment in particular that all of you, or most all of you, I have all of you, or most all of you, I have all of you, or most all of you, I have to assume, have. to assume, have. to assume, have. And if you can understand how that And if you can understand how that And if you can understand how that works, you can do tremendous things for works, you can do tremendous things for works, you can do tremendous things for your performance and for your recovery. your performance and for your recovery. your performance and for your recovery. So, what I'm about to tell you will So, what I'm about to tell you will So, what I'm about to tell you will allow you to perform better in all forms allow you to perform better in all forms allow you to perform better in all forms of exercise. of exercise. of exercise. And it is not commonly known, And it is not commonly known, And it is not commonly known, unfortunately. I'm here to try and unfortunately. I'm here to try and unfortunately. I'm here to try and change that. change that. change that. You have three compartments for You have three compartments for You have three compartments for increasing or dumping heat in your body. increasing or dumping heat in your body. increasing or dumping heat in your body. One is your core, we already talked One is your core, we already talked One is your core, we already talked about that. Your core organs, your about that. Your core organs, your about that. Your core organs, your heart, your lungs, your pancreas, heart, your lungs, your pancreas, heart, your lungs, your pancreas, your liver. It's the core of your body. your liver. It's the core of your body. your liver. It's the core of your body. The other is your periphery. The other is your periphery. The other is your periphery. Which are obviously your arms and your Which are obviously your arms and your Which are obviously your arms and your legs and your feet and your hands. legs and your feet and your hands. legs and your feet and your hands. But then there's a third component. But then there's a third component. But then there's a third component. Which is there are three locations on Which is there are three locations on Which is there are three locations on your body that are far better at passing your body that are far better at passing your body that are far better at passing heat out of the body and bringing cool heat out of the body and bringing cool heat out of the body and bringing cool into the body such that you can heat up into the body such that you can heat up into the body such that you can heat up or cool your body everywhere very or cool your body everywhere very or cool your body everywhere very quickly. Those three areas are your face, Those three areas are your face, Those three areas are your face, the palms of your hands, and the bottoms the palms of your hands, and the bottoms the palms of your hands, and the bottoms of your feet. of your feet. of your feet. Now, the skin on your hands and on the Now, the skin on your hands and on the Now, the skin on your hands and on the bottoms of your feet and to some extent bottoms of your feet and to some extent bottoms of your feet and to some extent on your face are called glabrous skin. on your face are called glabrous skin. on your face are called glabrous skin. That's g l a b o r o u s, glabrous skin. That's g l a b o r o u s, glabrous skin. That's g l a b o r o u s, glabrous skin. And what's special about those areas of And what's special about those areas of And what's special about those areas of your body and the glabrous skin your body and the glabrous skin your body and the glabrous skin is that is that is that the arrangement of vasculature, the arrangement of vasculature, the arrangement of vasculature, of blood vessels, capillaries, and of blood vessels, capillaries, and of blood vessels, capillaries, and arteries that serve those regions is arteries that serve those regions is arteries that serve those regions is very different than it is elsewhere in very different than it is elsewhere in very different than it is elsewhere in your body. your body. your body. Now, this has ancient roots. Now, this has ancient roots. Now, this has ancient roots. Typically, if you were another mammal Typically, if you were another mammal Typically, if you were another mammal like a bear or some sort of ape, like a bear or some sort of ape, like a bear or some sort of ape, you would have hair all over your body. you would have hair all over your body. you would have hair all over your body. Now, we all know some pretty hairy Now, we all know some pretty hairy Now, we all know some pretty hairy people or presumably you've heard that people or presumably you've heard that people or presumably you've heard that there are these hairy people. I know a there are these hairy people. I know a there are these hairy people. I know a few excessively hairy people. They And few excessively hairy people. They And few excessively hairy people. They And Costello is excessively hairy, but he's Costello is excessively hairy, but he's Costello is excessively hairy, but he's not a person, obviously. not a person, obviously. not a person, obviously. But all mammals But all mammals But all mammals have hair on their bodies. So, some have hair on their bodies. So, some have hair on their bodies. So, some people have very light hair or very fine people have very light hair or very fine people have very light hair or very fine hair. We don't have hair on these glabrous We don't have hair on these glabrous We don't have hair on these glabrous skin regions. Now, of course, you can skin regions. Now, of course, you can skin regions. Now, of course, you can have beard or facial hair growth, but have beard or facial hair growth, but have beard or facial hair growth, but there's still regions like the cheeks there's still regions like the cheeks there's still regions like the cheeks and other areas that maintain this and other areas that maintain this and other areas that maintain this special vasculature, okay? So, special vasculature, okay? So, special vasculature, okay? So, technically the hands and feet are real technically the hands and feet are real technically the hands and feet are real glabrous skin and the face is not always glabrous skin and the face is not always glabrous skin and the face is not always quite classified as glabrous, but these quite classified as glabrous, but these quite classified as glabrous, but these three locations, face, hand palms of three locations, face, hand palms of three locations, face, hand palms of hands, not tops, and bottoms of feet are hands, not tops, and bottoms of feet are hands, not tops, and bottoms of feet are very good at dumping heat and bringing very good at dumping heat and bringing very good at dumping heat and bringing in cool. And the reason is in cool. And the reason is in cool. And the reason is there's a rule in vascular biology there's a rule in vascular biology there's a rule in vascular biology that blood moves from arteries to that blood moves from arteries to that blood moves from arteries to capillaries and then to veins and then capillaries and then to veins and then capillaries and then to veins and then back to the heart, okay? So, arteries, back to the heart, okay? So, arteries, back to the heart, okay? So, arteries, which are the big ones, obviously, which are the big ones, obviously, which are the big ones, obviously, capillaries, which are the little fine capillaries, which are the little fine capillaries, which are the little fine ones, where oxygen and carbon dioxide ones, where oxygen and carbon dioxide ones, where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged, are exchanged, are exchanged, and veins, which then bring blood back and veins, which then bring blood back and veins, which then bring blood back to the heart and other tissues, of to the heart and other tissues, of to the heart and other tissues, of course. In these three regions of your hands, In these three regions of your hands, In these three regions of your hands, your face, and the bottoms of your feet, your face, and the bottoms of your feet, your face, and the bottoms of your feet, we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a very special pattern of vasculature. very special pattern of vasculature. very special pattern of vasculature. AVAs are described in the medical AVAs are described in the medical AVAs are described in the medical textbooks, so you can find them in textbooks, so you can find them in textbooks, so you can find them in Gray's Anatomy, not the television show, Gray's Anatomy, not the television show, Gray's Anatomy, not the television show, but the actual Gray's Anatomy textbook, but the actual Gray's Anatomy textbook, but the actual Gray's Anatomy textbook, which is a real thing that exists, and which is a real thing that exists, and which is a real thing that exists, and in all medical textbooks. Okay? So, in all medical textbooks. Okay? So, in all medical textbooks. Okay? So, let's talk about AVAs and what they are let's talk about AVAs and what they are let's talk about AVAs and what they are and why they allow these three regions and why they allow these three regions and why they allow these three regions of the body to heat or cool ourselves of the body to heat or cool ourselves of the body to heat or cool ourselves more readily. more readily. more readily. So, what are AVAs? So, what are AVAs? So, what are AVAs? AVAs are arteriovenous anastomoses. So, AVAs are arteriovenous anastomoses. So, AVAs are arteriovenous anastomoses. So, if you want to look that up, you can if you want to look that up, you can if you want to look that up, you can just look up AVAs, veins, capillaries, just look up AVAs, veins, capillaries, just look up AVAs, veins, capillaries, arteries, if you like, but I'll spell it arteries, if you like, but I'll spell it arteries, if you like, but I'll spell it for you. for you. for you. a r t e r i o arteriovenous a r t e r i o arteriovenous a r t e r i o arteriovenous v e n o u s v e n o u s v e n o u s arteriovenous anastomoses a n a s t o m o s e s anastomoses a n a s t o m o s e s anastomoses a n a s t o m o s e s arteriovenous anastomoses, okay? You arteriovenous anastomoses, okay? You arteriovenous anastomoses, okay? You want to know about arteriovenous want to know about arteriovenous want to know about arteriovenous anastomoses, trust me. anastomoses, trust me. anastomoses, trust me. And you want to remember that they're in And you want to remember that they're in And you want to remember that they're in your hands, the bottoms of your feet, your hands, the bottoms of your feet, your hands, the bottoms of your feet, and on your face, and in particular, on and on your face, and in particular, on and on your face, and in particular, on the palms of your hands, not the tops of the palms of your hands, not the tops of the palms of your hands, not the tops of your hands. Now, before I said blood your hands. Now, before I said blood your hands. Now, before I said blood flows typically from arteries to flows typically from arteries to flows typically from arteries to capillaries to veins and then back to capillaries to veins and then back to capillaries to veins and then back to the heart. But AVAs are direct the heart. But AVAs are direct the heart. But AVAs are direct connections between the small arteries connections between the small arteries connections between the small arteries and the small veins. and the small veins. and the small veins. They bypass the capillaries to some They bypass the capillaries to some They bypass the capillaries to some extent. They're little short vessel segments. They're little short vessel segments. They're little short vessel segments. They have a big, large inner diameter, They have a big, large inner diameter, They have a big, large inner diameter, and they have this very thick muscular and they have this very thick muscular and they have this very thick muscular wall. And they get input from what are called And they get input from what are called And they get input from what are called adrenergic neurons. They get input from adrenergic neurons. They get input from adrenergic neurons. They get input from neurons that release norepinephrine and neurons that release norepinephrine and neurons that release norepinephrine and epinephrine, which allows them to contract or dilate. which allows them to contract or dilate. which allows them to contract or dilate. Now, there's some rules of physics that Now, there's some rules of physics that Now, there's some rules of physics that talk about how the radius of a pipe and talk about how the radius of a pipe and talk about how the radius of a pipe and small changes in the radius of a pipe small changes in the radius of a pipe small changes in the radius of a pipe leads to leads to leads to massive increases in the rate and amount massive increases in the rate and amount massive increases in the rate and amount of stuff that can flow through that of stuff that can flow through that of stuff that can flow through that pipe. Okay, that's a rule of physics pipe. Okay, that's a rule of physics pipe. Okay, that's a rule of physics that says essentially that uh the radius that says essentially that uh the radius that says essentially that uh the radius is uh proportional to the amount of is uh proportional to the amount of is uh proportional to the amount of stuff that can flow through something to stuff that can flow through something to stuff that can flow through something to the fourth power. We're not going to the fourth power. We're not going to the fourth power. We're not going to make this a physics class, but if you make this a physics class, but if you make this a physics class, but if you want to look that up, you can. You can want to look that up, you can. You can want to look that up, you can. You can just look up how does the radius of a just look up how does the radius of a just look up how does the radius of a tube or pipe relate to how quickly or tube or pipe relate to how quickly or tube or pipe relate to how quickly or how much it can it stuff can flow how much it can it stuff can flow how much it can it stuff can flow through it. What you need to know, even through it. What you need to know, even through it. What you need to know, even if you don't want to know any of the if you don't want to know any of the if you don't want to know any of the underlying physics, is that these AVAs underlying physics, is that these AVAs underlying physics, is that these AVAs allow more heat to leave the body more allow more heat to leave the body more allow more heat to leave the body more quickly and more cool to enter the body quickly and more cool to enter the body quickly and more cool to enter the body more quickly more quickly more quickly than other venous arterial capillary beds venous arterial capillary beds venous arterial capillary beds throughout the body. In other words, you throughout the body. In other words, you throughout the body. In other words, you can heat up best at the face, the palms, can heat up best at the face, the palms, can heat up best at the face, the palms, and the bottoms of the feet, and you can and the bottoms of the feet, and you can and the bottoms of the feet, and you can cool down best at the face, the palms, cool down best at the face, the palms, cool down best at the face, the palms, and the bottoms of the feet than you can and the bottoms of the feet than you can and the bottoms of the feet than you can anywhere else on your body. When I say anywhere else on your body. When I say anywhere else on your body. When I say heat up or cool down, I mean actually heat up or cool down, I mean actually heat up or cool down, I mean actually heat or cool the core and your brain. heat or cool the core and your brain. heat or cool the core and your brain. Okay? So, this is vitally important. I Okay? So, this is vitally important. I Okay? So, this is vitally important. I realize we're getting down into the realize we're getting down into the realize we're getting down into the mechanistic weeds here, but you need to mechanistic weeds here, but you need to mechanistic weeds here, but you need to know that these three compartments of know that these three compartments of know that these three compartments of your body palms, bottoms of feet, and your body palms, bottoms of feet, and your body palms, bottoms of feet, and face are your best leverage points for face are your best leverage points for face are your best leverage points for manipulating temperature to vastly manipulating temperature to vastly manipulating temperature to vastly improve physical performance. improve physical performance. improve physical performance. Okay. I also want to point out that the Okay. I also want to point out that the Okay. I also want to point out that the work that I'm going to tell you about is work that I'm going to tell you about is work that I'm going to tell you about is not work from my laboratory. It's the not work from my laboratory. It's the not work from my laboratory. It's the work of, as I mentioned, my colleague work of, as I mentioned, my colleague work of, as I mentioned, my colleague Craig Heller's laboratory at Stanford. Craig Heller's laboratory at Stanford. Craig Heller's laboratory at Stanford. And we're going to have Craig on as a And we're going to have Craig on as a And we're going to have Craig on as a guest to talk more about these guest to talk more about these guest to talk more about these discoveries. They are his and his discoveries. They are his and his discoveries. They are his and his colleagues' discoveries. colleagues' discoveries. colleagues' discoveries. And how you can leverage them. They're And how you can leverage them. They're And how you can leverage them. They're building out some amazing technology. I building out some amazing technology. I building out some amazing technology. I had a conversation with Craig yesterday had a conversation with Craig yesterday had a conversation with Craig yesterday as a prelude to this episode and to the as a prelude to this episode and to the as a prelude to this episode and to the future conversation with him. So, you're future conversation with him. So, you're future conversation with him. So, you're getting the very latest on this topic. getting the very latest on this topic. getting the very latest on this topic. So, what Craig and his colleagues did So, what Craig and his colleagues did So, what Craig and his colleagues did really illustrates perfectly what these really illustrates perfectly what these really illustrates perfectly what these body surfaces can do and why. body surfaces can do and why. body surfaces can do and why. They were studying overheating in They were studying overheating in They were studying overheating in athletes and in military and in athletes and in military and in athletes and in military and in construction workers and trying to construction workers and trying to construction workers and trying to prevent it. prevent it. prevent it. And they did a bunch of experiments. I And they did a bunch of experiments. I And they did a bunch of experiments. I won't go into all of them now, but what won't go into all of them now, but what won't go into all of them now, but what they essentially found was that cooling they essentially found was that cooling they essentially found was that cooling the palms, palmar cooling, the palms, palmar cooling, the palms, palmar cooling, allowed people, athletes, and recreational people, athletes, and recreational people, athletes, and recreational athletes to run much further, athletes to run much further, athletes to run much further, to lift more weight, and to do more sets to lift more weight, and to do more sets to lift more weight, and to do more sets and reps to a absolutely staggering and reps to a absolutely staggering and reps to a absolutely staggering degree. Let's talk for a second a bit more about Let's talk for a second a bit more about Let's talk for a second a bit more about why we stop, why we shut off effort when why we stop, why we shut off effort when why we stop, why we shut off effort when we get too hot. we get too hot. we get too hot. Because in doing so, you'll really Because in doing so, you'll really Because in doing so, you'll really understand how and why the best understand how and why the best understand how and why the best protocols exist for being able to do protocols exist for being able to do protocols exist for being able to do more work, to be able to exercise longer more work, to be able to exercise longer more work, to be able to exercise longer and actually to feel good doing it. You and actually to feel good doing it. You and actually to feel good doing it. You actually can make a doubling of your actually can make a doubling of your actually can make a doubling of your dips or believe it or not a tripling or dips or believe it or not a tripling or dips or believe it or not a tripling or quadrupling or more of your pull-ups quadrupling or more of your pull-ups quadrupling or more of your pull-ups fairly straightforward. fairly straightforward. fairly straightforward. I mentioned before that when muscle I mentioned before that when muscle I mentioned before that when muscle heats up heats up heats up enzymes start getting disrupted and ATP enzymes start getting disrupted and ATP enzymes start getting disrupted and ATP in muscles can't work so well and those in muscles can't work so well and those in muscles can't work so well and those muscles can't contract. Let's get a muscles can't contract. Let's get a muscles can't contract. Let's get a little more specific about that. The little more specific about that. The little more specific about that. The enzyme that's involved here is something enzyme that's involved here is something enzyme that's involved here is something called pyruvate kinase. You don't need called pyruvate kinase. You don't need called pyruvate kinase. You don't need to know about pyruvate kinase, but what to know about pyruvate kinase, but what to know about pyruvate kinase, but what you do need to know is that it ends ASE you do need to know is that it ends ASE you do need to know is that it ends ASE which means it's an enzyme. which means it's an enzyme. which means it's an enzyme. And pyruvate kinase And pyruvate kinase And pyruvate kinase is essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a critical step that you can't bypass if critical step that you can't bypass if critical step that you can't bypass if you want muscles to contract and it's you want muscles to contract and it's you want muscles to contract and it's very temperature sensitive. Therefore, if you can keep temperature Therefore, if you can keep temperature Therefore, if you can keep temperature lower, you can do more work per unit lower, you can do more work per unit lower, you can do more work per unit time. You can do more pull-ups and that time. You can do more pull-ups and that time. You can do more pull-ups and that actually was done by Craig and his actually was done by Craig and his actually was done by Craig and his colleague. Excuse me. The pull-ups colleague. Excuse me. The pull-ups colleague. Excuse me. The pull-ups weren't actually done by Craig. I don't weren't actually done by Craig. I don't weren't actually done by Craig. I don't know how many pull-ups Craig can do. know how many pull-ups Craig can do. know how many pull-ups Craig can do. I'll ask him next time. Both cooled and I'll ask him next time. Both cooled and I'll ask him next time. Both cooled and uncooled, how many pull-ups he can do. uncooled, how many pull-ups he can do. uncooled, how many pull-ups he can do. But what they essentially did is they what they essentially did is they what they essentially did is they brought someone into their laboratory brought someone into their laboratory brought someone into their laboratory who could do who could do who could do 10 pull-ups on the first set and they 10 pull-ups on the first set and they 10 pull-ups on the first set and they were able to get 10, rest 2 or 3 were able to get 10, rest 2 or 3 were able to get 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes, get another 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes, get another 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes, get another 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes and if you've ever tried this, minutes and if you've ever tried this, minutes and if you've ever tried this, what you find is that you start dropping what you find is that you start dropping what you find is that you start dropping to eight, seven, six, etc. Now, the to eight, seven, six, etc. Now, the to eight, seven, six, etc. Now, the person might not necessarily feel like person might not necessarily feel like person might not necessarily feel like they're overheating, but the muscle is they're overheating, but the muscle is they're overheating, but the muscle is heating up. heating up. heating up. Then, with their knowledge that these Then, with their knowledge that these Then, with their knowledge that these AVAs, that these AVAs, that these AVAs, that these that these portals in the palms are a that these portals in the palms are a that these portals in the palms are a great way to both heat the body, but great way to both heat the body, but great way to both heat the body, but also to dump heat from the body, also to dump heat from the body, also to dump heat from the body, they used a device and I'll talk about they used a device and I'll talk about they used a device and I'll talk about what you can do at home, but a device what you can do at home, but a device what you can do at home, but a device where they had people hold on to what where they had people hold on to what where they had people hold on to what was essentially a cold tube. was essentially a cold tube. was essentially a cold tube. Now, this is crucial. The tube can't be Now, this is crucial. The tube can't be Now, this is crucial. The tube can't be so cold that it causes vasoconstriction so cold that it causes vasoconstriction so cold that it causes vasoconstriction because then the cold won't pass from because then the cold won't pass from because then the cold won't pass from the tube to the hand and to the core. the tube to the hand and to the core. the tube to the hand and to the core. But, if it's the right temperature, it's But, if it's the right temperature, it's But, if it's the right temperature, it's neither too hot nor too cold, neither too hot nor too cold, neither too hot nor too cold, that cool from the cold tube passes into that cool from the cold tube passes into that cool from the cold tube passes into the hand, the hand, the hand, these so-called palmar regions, these so-called palmar regions, these so-called palmar regions, and then cools the core, and then cools the core, and then cools the core, and in theory, by lowering body and in theory, by lowering body and in theory, by lowering body temperature, would allow the person or temperature, would allow the person or temperature, would allow the person or the athlete to do more work. And indeed, the athlete to do more work. And indeed, the athlete to do more work. And indeed, that's what they saw. that's what they saw. that's what they saw. The actual data, the specific data The actual data, the specific data The actual data, the specific data showed that subjects could do, at least showed that subjects could do, at least showed that subjects could do, at least the subjects they worked with, on their the subjects they worked with, on their the subjects they worked with, on their first day with no cooling, about 100 first day with no cooling, about 100 first day with no cooling, about 100 pull-ups across the pull-ups across the pull-ups across the very the time frame that they the very the time frame that they the very the time frame that they had. Okay? So, it might have taken had. Okay? So, it might have taken had. Okay? So, it might have taken anywhere from 10 to 15 or maybe more anywhere from 10 to 15 or maybe more anywhere from 10 to 15 or maybe more sets, depending on how skilled that sets, depending on how skilled that sets, depending on how skilled that person was, but in a fixed amount of person was, but in a fixed amount of person was, but in a fixed amount of time. Then, they came back and did the Then, they came back and did the Then, they came back and did the cooling. They did it the very next day, cooling. They did it the very next day, cooling. They did it the very next day, which, if you've ever trained a muscle which, if you've ever trained a muscle which, if you've ever trained a muscle the very next day, typically, you the very next day, typically, you the very next day, typically, you wouldn't do as well in its training if wouldn't do as well in its training if wouldn't do as well in its training if it took any damage from the previous it took any damage from the previous it took any damage from the previous session, or you at least do as well, but session, or you at least do as well, but session, or you at least do as well, but you probably wouldn't do what they then you probably wouldn't do what they then you probably wouldn't do what they then observed, which was they started cooling observed, which was they started cooling observed, which was they started cooling after every other set. The person would after every other set. The person would after every other set. The person would just hold the cold tube, cool down the just hold the cold tube, cool down the just hold the cold tube, cool down the body after every other set, rest, body after every other set, rest, body after every other set, rest, everything else was kept the same, everything else was kept the same, everything else was kept the same, and they found that they went to 180 and they found that they went to 180 and they found that they went to 180 pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a near doubling. near doubling. near doubling. And by doing this repeatedly over And by doing this repeatedly over And by doing this repeatedly over several sessions, over several weeks, several sessions, over several weeks, several sessions, over several weeks, they quickly went, in the cooling group, they quickly went, in the cooling group, they quickly went, in the cooling group, from a maximum of somewhere between 180 from a maximum of somewhere between 180 from a maximum of somewhere between 180 and 200, as I recall, I'm sort of and 200, as I recall, I'm sort of and 200, as I recall, I'm sort of estimating now, to 600 pull-ups in the estimating now, to 600 pull-ups in the estimating now, to 600 pull-ups in the equivalent amount of time, which is equivalent amount of time, which is equivalent amount of time, which is absolutely incredible. They then absolutely incredible. They then absolutely incredible. They then repeated this in a study on the bench repeated this in a study on the bench repeated this in a study on the bench press. And actually, the bench press press. And actually, the bench press press. And actually, the bench press study was pretty interesting because study was pretty interesting because study was pretty interesting because they actually had a control group that they actually had a control group that they actually had a control group that was admittedly taking specific amounts was admittedly taking specific amounts was admittedly taking specific amounts of anabolic steroids. The anabolic of anabolic steroids. The anabolic of anabolic steroids. The anabolic steroid was testosterone cypionate, steroid was testosterone cypionate, steroid was testosterone cypionate, which is essentially testosterone. which is essentially testosterone. which is essentially testosterone. And indeed, the testosterone cypionate, And indeed, the testosterone cypionate, And indeed, the testosterone cypionate, the steroid group, improved at a rate of the steroid group, improved at a rate of the steroid group, improved at a rate of about 1% per week. Um there were about 1% per week. Um there were about 1% per week. Um there were differences there were differences. differences there were differences. differences there were differences. And the cooling group basically left all And the cooling group basically left all And the cooling group basically left all other groups in the dust. It was just other groups in the dust. It was just other groups in the dust. It was just remarkable. So, cooling the core. I want remarkable. So, cooling the core. I want remarkable. So, cooling the core. I want to be very clear that it's not cooling to be very clear that it's not cooling to be very clear that it's not cooling the muscle. It wasn't about cooling the muscle. It wasn't about cooling the muscle. It wasn't about cooling the chest alone or just cooling the palms. chest alone or just cooling the palms. chest alone or just cooling the palms. It was about allowing cold to pass It was about allowing cold to pass It was about allowing cold to pass through the palms because of the unique through the palms because of the unique through the palms because of the unique vascular vasculature that's there, these vascular vasculature that's there, these vascular vasculature that's there, these AVAs, allowed these subjects to do far AVAs, allowed these subjects to do far AVAs, allowed these subjects to do far more work per unit time. And the more work per unit time. And the more work per unit time. And the important thing is that if they were to important thing is that if they were to important thing is that if they were to come back after doing 600 pull-ups or come back after doing 600 pull-ups or come back after doing 600 pull-ups or 500 pull-ups, you might say, "Well, wow, 500 pull-ups, you might say, "Well, wow, 500 pull-ups, you might say, "Well, wow, that's going to create a situation that's going to create a situation that's going to create a situation where recovery is going to be absolutely where recovery is going to be absolutely where recovery is going to be absolutely They could come back, not use the They could come back, not use the They could come back, not use the cooling, and they still saw a highly cooling, and they still saw a highly cooling, and they still saw a highly significant increase in the amount or significant increase in the amount or significant increase in the amount or the number of pull-ups or dips or bench the number of pull-ups or dips or bench the number of pull-ups or dips or bench press weight that they could do. press weight that they could do. press weight that they could do. Okay? So, what that meant is that it was Okay? So, what that meant is that it was Okay? So, what that meant is that it was both a excellent performance and an both a excellent performance and an both a excellent performance and an excellent training stimulus that they excellent training stimulus that they excellent training stimulus that they were able to recover from. Okay? I don't were able to recover from. Okay? I don't were able to recover from. Okay? I don't know if all of you are following this, know if all of you are following this, know if all of you are following this, but these are the sorts of increases in but these are the sorts of increases in but these are the sorts of increases in exercise output that are absolutely in exercise output that are absolutely in exercise output that are absolutely staggering. And that's why professional staggering. And that's why professional staggering. And that's why professional teams and the military and others teams and the military and others teams and the military and others capitalized on them very quickly and capitalized on them very quickly and capitalized on them very quickly and used these. Okay? Now, you may be used these. Okay? Now, you may be used these. Okay? Now, you may be asking, "What about endurance?" Right? Not "What about endurance?" Right? Not "What about endurance?" Right? Not everyone wants to be able to bench press everyone wants to be able to bench press everyone wants to be able to bench press a lot for multiple reps and sets. a lot for multiple reps and sets. a lot for multiple reps and sets. And I should just mention for the bench And I should just mention for the bench And I should just mention for the bench pressing, it was I believe they were pressing, it was I believe they were pressing, it was I believe they were they found people that could bench press they found people that could bench press they found people that could bench press 225, so that's 245-lb plates on the 225, so that's 245-lb plates on the 225, so that's 245-lb plates on the 45-lb standard Olympic bar for 45-lb standard Olympic bar for 45-lb standard Olympic bar for repetitions of anywhere from 6 to 10. repetitions of anywhere from 6 to 10. repetitions of anywhere from 6 to 10. And then they had them do the same And then they had them do the same And then they had them do the same thing. They did a set, they'd rest 2 or thing. They did a set, they'd rest 2 or thing. They did a set, they'd rest 2 or 3 minutes, sometimes up to 4 minutes, 3 minutes, sometimes up to 4 minutes, 3 minutes, sometimes up to 4 minutes, then do another set, repeat, then do another set, repeat, then do another set, repeat, repeat. And with cooling, they were able repeat. And with cooling, they were able repeat. And with cooling, they were able to increase the amount of work, the number increase the amount of work, the number increase the amount of work, the number of reps with the same weight. of reps with the same weight. of reps with the same weight. Sometimes they did have to increase sets Sometimes they did have to increase sets Sometimes they did have to increase sets to approximately double. So, it's pretty to approximately double. So, it's pretty to approximately double. So, it's pretty fantastic. So, with endurance, similar increases have with endurance, similar increases have with endurance, similar increases have been shown. And the way that they would been shown. And the way that they would been shown. And the way that they would do those tests are a little bit do those tests are a little bit do those tests are a little bit different, and they also point to a different, and they also point to a different, and they also point to a really important mechanism of why we really important mechanism of why we really important mechanism of why we stop doing work at all stop doing work at all stop doing work at all when we perceive that we are putting in when we perceive that we are putting in when we perceive that we are putting in too much effort. So, it gets right to too much effort. So, it gets right to too much effort. So, it gets right to the heart of the relationship between the heart of the relationship between the heart of the relationship between temperature in muscles and your temperature in muscles and your temperature in muscles and your willpower. Those are directly related. willpower. Those are directly related. willpower. Those are directly related. Your body heat and your willpower are Your body heat and your willpower are Your body heat and your willpower are linked in a physiological way. So, I'm linked in a physiological way. So, I'm linked in a physiological way. So, I'm not talking about the kind of stuff that not talking about the kind of stuff that not talking about the kind of stuff that you see as kind of like clickbait on the you see as kind of like clickbait on the you see as kind of like clickbait on the internet or like increase willpower now internet or like increase willpower now internet or like increase willpower now or become resilient now or never do this or become resilient now or never do this or become resilient now or never do this again if you want to be mentally strong. again if you want to be mentally strong. again if you want to be mentally strong. I'm talking about a physiological I'm talking about a physiological I'm talking about a physiological mechanism that exists in the body and mechanism that exists in the body and mechanism that exists in the body and brain that causes you to stop or that brain that causes you to stop or that brain that causes you to stop or that will allow you to continue to go harder will allow you to continue to go harder will allow you to continue to go harder and further than you normally would. and further than you normally would. and further than you normally would. Okay, so let's talk about willpower and Okay, so let's talk about willpower and Okay, so let's talk about willpower and heat and how heat shuts you down. heat and how heat shuts you down. heat and how heat shuts you down. In other words, if you are cool, if your In other words, if you are cool, if your In other words, if you are cool, if your body temperature is in a particular body temperature is in a particular body temperature is in a particular range, not only can you go further, but range, not only can you go further, but range, not only can you go further, but you will go further you will go further you will go further if you want to. if you want to. if you want to. Said differently, Said differently, Said differently, if you heat up too much, if you heat up too much, if you heat up too much, you will stop or you will die. you will stop or you will die. you will stop or you will die. Typically, people stop. There are Typically, people stop. There are Typically, people stop. There are individuals who will push to the point individuals who will push to the point individuals who will push to the point where they black out and die in the same where they black out and die in the same where they black out and die in the same way that, and please don't do this way that, and please don't do this way that, and please don't do this experiment, there are people who can sit down there are people who can sit down there are people who can sit down face-to-face and say, "Let's hold our face-to-face and say, "Let's hold our face-to-face and say, "Let's hold our breath, and whoever breathes first breath, and whoever breathes first breath, and whoever breathes first loses." Some people will just go until it's Some people will just go until it's Some people will just go until it's painful, and then they'll gasp and take painful, and then they'll gasp and take painful, and then they'll gasp and take a big breath. a big breath. a big breath. There are always those individuals who There are always those individuals who There are always those individuals who can override that reflex, and they will can override that reflex, and they will can override that reflex, and they will go until they pass out. Okay? And if you go until they pass out. Okay? And if you go until they pass out. Okay? And if you do that in water, you can very easily do that in water, you can very easily do that in water, you can very easily die. So, please don't do that die. So, please don't do that die. So, please don't do that experiment. But, there's a reflex But, there's a reflex But, there's a reflex that relates the body to the brain that relates the body to the brain that relates the body to the brain and the brain to the body that shuts off and the brain to the body that shuts off and the brain to the body that shuts off our effort when we get too hot. our effort when we get too hot. our effort when we get too hot. So, what Craig and his colleagues and So, what Craig and his colleagues and So, what Craig and his colleagues and now others have done is to do a test in now others have done is to do a test in now others have done is to do a test in the laboratory where rather than ask the laboratory where rather than ask the laboratory where rather than ask people to run outside until they people to run outside until they people to run outside until they absolutely don't want to run anymore, absolutely don't want to run anymore, absolutely don't want to run anymore, you put them on a treadmill and you set you put them on a treadmill and you set you put them on a treadmill and you set the speed. the speed. the speed. Okay? So, they have to keep up with the Okay? So, they have to keep up with the Okay? So, they have to keep up with the treadmill, and at some point they quit. treadmill, and at some point they quit. treadmill, and at some point they quit. And you take groups and you do those And you take groups and you do those And you take groups and you do those in different temperature environments. in different temperature environments. in different temperature environments. So, some people are running in a nice So, some people are running in a nice So, some people are running in a nice chilly laboratory. chilly laboratory. chilly laboratory. They get their heart rate up, so the They get their heart rate up, so the They get their heart rate up, so the maybe their heart rate goes from maybe their heart rate goes from maybe their heart rate goes from you know, 40 or 50 baseline heart rate, you know, 40 or 50 baseline heart rate, you know, 40 or 50 baseline heart rate, maybe it gets up to 80 or 100, and then maybe it gets up to 80 or 100, and then maybe it gets up to 80 or 100, and then they keep the rate of the treadmill they keep the rate of the treadmill they keep the rate of the treadmill going the same, and they will just going the same, and they will just going the same, and they will just plateau. So, they're getting to a steady plateau. So, they're getting to a steady plateau. So, they're getting to a steady state cadence or rhythm, and their heart state cadence or rhythm, and their heart state cadence or rhythm, and their heart is beating at more or less a steady is beating at more or less a steady is beating at more or less a steady state. Eventually, they'll probably stop state. Eventually, they'll probably stop state. Eventually, they'll probably stop cuz they have something else to do, but cuz they have something else to do, but cuz they have something else to do, but people will continue people will continue people will continue at that temperature at that temperature at that temperature and at that heart rate and at that heart rate and at that heart rate unless you start turning up the unless you start turning up the unless you start turning up the temperature in the room. temperature in the room. temperature in the room. And at some point, they will stop, and And at some point, they will stop, and And at some point, they will stop, and they'll stop much earlier they'll stop much earlier they'll stop much earlier when it gets hot because of something when it gets hot because of something when it gets hot because of something called cardiac drift. Okay? So, let's called cardiac drift. Okay? So, let's called cardiac drift. Okay? So, let's say I'm running, and I'm running at a say I'm running, and I'm running at a say I'm running, and I'm running at a steady cadence on this treadmill, and my steady cadence on this treadmill, and my steady cadence on this treadmill, and my heart rate is 85 beats per minute or 100 heart rate is 85 beats per minute or 100 heart rate is 85 beats per minute or 100 beats per minute, doesn't matter. Let's beats per minute, doesn't matter. Let's beats per minute, doesn't matter. Let's say 100 just for sake of example. say 100 just for sake of example. say 100 just for sake of example. Well, just making the room hotter is Well, just making the room hotter is Well, just making the room hotter is going to increase my heart rate further, going to increase my heart rate further, going to increase my heart rate further, even though I'm at the same output. even though I'm at the same output. even though I'm at the same output. And the brain And the brain And the brain does a computation. It somehow figures does a computation. It somehow figures does a computation. It somehow figures out that there's a heat component that's out that there's a heat component that's out that there's a heat component that's increasing heart rate, and there's an increasing heart rate, and there's an increasing heart rate, and there's an effort component from running that's effort component from running that's effort component from running that's driving heart rate. And if the heat driving heart rate. And if the heat driving heart rate. And if the heat component and the and the heart rate component and the and the heart rate component and the and the heart rate output from the effort get to hit a output from the effort get to hit a output from the effort get to hit a certain threshold, I stop. Okay? And certain threshold, I stop. Okay? And certain threshold, I stop. Okay? And some of you may think, well, there are some of you may think, well, there are some of you may think, well, there are people who just run and run and run and people who just run and run and run and people who just run and run and run and never stop. Eventually, everyone stops. never stop. Eventually, everyone stops. never stop. Eventually, everyone stops. Maybe it's because the race ended, maybe Maybe it's because the race ended, maybe Maybe it's because the race ended, maybe it's because it's because it's because uh you know, everyone else quit. I uh you know, everyone else quit. I uh you know, everyone else quit. I actually saw some stuff online. There actually saw some stuff online. There actually saw some stuff online. There are these races where people just will are these races where people just will are these races where people just will continuously do the same loop until continuously do the same loop until continuously do the same loop until everyone else drops out and then one guy everyone else drops out and then one guy everyone else drops out and then one guy or gal keeps going and past everybody. or gal keeps going and past everybody. or gal keeps going and past everybody. But typically, it stops because the race But typically, it stops because the race But typically, it stops because the race is over or because people quit. is over or because people quit. is over or because people quit. Increasing temperature Increasing temperature Increasing temperature increases the rate of quitting in part, increases the rate of quitting in part, increases the rate of quitting in part, not entirely, but in part because of not entirely, but in part because of not entirely, but in part because of this thing called cardiac drift, which this thing called cardiac drift, which this thing called cardiac drift, which you've probably experienced if you've probably experienced if you've probably experienced if you've been out on a hot day and you're walking been out on a hot day and you're walking been out on a hot day and you're walking uphill, you might stop to take a breath. uphill, you might stop to take a breath. uphill, you might stop to take a breath. If you sit in a sauna, your heart rate If you sit in a sauna, your heart rate If you sit in a sauna, your heart rate will increase. Heat increases heart will increase. Heat increases heart will increase. Heat increases heart rate. Effort increases heart rate. At a rate. Effort increases heart rate. At a rate. Effort increases heart rate. At a steady effort, you'll have a steady effort, you'll have a steady effort, you'll have a steady heart rate. If you increase the heat in heart rate. If you increase the heat in heart rate. If you increase the heat in the environment that you're engaging in the environment that you're engaging in the environment that you're engaging in that steady heart rate, your heart rate that steady heart rate, your heart rate that steady heart rate, your heart rate will now go up due to cardiac drift, and will now go up due to cardiac drift, and will now go up due to cardiac drift, and you will quit. Okay? So, Heller and you will quit. Okay? So, Heller and you will quit. Okay? So, Heller and colleagues have done experiments where they do have done experiments where they do have done experiments where they do palmar cooling under these environments. palmar cooling under these environments. palmar cooling under these environments. And that's wonderful because not only And that's wonderful because not only And that's wonderful because not only does it enable people to go further and does it enable people to go further and does it enable people to go further and faster for much longer. That's been shown for much longer. That's been shown for much longer. That's been shown statistically significant every time. statistically significant every time. statistically significant every time. But it also protects the brain and body But it also protects the brain and body But it also protects the brain and body hyperthermia, overheating, coma, nerve hyperthermia, overheating, coma, nerve hyperthermia, overheating, coma, nerve injury, nerve death, and actual death. injury, nerve death, and actual death. injury, nerve death, and actual death. Okay? So, you can see why this is such a Okay? So, you can see why this is such a Okay? So, you can see why this is such a valuable tool. a valuable tool. a valuable tool. So, what are they doing? Well, in this case, what are they doing? Well, in this case, what are they doing? Well, in this case, too, they're having them cool their too, they're having them cool their too, they're having them cool their hands. And they're cooling the palms. Cooling And they're cooling the palms. Cooling And they're cooling the palms. Cooling the palms of the feet is a little the palms of the feet is a little the palms of the feet is a little trickier, but cooling the face could trickier, but cooling the face could trickier, but cooling the face could actually work as well. And we're going actually work as well. And we're going actually work as well. And we're going to talk about cooling the face and how to talk about cooling the face and how to talk about cooling the face and how to incorporate this. So, at this point, to incorporate this. So, at this point, to incorporate this. So, at this point, I've just really wanted to uh I've just really wanted to uh I've just really wanted to uh impress upon you, not impress you, but impress upon you, not impress you, but impress upon you, not impress you, but impress upon you the fact that you have impress upon you the fact that you have impress upon you the fact that you have these three surfaces of your body that these three surfaces of your body that these three surfaces of your body that are very good at passing cold into the are very good at passing cold into the are very good at passing cold into the body such that it cools the core body such that it cools the core body such that it cools the core body temperature, and that's a good thing for temperature, and that's a good thing for temperature, and that's a good thing for health and safety and in order to health and safety and in order to health and safety and in order to maintain work output over longer periods maintain work output over longer periods maintain work output over longer periods of time or actually just do more work. I of time or actually just do more work. I of time or actually just do more work. I mean, to me, the result is just so mean, to me, the result is just so mean, to me, the result is just so staggering is the 100 to 180 pull-ups in staggering is the 100 to 180 pull-ups in staggering is the 100 to 180 pull-ups in the controls and then 600 pull-ups in the controls and then 600 pull-ups in the controls and then 600 pull-ups in the cooled individuals, right? They the cooled individuals, right? They the cooled individuals, right? They actually also feel mentally as if they actually also feel mentally as if they actually also feel mentally as if they can do more work. It's not just that can do more work. It's not just that can do more work. It's not just that they can, their willpower and is they can, their willpower and is they can, their willpower and is adjusted somehow by these shifts in adjusted somehow by these shifts in adjusted somehow by these shifts in temperature. Now, before we continue and get to the Now, before we continue and get to the Now, before we continue and get to the exact ways that any number of us can exact ways that any number of us can exact ways that any number of us can start to use this information, I want to start to use this information, I want to start to use this information, I want to talk about the opposite thing, which is talk about the opposite thing, which is talk about the opposite thing, which is heating. And we have to remember that these surfaces, we have to remember that these surfaces, we have to remember that these surfaces, the palms and the bottoms of the feet the palms and the bottoms of the feet the palms and the bottoms of the feet and the face, were not just arranged and the face, were not just arranged and the face, were not just arranged with these AVAs, these special with these AVAs, these special with these AVAs, these special uh ways to pass blood from arteries to uh ways to pass blood from arteries to uh ways to pass blood from arteries to veins in order to cool us for better veins in order to cool us for better veins in order to cool us for better athletic performance or to heat us uh athletic performance or to heat us uh athletic performance or to heat us uh for uh on cold days, but for both of for uh on cold days, but for both of for uh on cold days, but for both of those things. Now, those things. Now, those things. Now, Heller and colleagues and others have Heller and colleagues and others have Heller and colleagues and others have also explored how they these can be used also explored how they these can be used also explored how they these can be used to heat up the core. There are times to heat up the core. There are times to heat up the core. There are times when we want to heat up our core. when we want to heat up our core. when we want to heat up our core. Typically, we hear that most of the heat Typically, we hear that most of the heat Typically, we hear that most of the heat escapes through our head, so we'll put escapes through our head, so we'll put escapes through our head, so we'll put on a hat when we go outside. on a hat when we go outside. on a hat when we go outside. That's actually not true. Most of your That's actually not true. Most of your That's actually not true. Most of your heat escapes through your face, the heat escapes through your face, the heat escapes through your face, the palms of your hands, and the bottoms of palms of your hands, and the bottoms of palms of your hands, and the bottoms of your feet. Now, you should know why your feet. Now, you should know why your feet. Now, you should know why that's the case. that's the case. that's the case. What this means is that for post-surgery What this means is that for post-surgery What this means is that for post-surgery patients or for people that are hypothermic, or for people that are hypothermic, or for people that are hypothermic, indeed, you want to heat the core, indeed, you want to heat the core, indeed, you want to heat the core, right? But actually, I was on a swim right? But actually, I was on a swim right? But actually, I was on a swim recently where a friend became recently where a friend became recently where a friend became hypothermic. He was kind of um slurring hypothermic. He was kind of um slurring hypothermic. He was kind of um slurring his words and kind of staggering around his words and kind of staggering around his words and kind of staggering around when we got him back on the beach. We when we got him back on the beach. We when we got him back on the beach. We brought him over to the lifeguard brought him over to the lifeguard brought him over to the lifeguard station. He turned out to be fine. station. He turned out to be fine. station. He turned out to be fine. Again, this is why cold water swims are Again, this is why cold water swims are Again, this is why cold water swims are something that you really need to do in something that you really need to do in something that you really need to do in groups, not alone, and you really have groups, not alone, and you really have groups, not alone, and you really have to know what you're doing. to know what you're doing. to know what you're doing. There were reasons for why this happened There were reasons for why this happened There were reasons for why this happened that day. that day. that day. But, you know, we were basically people But, you know, we were basically people But, you know, we were basically people thought we were a little strange until thought we were a little strange until thought we were a little strange until they realized what was happening. they realized what was happening. they realized what was happening. We were walking down the beach basically We were walking down the beach basically We were walking down the beach basically sandwiching him between uh at our chest sandwiching him between uh at our chest sandwiching him between uh at our chest because we were still warmer than the because we were still warmer than the because we were still warmer than the than the ambient environment, the than the ambient environment, the than the ambient environment, the environment around us. We were pushing environment around us. We were pushing environment around us. We were pushing our chests against him to try and our chests against him to try and our chests against him to try and warm him up, to warm up his core. In warm him up, to warm up his core. In warm him up, to warm up his core. In retrospect, that was the wrong thing to retrospect, that was the wrong thing to retrospect, that was the wrong thing to do. In talking with Craig and uh talking do. In talking with Craig and uh talking do. In talking with Craig and uh talking to other colleagues that work on to other colleagues that work on to other colleagues that work on thermogenesis, uh what we should have thermogenesis, uh what we should have thermogenesis, uh what we should have done was warm the palms of his hands, done was warm the palms of his hands, done was warm the palms of his hands, the bottoms of his feet, and his face the bottoms of his feet, and his face the bottoms of his feet, and his face because that would insulate the heat because that would insulate the heat because that would insulate the heat loss. Now, he was very cold, so loss. Now, he was very cold, so loss. Now, he was very cold, so presumably there was vasoconstriction of presumably there was vasoconstriction of presumably there was vasoconstriction of the veins at these locations. Um and the veins at these locations. Um and the veins at these locations. Um and so it's not clear that would have so it's not clear that would have so it's not clear that would have been the only strategy to use. But, been the only strategy to use. But, been the only strategy to use. But, they have explored how to heat up they have explored how to heat up they have explored how to heat up post-surgery patients, and one of the post-surgery patients, and one of the post-surgery patients, and one of the best ways to do that is to get warm best ways to do that is to get warm best ways to do that is to get warm socks on the bottoms of the feet, get socks on the bottoms of the feet, get socks on the bottoms of the feet, get gloves on the hands, and if it can be gloves on the hands, and if it can be gloves on the hands, and if it can be done safely to warm the face. Now, of done safely to warm the face. Now, of done safely to warm the face. Now, of course, you don't want to obstruct course, you don't want to obstruct course, you don't want to obstruct respiration and things of that sort. respiration and things of that sort. respiration and things of that sort. But, again, But, again, But, again, the ability to pass heat into the body the ability to pass heat into the body the ability to pass heat into the body or to remove heat to the body is best or to remove heat to the body is best or to remove heat to the body is best done through these three surfaces. I done through these three surfaces. I done through these three surfaces. I can't emphasize that enough. So, I can't emphasize that enough. So, I can't emphasize that enough. So, I mentioned before that you want to cool mentioned before that you want to cool mentioned before that you want to cool the palms or the bottoms of the feet, the palms or the bottoms of the feet, the palms or the bottoms of the feet, although that's a little harder to do, although that's a little harder to do, although that's a little harder to do, or the face, but not so much that the or the face, but not so much that the or the face, but not so much that the blood vessels constrict because then you blood vessels constrict because then you blood vessels constrict because then you won't be able to pass cool into the body won't be able to pass cool into the body won't be able to pass cool into the body because those pipes got smaller. because those pipes got smaller. because those pipes got smaller. And therefore, you can't pass cool into And therefore, you can't pass cool into And therefore, you can't pass cool into the body. So, how can you start to the body. So, how can you start to the body. So, how can you start to incorporate this? Well, incorporate this? Well, incorporate this? Well, Craig and colleagues have a company that Craig and colleagues have a company that Craig and colleagues have a company that they've um spun out through Stanford. Uh they've um spun out through Stanford. Uh they've um spun out through Stanford. Uh we'll talk about that when we sit down we'll talk about that when we sit down we'll talk about that when we sit down with Craig that has with Craig that has with Craig that has made engineered devices that are has made engineered devices that are has made engineered devices that are optimal for this that are going to keep optimal for this that are going to keep optimal for this that are going to keep those passages open, keep the size of those passages open, keep the size of those passages open, keep the size of the those veins correct to pass cool the those veins correct to pass cool the those veins correct to pass cool into the body quickly for sake of elite into the body quickly for sake of elite into the body quickly for sake of elite sports performance and even recreational sports performance and even recreational sports performance and even recreational sports performance. But you can actually sports performance. But you can actually sports performance. But you can actually start to incorporate this. start to incorporate this. start to incorporate this. First of all, First of all, First of all, I always get asked how cold should the I always get asked how cold should the I always get asked how cold should the water be? Should it be ice water? Should water be? Should it be ice water? Should water be? Should it be ice water? Should it be very cold water? it be very cold water? it be very cold water? The answer is no. The answer is no. The answer is no. If you want to experience some of this If you want to experience some of this If you want to experience some of this effect without a device, one thing you effect without a device, one thing you effect without a device, one thing you could do would be for instance to do I could do would be for instance to do I could do would be for instance to do I don't know, I'll use the gym or the don't know, I'll use the gym or the don't know, I'll use the gym or the treadmill as an example. You could do treadmill as an example. You could do treadmill as an example. You could do your maximum number of pull-ups, stop, your maximum number of pull-ups, stop, your maximum number of pull-ups, stop, and then you could actually put your and then you could actually put your and then you could actually put your hands into or on the surface of hands into or on the surface of hands into or on the surface of a sink that is presumably stopped up a sink that is presumably stopped up a sink that is presumably stopped up with cool water. So, not ice water, not cool water. So, not ice water, not cool water. So, not ice water, not freezing cold, but cool water. Slightly freezing cold, but cool water. Slightly freezing cold, but cool water. Slightly cooler than body temperature before you started than body temperature before you started than body temperature before you started training would be a good place to start. training would be a good place to start. training would be a good place to start. You do that for 10 to 30 seconds. You do that for 10 to 30 seconds. You do that for 10 to 30 seconds. Then you could go back and do your next Then you could go back and do your next Then you could go back and do your next set. You would repeat the cooling. You set. You would repeat the cooling. You set. You would repeat the cooling. You would want to extend the amount of would want to extend the amount of would want to extend the amount of cooling somewhat, so you might want to cooling somewhat, so you might want to cooling somewhat, so you might want to do that for 30 seconds to a minute. This do that for 30 seconds to a minute. This do that for 30 seconds to a minute. This is not going to be perfect. You're going is not going to be perfect. You're going is not going to be perfect. You're going to have to play with how cold to make it to have to play with how cold to make it to have to play with how cold to make it in order to get the optimal effect, but in order to get the optimal effect, but in order to get the optimal effect, but you ought to see an effect nonetheless. you ought to see an effect nonetheless. you ought to see an effect nonetheless. The same is true if you're running and The same is true if you're running and The same is true if you're running and you're fatiguing, obviously you don't you're fatiguing, obviously you don't you're fatiguing, obviously you don't want to become hyperthermic. want to become hyperthermic. want to become hyperthermic. Cooling the hands or the bottoms of your Cooling the hands or the bottoms of your Cooling the hands or the bottoms of your feet or the face would be the ideal way feet or the face would be the ideal way feet or the face would be the ideal way to dump heat in order to be able to dump heat in order to be able to dump heat in order to be able to generate more output. generate more output. generate more output. Now, the face is something that we Now, the face is something that we Now, the face is something that we haven't talked a lot about. haven't talked a lot about. haven't talked a lot about. Everything I've told you up until now Everything I've told you up until now Everything I've told you up until now also says that if you are somebody who also says that if you are somebody who also says that if you are somebody who tends to get cold when you are outside, tends to get cold when you are outside, tends to get cold when you are outside, say in the winter or even in the fall, say in the winter or even in the fall, say in the winter or even in the fall, you tend to run cold, you tend to run cold, you tend to run cold, warming your face is going to be the warming your face is going to be the warming your face is going to be the most important thing that you can do. most important thing that you can do. most important thing that you can do. Now, it's kind of hard to do that Now, it's kind of hard to do that Now, it's kind of hard to do that without looking strange, like wearing a without looking strange, like wearing a without looking strange, like wearing a ski mask or something like that, but ski mask or something like that, but ski mask or something like that, but that is going to be more effective than that is going to be more effective than that is going to be more effective than covering and warming any other part of covering and warming any other part of covering and warming any other part of your body. Although, it'd be quite your body. Although, it'd be quite your body. Although, it'd be quite strange if you only had a ski mask on strange if you only had a ski mask on strange if you only had a ski mask on and you weren't wearing clothes anywhere and you weren't wearing clothes anywhere and you weren't wearing clothes anywhere else on your body. I don't recommend else on your body. I don't recommend else on your body. I don't recommend doing that outside. That would get you doing that outside. That would get you doing that outside. That would get you into all sorts of other kinds of into all sorts of other kinds of into all sorts of other kinds of trouble. It wouldn't be good for trouble. It wouldn't be good for trouble. It wouldn't be good for anybody. But, now you understand the principle and the now you understand the principle and the now you understand the principle and the locations at which to deliver heat and locations at which to deliver heat and locations at which to deliver heat and cold. So, let's say that you are out for cold. So, let's say that you are out for cold. So, let's say that you are out for a run and you want to incorporate this a run and you want to incorporate this a run and you want to incorporate this cooling mechanism. I talked to Craig cooling mechanism. I talked to Craig cooling mechanism. I talked to Craig about this. I said, "What would be the about this. I said, "What would be the about this. I said, "What would be the kind of uh kind of uh kind of uh poor person's approach to this before poor person's approach to this before poor person's approach to this before this device is uh commercially this device is uh commercially this device is uh commercially available?" He said, "Well, you available?" He said, "Well, you available?" He said, "Well, you could take a frozen uh juice can if you could take a frozen uh juice can if you could take a frozen uh juice can if you have one of those or a very cold can of have one of those or a very cold can of have one of those or a very cold can of soda and you would want to pass it back soda and you would want to pass it back soda and you would want to pass it back and forth between your two hands. The and forth between your two hands. The and forth between your two hands. The reason the passing back and forth is reason the passing back and forth is reason the passing back and forth is really important is because you Again, really important is because you Again, really important is because you Again, you don't want to be so cold that you don't want to be so cold that you don't want to be so cold that you constrict those venous portals that will constrict those venous portals that will constrict those venous portals that will allow cold to go into the body. allow cold to go into the body. allow cold to go into the body. Now, there are certainly people that are Now, there are certainly people that are Now, there are certainly people that are working on bike handles and that can working on bike handles and that can working on bike handles and that can actually cool the hands. You can expect actually cool the hands. You can expect actually cool the hands. You can expect with the Olympics coming up, people are with the Olympics coming up, people are with the Olympics coming up, people are aware of these data and are starting to aware of these data and are starting to aware of these data and are starting to incorporate into a number of things. incorporate into a number of things. incorporate into a number of things. Here's what you don't want to do. And Here's what you don't want to do. And Here's what you don't want to do. And there are sports teams that I won't there are sports teams that I won't there are sports teams that I won't mention by name or brand that have made mention by name or brand that have made mention by name or brand that have made this mistake and it cost them dearly. this mistake and it cost them dearly. this mistake and it cost them dearly. You don't want to cool the core if you You don't want to cool the core if you You don't want to cool the core if you want to cool the body, right? If it's a want to cool the body, right? If it's a want to cool the body, right? If it's a very hot day and you're going to train, very hot day and you're going to train, very hot day and you're going to train, getting into an ice bath first, sure, it getting into an ice bath first, sure, it getting into an ice bath first, sure, it will it will cool you down, but that's not it will cool you down, but that's not it will cool you down, but that's not going to be as effective as cooling the going to be as effective as cooling the going to be as effective as cooling the palms, the bottoms of the feet, and the palms, the bottoms of the feet, and the palms, the bottoms of the feet, and the face. I have a friend who does some important I have a friend who does some important I have a friend who does some important uh work in this space with people in uh work in this space with people in uh work in this space with people in various uh let's just say cultures where various uh let's just say cultures where various uh let's just say cultures where heat is generated quite a lot and they heat is generated quite a lot and they heat is generated quite a lot and they need to dump heat. Ice packs delivered need to dump heat. Ice packs delivered need to dump heat. Ice packs delivered to the face are something that they to the face are something that they to the face are something that they actually use in order to dump heat actually use in order to dump heat actually use in order to dump heat quickly. Now, again, you don't want to quickly. Now, again, you don't want to quickly. Now, again, you don't want to keep the ice pack on your face. These keep the ice pack on your face. These keep the ice pack on your face. These are people that are very high work are people that are very high work are people that are very high work output, right? Firefighters and output, right? Firefighters and output, right? Firefighters and similar. At very high work output, and similar. At very high work output, and similar. At very high work output, and then they'll put this essentially it's a then they'll put this essentially it's a then they'll put this essentially it's a it's like a cool face mask on their it's like a cool face mask on their it's like a cool face mask on their face. It'll allow their core body face. It'll allow their core body face. It'll allow their core body temperature come down, and then they temperature come down, and then they temperature come down, and then they remove it. They're not keeping it on remove it. They're not keeping it on remove it. They're not keeping it on there so long that they're getting the there so long that they're getting the there so long that they're getting the vasoconstriction. Okay, so there are a number of ways that Okay, so there are a number of ways that Okay, so there are a number of ways that you could do this. you could do this. you could do this. And again, I'm not giving specific And again, I'm not giving specific And again, I'm not giving specific temperatures because it depends on how temperatures because it depends on how temperatures because it depends on how hot that day and how hot your body hot that day and how hot your body hot that day and how hot your body temperature is. So, you can see why temperature is. So, you can see why temperature is. So, you can see why there's a need to create more devices there's a need to create more devices there's a need to create more devices for this. But, you can see a for this. But, you can see a for this. But, you can see a considerable improvement in endurance, in strength, improvement in endurance, in strength, improvement in endurance, in strength, and in all kinds of explosive and sort and in all kinds of explosive and sort and in all kinds of explosive and sort of you know, explosive power type output of you know, explosive power type output of you know, explosive power type output in athletics by using the surfaces of in athletics by using the surfaces of in athletics by using the surfaces of the hands and bottoms of the feet the hands and bottoms of the feet the hands and bottoms of the feet and face. and face. and face. The one that I've tried, because in The one that I've tried, because in The one that I've tried, because in anticipation of this episode, was the anticipation of this episode, was the anticipation of this episode, was the dips where then I would cool my hands. I dips where then I would cool my hands. I dips where then I would cool my hands. I actually decided to cool the bottoms of actually decided to cool the bottoms of actually decided to cool the bottoms of my feet as well, because it just feels my feet as well, because it just feels my feet as well, because it just feels good and it's particularly hot out good and it's particularly hot out good and it's particularly hot out lately. So, no shoes or socks on, put my lately. So, no shoes or socks on, put my lately. So, no shoes or socks on, put my feet into feet into feet into uh the bottoms of my feet just kind of uh the bottoms of my feet just kind of uh the bottoms of my feet just kind of hovering about a centimeter or two below hovering about a centimeter or two below hovering about a centimeter or two below the surface of a bucket of water that the surface of a bucket of water that the surface of a bucket of water that was just slightly it felt cool, slightly was just slightly it felt cool, slightly was just slightly it felt cool, slightly cooler than um body temperature um or cooler than um body temperature um or cooler than um body temperature um or so. It just basically what came out of so. It just basically what came out of so. It just basically what came out of the spigot after I let it run for a the spigot after I let it run for a the spigot after I let it run for a little bit. little bit. little bit. And indeed, I saw a 60% increase in the And indeed, I saw a 60% increase in the And indeed, I saw a 60% increase in the number of dips that I can do in a single number of dips that I can do in a single number of dips that I can do in a single session. So, it's actually a quite session. So, it's actually a quite session. So, it's actually a quite significant effect, and you don't have significant effect, and you don't have significant effect, and you don't have to be perfectly precise in order to do to be perfectly precise in order to do to be perfectly precise in order to do it. And of course, if you want to heat up And of course, if you want to heat up And of course, if you want to heat up for whatever reason, like you're in for whatever reason, like you're in for whatever reason, like you're in you're camping or you're lost in the you're camping or you're lost in the you're camping or you're lost in the environment, remember these three environment, remember these three environment, remember these three surfaces are going to be the best way to surfaces are going to be the best way to surfaces are going to be the best way to heat your core as well. So, up until heat your core as well. So, up until heat your core as well. So, up until now, we've been talking about how to use now, we've been talking about how to use now, we've been talking about how to use cold during a workout in order to cold during a workout in order to cold during a workout in order to improve performance. And indeed, cold improve performance. And indeed, cold improve performance. And indeed, cold applied to the appropriate parts of the applied to the appropriate parts of the applied to the appropriate parts of the body the appropriate times body the appropriate times body the appropriate times can vastly improve our performance in can vastly improve our performance in can vastly improve our performance in endurance and strength. endurance and strength. endurance and strength. Now I want to talk about the use of Now I want to talk about the use of Now I want to talk about the use of temperature, in particular cold, to temperature, in particular cold, to temperature, in particular cold, to improve the speed improve the speed improve the speed and the depth of recovery. and the depth of recovery. and the depth of recovery. Recovery is obviously vital. Recovery is obviously vital. Recovery is obviously vital. Right? During a weight training session Right? During a weight training session Right? During a weight training session or during an endurance session, that's or during an endurance session, that's or during an endurance session, that's just the stimulus for getting better the just the stimulus for getting better the just the stimulus for getting better the next time. And if you don't recover, you next time. And if you don't recover, you next time. And if you don't recover, you not only won't get better, but you'll not only won't get better, but you'll not only won't get better, but you'll get worse. get worse. get worse. There's a lot of interest in the use of There's a lot of interest in the use of There's a lot of interest in the use of cold in order to improve recovery in the in order to improve recovery in the in order to improve recovery in the short term. We see this and probably the short term. We see this and probably the short term. We see this and probably the best example of this would be fighters best example of this would be fighters best example of this would be fighters in combat sports between rounds or in combat sports between rounds or in combat sports between rounds or athletes during in between quarters or athletes during in between quarters or athletes during in between quarters or half time. That's one form of recovery. half time. That's one form of recovery. half time. That's one form of recovery. The ability to go back into the sport The ability to go back into the sport The ability to go back into the sport very soon on an order of minutes, very soon on an order of minutes, very soon on an order of minutes, anywhere from like 1 minute in between anywhere from like 1 minute in between anywhere from like 1 minute in between rounds in typical combat sports, or rounds in typical combat sports, or rounds in typical combat sports, or several minutes at a half time, et several minutes at a half time, et several minutes at a half time, et cetera. Typically, what we see is people cooling Typically, what we see is people cooling Typically, what we see is people cooling their core, their core, their core, cooling the back of their neck, cooling the back of their neck, cooling the back of their neck, cooling the top of their head. So it might be, the top of their head. So it might be, the top of their head. So it might be, you know, you know, you know, a sponge with cold water over the top of a sponge with cold water over the top of a sponge with cold water over the top of the head or an ice pack on the back of the head or an ice pack on the back of the head or an ice pack on the back of the neck or in some cases even wearing the neck or in some cases even wearing the neck or in some cases even wearing cold ice vests. cold ice vests. cold ice vests. This has actually been done. This has actually been done. This has actually been done. That's going to be a very inefficient That's going to be a very inefficient That's going to be a very inefficient way to improve recovery of that kind. way to improve recovery of that kind. way to improve recovery of that kind. Far better would be to cool the face, Far better would be to cool the face, Far better would be to cool the face, the palms of the hands, or the bottoms the palms of the hands, or the bottoms the palms of the hands, or the bottoms of the feet for the reasons that I of the feet for the reasons that I of the feet for the reasons that I described up until now. described up until now. described up until now. Submerging the body in an ice bath or Submerging the body in an ice bath or Submerging the body in an ice bath or taking a cold shower, taking a cold shower, taking a cold shower, say up to the neck or up to the chest or say up to the neck or up to the chest or say up to the neck or up to the chest or getting under cold water or jumping in a getting under cold water or jumping in a getting under cold water or jumping in a cold lake or something of that sort or cold lake or something of that sort or cold lake or something of that sort or in the locker room getting under the in the locker room getting under the in the locker room getting under the cold shower also would be a terrible way cold shower also would be a terrible way cold shower also would be a terrible way to cool off the body quickly in compared to cool off the body quickly in compared to cool off the body quickly in compared to the ways that I described through the to the ways that I described through the to the ways that I described through the palms of the hands, the bottoms of the palms of the hands, the bottoms of the palms of the hands, the bottoms of the feet, or the face feet, or the face feet, or the face for the following reason. First of all, for the following reason. First of all, for the following reason. First of all, it's not optimizing those portals of the it's not optimizing those portals of the it's not optimizing those portals of the face, palms of the hands, and the feet. face, palms of the hands, and the feet. face, palms of the hands, and the feet. And in addition, if it's very cold and And in addition, if it's very cold and And in addition, if it's very cold and you submerge or you cover a lot of the you submerge or you cover a lot of the you submerge or you cover a lot of the body with that cold, you're going to body with that cold, you're going to body with that cold, you're going to cause constriction of the very vessels cause constriction of the very vessels cause constriction of the very vessels and pathways that allow the body to and pathways that allow the body to and pathways that allow the body to efficiently dump heat. efficiently dump heat. efficiently dump heat. So again So again So again the key thing is to cool these one or the key thing is to cool these one or the key thing is to cool these one or two or three of these surfaces, but not two or three of these surfaces, but not two or three of these surfaces, but not so cold that you cause the so cold that you cause the so cold that you cause the vasoconstriction. So what does this mean vasoconstriction. So what does this mean vasoconstriction. So what does this mean for you? for you? for you? It means that getting in an ice bath or It means that getting in an ice bath or It means that getting in an ice bath or a cold shower or putting an ice pack on a cold shower or putting an ice pack on a cold shower or putting an ice pack on the back of your neck in most cases is the back of your neck in most cases is the back of your neck in most cases is not going to be as good as splashing not going to be as good as splashing not going to be as good as splashing cold water on your face or even just cold water on your face or even just cold water on your face or even just holding your face with a damp cool holding your face with a damp cool holding your face with a damp cool cloth or something of that sort. cloth or something of that sort. cloth or something of that sort. It's so it's kind of counterintuitive. It's so it's kind of counterintuitive. It's so it's kind of counterintuitive. You would think, "Oh, if I just jump You would think, "Oh, if I just jump You would think, "Oh, if I just jump into an ice bath, I'm going to cool down into an ice bath, I'm going to cool down into an ice bath, I'm going to cool down much faster than if I just cool these, much faster than if I just cool these, much faster than if I just cool these, you know, one or two or three of these you know, one or two or three of these you know, one or two or three of these select regions of the body." But that's select regions of the body." But that's select regions of the body." But that's actually not the case. actually not the case. actually not the case. And then of course there's recovery that And then of course there's recovery that And then of course there's recovery that occurs from session to session. So occurs from session to session. So occurs from session to session. So outside of the game or the match or the outside of the game or the match or the outside of the game or the match or the or the exercise um or the exercise um or the exercise um session. And many people are now relying on things many people are now relying on things many people are now relying on things like cryotherapy, which requires a lot like cryotherapy, which requires a lot like cryotherapy, which requires a lot of expensive equipment, big, you know, of expensive equipment, big, you know, of expensive equipment, big, you know, um liquid nitrogen-driven uh machine. That liquid nitrogen-driven uh machine. That liquid nitrogen-driven uh machine. That those aren't so common or for most those aren't so common or for most those aren't so common or for most people or accessible for most people. people or accessible for most people. people or accessible for most people. But a lot of people are using cold baths But a lot of people are using cold baths But a lot of people are using cold baths or ice baths or cold showers. or ice baths or cold showers. or ice baths or cold showers. And again, that's not going to optimize And again, that's not going to optimize And again, that's not going to optimize recovery. In fact, it's going to have an In fact, it's going to have an In fact, it's going to have an additional effect that is going to additional effect that is going to additional effect that is going to potentially block the training stimulus. potentially block the training stimulus. potentially block the training stimulus. When you get into an ice bath, indeed, When you get into an ice bath, indeed, When you get into an ice bath, indeed, there are provided it's not very, very there are provided it's not very, very there are provided it's not very, very cold. If you get into a cold shower, cold. If you get into a cold shower, cold. If you get into a cold shower, provided it's not very, very cold, you provided it's not very, very cold, you provided it's not very, very cold, you are indeed blocking some of the are indeed blocking some of the are indeed blocking some of the inflammation that occurs because of the inflammation that occurs because of the inflammation that occurs because of the training session. training session. training session. But in doing so, you also are blocking But in doing so, you also are blocking But in doing so, you also are blocking pathways such as mTOR, mammalian target pathways such as mTOR, mammalian target pathways such as mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin, which are involved in the of rapamycin, which are involved in the of rapamycin, which are involved in the adaptation for a muscle to become adaptation for a muscle to become adaptation for a muscle to become stronger or bigger. Put simply, stronger or bigger. Put simply, stronger or bigger. Put simply, covering the body in cold or immersing covering the body in cold or immersing covering the body in cold or immersing the body in cold after training the body in cold after training the body in cold after training can short-circuit or prevent the can short-circuit or prevent the can short-circuit or prevent the hypertrophy or muscle growth response. hypertrophy or muscle growth response. hypertrophy or muscle growth response. It has other effects that can be It has other effects that can be It has other effects that can be positive, right? It can induce positive, right? It can induce positive, right? It can induce thermogenesis, etc. It can reduce thermogenesis, etc. It can reduce thermogenesis, etc. It can reduce inflammation, but it can prevent some of inflammation, but it can prevent some of inflammation, but it can prevent some of the positive effects of exercise. Now, the positive effects of exercise. Now, the positive effects of exercise. Now, it hasn't been examined so much for it hasn't been examined so much for it hasn't been examined so much for endurance work, endurance work, endurance work, but let's say you come back from a round but let's say you come back from a round but let's say you come back from a round of endurance work, a run or a bike, or a of endurance work, a run or a bike, or a of endurance work, a run or a bike, or a swim, getting into a cool bath, or swim, getting into a cool bath, or swim, getting into a cool bath, or cooling the palms, the bottoms of cooling the palms, the bottoms of cooling the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the face, in my opinion, the feet, or the face, in my opinion, the feet, or the face, in my opinion, based on the science, would be better based on the science, would be better based on the science, would be better than completely immersing the body in than completely immersing the body in than completely immersing the body in the ice bath or the cold shower. There the ice bath or the cold shower. There the ice bath or the cold shower. There is a time and a place for the use of the is a time and a place for the use of the is a time and a place for the use of the ice bath or the cold shower or the cold ice bath or the cold shower or the cold ice bath or the cold shower or the cold plunge. Those tend to be when you want to Those tend to be when you want to Those tend to be when you want to deliberately increase brown fat deliberately increase brown fat deliberately increase brown fat thermogenesis, or when you want to del- thermogenesis, or when you want to del- thermogenesis, or when you want to del- deliberately work on mental resilience. deliberately work on mental resilience. deliberately work on mental resilience. And in a subsequent episode on fat loss, And in a subsequent episode on fat loss, And in a subsequent episode on fat loss, I'm going to talk about how to optimize I'm going to talk about how to optimize I'm going to talk about how to optimize the use of cold specifically for the use of cold specifically for the use of cold specifically for increasing metabolism and fat loss. increasing metabolism and fat loss. increasing metabolism and fat loss. But for now, since we're talking about But for now, since we're talking about But for now, since we're talking about the use of cold for improving the use of cold for improving the use of cold for improving performance and recovery, performance and recovery, performance and recovery, the suggestion that I'm going to provide the suggestion that I'm going to provide the suggestion that I'm going to provide is based on the work of Craig Heller and is based on the work of Craig Heller and is based on the work of Craig Heller and colleagues that I've been talking about, colleagues that I've been talking about, colleagues that I've been talking about, as well as a excellent book. I mainly as well as a excellent book. I mainly as well as a excellent book. I mainly rely on textbooks rely on textbooks rely on textbooks and uh special volume books, which are and uh special volume books, which are and uh special volume books, which are collections of papers from experts in a collections of papers from experts in a collections of papers from experts in a particular area that go beyond standard particular area that go beyond standard particular area that go beyond standard kind of college-level textbooks. The one kind of college-level textbooks. The one kind of college-level textbooks. The one that I've been relying on is called that I've been relying on is called that I've been relying on is called Thermoregulation in Human Performance, Thermoregulation in Human Performance, Thermoregulation in Human Performance, Physiological and Biological Aspects, by Physiological and Biological Aspects, by Physiological and Biological Aspects, by F. E. Marino. I don't know the F. E. Marino. I don't know the F. E. Marino. I don't know the publisher. I don't know the author. I do publisher. I don't know the author. I do publisher. I don't know the author. I do recognize some of the names of the recognize some of the names of the recognize some of the names of the particular papers there, but I just want particular papers there, but I just want particular papers there, but I just want to be clear there's no sort of business to be clear there's no sort of business to be clear there's no sort of business relationship or deal with them, but it's relationship or deal with them, but it's relationship or deal with them, but it's an excellent text. It's called an excellent text. It's called an excellent text. It's called Thermoregulation in Human Performance. Thermoregulation in Human Performance. Thermoregulation in Human Performance. You can find it You can find it You can find it online if you want to go really deep online if you want to go really deep online if you want to go really deep into this, but basically what they show into this, but basically what they show into this, but basically what they show is that if you can cool the body back to is that if you can cool the body back to is that if you can cool the body back to its resting temperature its resting temperature its resting temperature for a for a for a and rest by resting temperature, I mean and rest by resting temperature, I mean and rest by resting temperature, I mean within the range that you would see at within the range that you would see at within the range that you would see at any time of waking day, but not in any time of waking day, but not in any time of waking day, but not in exercise. So, just bringing the body exercise. So, just bringing the body exercise. So, just bringing the body temperature down to baseline, temperature down to baseline, temperature down to baseline, if you can do that, the sooner you can if you can do that, the sooner you can if you can do that, the sooner you can do that after a workout, the sooner that do that after a workout, the sooner that do that after a workout, the sooner that the muscle will recover, that the muscle will recover, that the muscle will recover, that the tendons will recover, and that the tendons will recover, and that the tendons will recover, and that the person, you, can get back into more person, you, can get back into more person, you, can get back into more endurance training, more weight endurance training, more weight endurance training, more weight training, et cetera. So, cold actually training, et cetera. So, cold actually training, et cetera. So, cold actually can be a very powerful tool for can be a very powerful tool for can be a very powerful tool for recovery, but to maximize return to recovery, but to maximize return to recovery, but to maximize return to baseline levels of temperature, baseline levels of temperature, baseline levels of temperature, it's my belief based on the it's my belief based on the it's my belief based on the studies that are published in this book, studies that are published in this book, studies that are published in this book, as well as my discussions with my as well as my discussions with my as well as my discussions with my colleague Craig Heller, and in reviewing colleague Craig Heller, and in reviewing colleague Craig Heller, and in reviewing the literature overall, that just the literature overall, that just the literature overall, that just simply cooling the entire body by simply cooling the entire body by simply cooling the entire body by jumping into an ice bath or a cold jumping into an ice bath or a cold jumping into an ice bath or a cold shower is not the best way to go. You shower is not the best way to go. You shower is not the best way to go. You really want to rely on one of these really want to rely on one of these really want to rely on one of these three glabrous skin portals of the three glabrous skin portals of the three glabrous skin portals of the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the face. So, now you probably know more than you So, now you probably know more than you So, now you probably know more than you ever wanted to know about how we ever wanted to know about how we ever wanted to know about how we regulate body temperature and how it can regulate body temperature and how it can regulate body temperature and how it can be applied to exercise both be applied to exercise both be applied to exercise both during the exercise session and during the exercise session and during the exercise session and afterward to optimize recovery. afterward to optimize recovery. afterward to optimize recovery. Many of us, all of us presumably, are Many of us, all of us presumably, are Many of us, all of us presumably, are also eating and drinking things and also eating and drinking things and also eating and drinking things and taking things at various times that can taking things at various times that can taking things at various times that can impact this process. impact this process. impact this process. And so, And so, And so, because of that, we should ask whether because of that, we should ask whether because of that, we should ask whether or not those things are impacting body or not those things are impacting body or not those things are impacting body temperature. And when we do that, we find that there And when we do that, we find that there And when we do that, we find that there are certain things that many of us are certain things that many of us are certain things that many of us are doing that are actually impairing our doing that are actually impairing our doing that are actually impairing our performance. So, for instance, if you are taking a So, for instance, if you are taking a So, for instance, if you are taking a pre-workout drink or you're ingesting a pre-workout drink or you're ingesting a pre-workout drink or you're ingesting a lot of caffeine or other substance to lot of caffeine or other substance to lot of caffeine or other substance to bring your body temperature up bring your body temperature up bring your body temperature up before exercise, you are limiting the before exercise, you are limiting the before exercise, you are limiting the amount of exercise that you can do. amount of exercise that you can do. amount of exercise that you can do. I can recall a time in college when I can recall a time in college when I can recall a time in college when I would drink a lot of espresso uh back would drink a lot of espresso uh back would drink a lot of espresso uh back then um ephedrine was sold over the then um ephedrine was sold over the then um ephedrine was sold over the counter. I remember taking it. It will counter. I remember taking it. It will counter. I remember taking it. It will really energize you for workouts. You can energize you for workouts. You can energize you for workouts. You can generate a lot of energy and get generate a lot of energy and get generate a lot of energy and get extremely focused taking those things. extremely focused taking those things. extremely focused taking those things. They do increase heart rate. They can be They do increase heart rate. They can be They do increase heart rate. They can be quite dangerous. I don't recommend quite dangerous. I don't recommend quite dangerous. I don't recommend people take them. In fact, I think people take them. In fact, I think people take them. In fact, I think ephedrine is now off the shelves as a um ephedrine is now off the shelves as a um ephedrine is now off the shelves as a um non- prescription compound because various prescription compound because various prescription compound because various people died from taking it who were people died from taking it who were people died from taking it who were sensitive to it or exercised in heat. sensitive to it or exercised in heat. sensitive to it or exercised in heat. But looking back at that, I realized it But looking back at that, I realized it But looking back at that, I realized it was a foolish approach. was a foolish approach. was a foolish approach. It was increasing core thermogenesis. It was increasing core thermogenesis. It was increasing core thermogenesis. Sure, I might have burned a few more Sure, I might have burned a few more Sure, I might have burned a few more calories, but actually when I look at calories, but actually when I look at calories, but actually when I look at the data the data the data that are coming from specific cooling that are coming from specific cooling that are coming from specific cooling and how that can so increase in and how that can so increase in and how that can so increase in performance if done properly, and then I performance if done properly, and then I performance if done properly, and then I compare that to the effects of taking compare that to the effects of taking compare that to the effects of taking some sort of thermogenic compound, some sort of thermogenic compound, some sort of thermogenic compound, whatever it is, some pre-workout or some whatever it is, some pre-workout or some whatever it is, some pre-workout or some pill or high levels of caffeine, pill or high levels of caffeine, pill or high levels of caffeine, it's very clear that increasing body it's very clear that increasing body it's very clear that increasing body temperature prior to working out is the temperature prior to working out is the temperature prior to working out is the exact wrong thing that one would want to exact wrong thing that one would want to exact wrong thing that one would want to do. You don't want to stay so cold that do. You don't want to stay so cold that do. You don't want to stay so cold that you can't generate good muscle you can't generate good muscle you can't generate good muscle contractions. You don't want to you contractions. You don't want to you contractions. You don't want to you know, be like I am coming out of know, be like I am coming out of know, be like I am coming out of the cold ocean, you know, with claws for the cold ocean, you know, with claws for the cold ocean, you know, with claws for hands, but hands, but hands, but one wants to have your body temperature one wants to have your body temperature one wants to have your body temperature in a range that still allows you to work in a range that still allows you to work in a range that still allows you to work hard and perform well. hard and perform well. hard and perform well. Now, in terms of recovery, Now, in terms of recovery, Now, in terms of recovery, things like alcohol, we know are things like alcohol, we know are things like alcohol, we know are vasodilators. So, those are going to vasodilators. So, those are going to vasodilators. So, those are going to cause people to drop body temperature. cause people to drop body temperature. cause people to drop body temperature. So, you might think, "Oh, well, that So, you might think, "Oh, well, that So, you might think, "Oh, well, that sounds great for recovery." And I don't sounds great for recovery." And I don't sounds great for recovery." And I don't think if people should be drinking who think if people should be drinking who think if people should be drinking who are you know, have problems with alcohol are you know, have problems with alcohol are you know, have problems with alcohol intake, you know, alcoholics or they're intake, you know, alcoholics or they're intake, you know, alcoholics or they're not of drinking age, etc. I'm not a not of drinking age, etc. I'm not a not of drinking age, etc. I'm not a drinker, but I do have a good friend drinker, but I do have a good friend drinker, but I do have a good friend who's a quite accomplished athlete who who's a quite accomplished athlete who who's a quite accomplished athlete who basically drinks a beer or two after his basically drinks a beer or two after his basically drinks a beer or two after his long runs or cycling. And you know, his long runs or cycling. And you know, his long runs or cycling. And you know, his argument is, well, I'm dumping body heat argument is, well, I'm dumping body heat argument is, well, I'm dumping body heat and I like a beer. And he's probably and I like a beer. And he's probably and I like a beer. And he's probably right. It's probably a really good tool right. It's probably a really good tool right. It's probably a really good tool provided you don't have issues with provided you don't have issues with provided you don't have issues with alcohol that would preclude that as a alcohol that would preclude that as a alcohol that would preclude that as a tool or you're not of drinking age. tool or you're not of drinking age. tool or you're not of drinking age. But anything that you ingest after But anything that you ingest after But anything that you ingest after exercise that would increase body exercise that would increase body exercise that would increase body temperature is going to impede recovery. temperature is going to impede recovery. temperature is going to impede recovery. Anything that you do that lowers body Anything that you do that lowers body Anything that you do that lowers body temperature provided it's in safe ranges temperature provided it's in safe ranges temperature provided it's in safe ranges is going to accelerate recovery. is going to accelerate recovery. is going to accelerate recovery. And that brings us to the whole host of And that brings us to the whole host of And that brings us to the whole host of compounds that people take that can compounds that people take that can compounds that people take that can increase body temperature. increase body temperature. increase body temperature. And many people are taking these things And many people are taking these things And many people are taking these things in order to increase fat burning and in order to increase fat burning and in order to increase fat burning and increase metabolism, but in my opinion, increase metabolism, but in my opinion, increase metabolism, but in my opinion, it's impeding their ability to perform it's impeding their ability to perform it's impeding their ability to perform well. And especially if the performance well. And especially if the performance well. And especially if the performance is something that you're focused on is something that you're focused on is something that you're focused on aside from body recomposition, losing aside from body recomposition, losing aside from body recomposition, losing fat, building muscle. But even if you're fat, building muscle. But even if you're fat, building muscle. But even if you're focused on losing fat, building muscle, focused on losing fat, building muscle, focused on losing fat, building muscle, you have to ask yourself, is the body you have to ask yourself, is the body you have to ask yourself, is the body temperature increase that I'm getting temperature increase that I'm getting temperature increase that I'm getting from these compounds really worth it from these compounds really worth it from these compounds really worth it given that it can block or prevent my given that it can block or prevent my given that it can block or prevent my performance from being as good as it performance from being as good as it performance from being as good as it could. In other words, is it worth could. In other words, is it worth could. In other words, is it worth taking something that makes you feel taking something that makes you feel taking something that makes you feel very energized to go work out, but then very energized to go work out, but then very energized to go work out, but then you now know that you are stopping you now know that you are stopping you now know that you are stopping earlier and you're performing less well, earlier and you're performing less well, earlier and you're performing less well, fewer reps, fewer steps overall? fewer reps, fewer steps overall? fewer reps, fewer steps overall? Is it worth it? If you had not taken Is it worth it? If you had not taken Is it worth it? If you had not taken that thing, then you could perform much that thing, then you could perform much that thing, then you could perform much longer and at much higher capacity. and at much higher capacity. and at much higher capacity. Now, some of you are probably saying, Now, some of you are probably saying, Now, some of you are probably saying, well, that's ridiculous because when I well, that's ridiculous because when I well, that's ridiculous because when I drink a quadruple espresso and I pop a drink a quadruple espresso and I pop a drink a quadruple espresso and I pop a whatever pre-workout or drink a whatever pre-workout or drink a whatever pre-workout or drink a pre-workout, then I know I can go much pre-workout, then I know I can go much pre-workout, then I know I can go much further. Ah, that might be true, but the further. Ah, that might be true, but the further. Ah, that might be true, but the increase in temperature is also costing increase in temperature is also costing increase in temperature is also costing you on the recovery side. And unless you on the recovery side. And unless you on the recovery side. And unless you're doing other things to improve you're doing other things to improve you're doing other things to improve your recovery, and I know many people your recovery, and I know many people your recovery, and I know many people that are. I don't judge, but many people that are. I don't judge, but many people that are. I don't judge, but many people who are doing those things are also who are doing those things are also who are doing those things are also augmenting their recovery through augmenting their recovery through augmenting their recovery through hormone augmentation and other hormone augmentation and other hormone augmentation and other performance-enhancing tools, performance-enhancing tools, performance-enhancing tools, then for the typical person who's not then for the typical person who's not then for the typical person who's not doing that, it's probably shooting doing that, it's probably shooting doing that, it's probably shooting yourself in the foot. So, let's take a yourself in the foot. So, let's take a yourself in the foot. So, let's take a look at what some of those compounds are look at what some of those compounds are look at what some of those compounds are and what they do, and just briefly and what they do, and just briefly and what they do, and just briefly review whether or not they would be a review whether or not they would be a review whether or not they would be a good or a bad idea to include if your good or a bad idea to include if your good or a bad idea to include if your main goals are performance or your main goals are performance or your main goals are performance or your main goals are body recomposition or both. goals are body recomposition or both. goals are body recomposition or both. So, let's just briefly discuss So, let's just briefly discuss So, let's just briefly discuss stimulants. This could be caffeine, this stimulants. This could be caffeine, this stimulants. This could be caffeine, this could be any other kind of stimulant could be any other kind of stimulant could be any other kind of stimulant that are typically in a pre-workout that are typically in a pre-workout that are typically in a pre-workout drink or anything that might get you drink or anything that might get you drink or anything that might get you revved up before exercising. This could revved up before exercising. This could revved up before exercising. This could even be very strong tea. I've mentioned even be very strong tea. I've mentioned even be very strong tea. I've mentioned I'm a big consumer of mate. I like yerba I'm a big consumer of mate. I like yerba I'm a big consumer of mate. I like yerba mate. I love that stuff. Uh and I also mate. I love that stuff. Uh and I also mate. I love that stuff. Uh and I also drink caffeine. I drink I love coffee of drink caffeine. I drink I love coffee of drink caffeine. I drink I love coffee of various kinds, mushroom coffee, black various kinds, mushroom coffee, black various kinds, mushroom coffee, black coffee, espresso, etc. coffee, espresso, etc. coffee, espresso, etc. I'm a chronic caffeine user. I'm a chronic caffeine user. I'm a chronic caffeine user. I don't think I'm an addict, but I don't think I'm an addict, but I don't think I'm an addict, but I'm a chronic caffeine user, meaning I'm a chronic caffeine user, meaning I'm a chronic caffeine user, meaning when I drink caffeine, my heart rate when I drink caffeine, my heart rate when I drink caffeine, my heart rate doesn't increase so much that it feels doesn't increase so much that it feels doesn't increase so much that it feels like a shock to my system. Some people like a shock to my system. Some people like a shock to my system. Some people are not caffeine adapted or they're very are not caffeine adapted or they're very are not caffeine adapted or they're very caffeine sensitive. caffeine sensitive. caffeine sensitive. Here's the straightforward rule. Here's the straightforward rule. Here's the straightforward rule. Caffeine for somebody who doesn't drink caffeine for somebody who doesn't drink caffeine for somebody who doesn't drink caffeine very much will constrict the blood very much will constrict the blood very much will constrict the blood vessels and will increase retention of vessels and will increase retention of vessels and will increase retention of body heat and is probably a bad idea body heat and is probably a bad idea body heat and is probably a bad idea before exercise. before exercise. before exercise. For somebody who's caffeine adapted and For somebody who's caffeine adapted and For somebody who's caffeine adapted and is used to drinking caffeine, it won't is used to drinking caffeine, it won't is used to drinking caffeine, it won't have that vasoconstriction effect. have that vasoconstriction effect. have that vasoconstriction effect. That's what the data point to That's what the data point to That's what the data point to because I'm adapted to it, and but it because I'm adapted to it, and but it because I'm adapted to it, and but it will cause vasodilation will cause vasodilation will cause vasodilation and will allow me to dump body heat. So, and will allow me to dump body heat. So, and will allow me to dump body heat. So, for me, I use it before I train or do for me, I use it before I train or do for me, I use it before I train or do any kind of exercise because I tend to any kind of exercise because I tend to any kind of exercise because I tend to do that early in the day. It won't do that early in the day. It won't do that early in the day. It won't prevent me from sleeping, and it causes prevent me from sleeping, and it causes prevent me from sleeping, and it causes vasodilation. And then afterwards, I'm aware that it And then afterwards, I'm aware that it And then afterwards, I'm aware that it causes vasoconstriction after the causes vasoconstriction after the causes vasoconstriction after the caffeine wears off. So, for somebody who caffeine wears off. So, for somebody who caffeine wears off. So, for somebody who drinks two or three or more two or three or more two or three or more cups of coffee a day or mate a day, so cups of coffee a day or mate a day, so cups of coffee a day or mate a day, so we're talking intake of anywhere from we're talking intake of anywhere from we're talking intake of anywhere from 100 to 400 mg of caffeine. 100 to 400 mg of caffeine. 100 to 400 mg of caffeine. What you want to do is you want to make What you want to do is you want to make What you want to do is you want to make sure that you would do that you would do that you would do that before exercise and probably not after before exercise and probably not after before exercise and probably not after exercise. That just makes logical sense exercise. That just makes logical sense exercise. That just makes logical sense given what we know about thermal given what we know about thermal given what we know about thermal regulation. And if you're somebody who regulation. And if you're somebody who regulation. And if you're somebody who doesn't drink caffeine, drinking doesn't drink caffeine, drinking doesn't drink caffeine, drinking caffeine before a workout is going to be caffeine before a workout is going to be caffeine before a workout is going to be about the worst thing that you could about the worst thing that you could about the worst thing that you could possibly do because it's going to possibly do because it's going to possibly do because it's going to increase core body temperature through increase core body temperature through increase core body temperature through its thermogenic effects and it's going its thermogenic effects and it's going its thermogenic effects and it's going to constrict your blood vessels and make to constrict your blood vessels and make to constrict your blood vessels and make it even harder to dump heat. So, I don't it even harder to dump heat. So, I don't it even harder to dump heat. So, I don't suggest that people drink caffeine or suggest that people drink caffeine or suggest that people drink caffeine or not. I just suggest that you think about not. I just suggest that you think about not. I just suggest that you think about whether or not you're caffeine adapted whether or not you're caffeine adapted whether or not you're caffeine adapted or not and decide whether or not you or not and decide whether or not you or not and decide whether or not you want to drink caffeine. In general, want to drink caffeine. In general, want to drink caffeine. In general, you're going to be better not drinking you're going to be better not drinking you're going to be better not drinking any caffeine than you are drinking any caffeine than you are drinking any caffeine than you are drinking caffeine unless you're a heavy caffeine unless you're a heavy caffeine unless you're a heavy caffeine user or abuser, in which case not user or abuser, in which case not user or abuser, in which case not drinking caffeine is going to give you drinking caffeine is going to give you drinking caffeine is going to give you vicious headaches and it's going to make vicious headaches and it's going to make vicious headaches and it's going to make it very hard to get motivated because it very hard to get motivated because it very hard to get motivated because you're just not used to it. It takes you're just not used to it. It takes you're just not used to it. It takes about 3 weeks to get used to no about 3 weeks to get used to no about 3 weeks to get used to no caffeine. It's brutal. I've done it caffeine. It's brutal. I've done it caffeine. It's brutal. I've done it before. I've done caffeine fast. I don't before. I've done caffeine fast. I don't before. I've done caffeine fast. I don't know that I ever want to do it again. know that I ever want to do it again. know that I ever want to do it again. That's how painful it was. That's how painful it was. That's how painful it was. But, you get headaches because of the But, you get headaches because of the But, you get headaches because of the effects on vasodilation and effects on vasodilation and effects on vasodilation and constriction. If you like caffeine, use in moderate If you like caffeine, use in moderate If you like caffeine, use in moderate amounts and use it before your workouts, amounts and use it before your workouts, amounts and use it before your workouts, not after. If you don't like caffeine or not after. If you don't like caffeine or not after. If you don't like caffeine or you don't use it very often, stay away you don't use it very often, stay away you don't use it very often, stay away from it anywhere close to exercise from it anywhere close to exercise from it anywhere close to exercise before or after, for that matter. One of before or after, for that matter. One of before or after, for that matter. One of the more commonly used compounds that's the more commonly used compounds that's the more commonly used compounds that's sold over the counter are non-steroid sold over the counter are non-steroid sold over the counter are non-steroid anti-inflammatories. So, things like anti-inflammatories. So, things like anti-inflammatories. So, things like Tylenol and Advil and other trade names, Tylenol and Advil and other trade names, Tylenol and Advil and other trade names, naproxen sodium, things of that sort. naproxen sodium, things of that sort. naproxen sodium, things of that sort. Almost all of those drop body Almost all of those drop body Almost all of those drop body temperature to some temperature to some temperature to some extent. And that's why it's often extent. And that's why it's often extent. And that's why it's often recommended that people take them when recommended that people take them when recommended that people take them when they have a fever. Although the whole they have a fever. Although the whole they have a fever. Although the whole business of dropping body temperature business of dropping body temperature business of dropping body temperature artificially when you have a fever is artificially when you have a fever is artificially when you have a fever is itself an interesting discussion whether itself an interesting discussion whether itself an interesting discussion whether or not uh that's the most adaptive or not uh that's the most adaptive or not uh that's the most adaptive or best thing to do. Certainly, you don't best thing to do. Certainly, you don't best thing to do. Certainly, you don't want fever to go too high. Can be very want fever to go too high. Can be very want fever to go too high. Can be very dangerous. Can kill you. But, dangerous. Can kill you. But, dangerous. Can kill you. But, artificially dropping body temperature artificially dropping body temperature artificially dropping body temperature with these compounds can be tricky. Now, with these compounds can be tricky. Now, with these compounds can be tricky. Now, a number of athletes, especially a number of athletes, especially a number of athletes, especially endurance athletes, will rely on these endurance athletes, will rely on these endurance athletes, will rely on these non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs specifically to keep body temperature specifically to keep body temperature specifically to keep body temperature lower during long bouts of exertion. lower during long bouts of exertion. lower during long bouts of exertion. This is a little bit of a pharmacologic This is a little bit of a pharmacologic This is a little bit of a pharmacologic version of dumping heat instead of using version of dumping heat instead of using version of dumping heat instead of using palmer cooling um palmer cooling um palmer cooling um or, you know, face ice pack or, you know, face ice pack or, you know, face ice pack cooling, they're relying on pharmacology cooling, they're relying on pharmacology cooling, they're relying on pharmacology to drop their core body temperature. to drop their core body temperature. to drop their core body temperature. That has certain obvious advantages. That has certain obvious advantages. That has certain obvious advantages. Those advantages should be obvious and Those advantages should be obvious and Those advantages should be obvious and the reasons for them should be obvious the reasons for them should be obvious the reasons for them should be obvious based on everything we've talked about based on everything we've talked about based on everything we've talked about up until now. Lower temperature allows up until now. Lower temperature allows up until now. Lower temperature allows you to go further, harder with more you to go further, harder with more you to go further, harder with more intensity. However, they do have effects on the However, they do have effects on the However, they do have effects on the liver and they can also have effects on the and they can also have effects on the and they can also have effects on the kidneys. And during long bouts of kidneys. And during long bouts of kidneys. And during long bouts of exercise or even short bouts of exercise or even short bouts of exercise or even short bouts of exercise, water balance and salt balance exercise, water balance and salt balance exercise, water balance and salt balance are also going to be vital to maintain are also going to be vital to maintain are also going to be vital to maintain in order to perform well, in order to perform well, in order to perform well, generate the best muscle contraction, generate the best muscle contraction, generate the best muscle contraction, stay mentally alert, and also to stay mentally alert, and also to stay mentally alert, and also to stay alive. We will do an episode on salt, alive. We will do an episode on salt, alive. We will do an episode on salt, electrolytes, and water and water electrolytes, and water and water electrolytes, and water and water balance. But, you probably want to think balance. But, you probably want to think balance. But, you probably want to think carefully about whether or not you want carefully about whether or not you want carefully about whether or not you want to use non-steroid anti-inflammatories to use non-steroid anti-inflammatories to use non-steroid anti-inflammatories before any training session just for the before any training session just for the before any training session just for the performance augmentation effect unless performance augmentation effect unless performance augmentation effect unless you're working carefully with a coach, you're working carefully with a coach, you're working carefully with a coach, whether or not you've done that in whether or not you've done that in whether or not you've done that in practices, and of course, whether or not practices, and of course, whether or not practices, and of course, whether or not you are in a situation where monitoring you are in a situation where monitoring you are in a situation where monitoring your body temperature carefully is going your body temperature carefully is going your body temperature carefully is going to be important. You might ask, "Well, to be important. You might ask, "Well, to be important. You might ask, "Well, when would that be?" Well, desert races, when would that be?" Well, desert races, when would that be?" Well, desert races, summer training and races, winter rides. summer training and races, winter rides. summer training and races, winter rides. You certainly don't want to get too You certainly don't want to get too You certainly don't want to get too cool, either. So, alcohol, caffeine, and cool, either. So, alcohol, caffeine, and cool, either. So, alcohol, caffeine, and non-steroid anti-inflam- non-steroid anti-inflam- non-steroid anti-inflam- anti-inflammatory drugs, because of anti-inflammatory drugs, because of anti-inflammatory drugs, because of their effects on temperature will impact their effects on temperature will impact their effects on temperature will impact performance and recovery, but you want performance and recovery, but you want performance and recovery, but you want to be cautious about how you approach to be cautious about how you approach to be cautious about how you approach them. I personally am more a fan of them. I personally am more a fan of them. I personally am more a fan of using caffeine in moderate doses for the using caffeine in moderate doses for the using caffeine in moderate doses for the reason I described before, as well to reason I described before, as well to reason I described before, as well to use the cooling of the palms, cooling of use the cooling of the palms, cooling of use the cooling of the palms, cooling of the of the bottoms of my feet, right? Uh the of the bottoms of my feet, right? Uh the of the bottoms of my feet, right? Uh by placing them into a bucket or uh into by placing them into a bucket or uh into by placing them into a bucket or uh into a cool bath after training, or a cool bath after training, or a cool bath after training, or cooling the face after training, or cooling the face after training, or cooling the face after training, or sometimes even during training. It just sometimes even during training. It just sometimes even during training. It just seems like there's more of a margin to seems like there's more of a margin to seems like there's more of a margin to play with the variables to heat up the play with the variables to heat up the play with the variables to heat up the water or cool it down a little bit water or cool it down a little bit water or cool it down a little bit um to include one palm or the other um to include one palm or the other um to include one palm or the other palm. There's just all sorts of uh palm. There's just all sorts of uh palm. There's just all sorts of uh good parameter space, as we call it in good parameter space, as we call it in good parameter space, as we call it in science, that you can play with and work science, that you can play with and work science, that you can play with and work with to find what works for you. As with to find what works for you. As with to find what works for you. As Whereas when you pop a pill, sure, you Whereas when you pop a pill, sure, you Whereas when you pop a pill, sure, you can adjust the dose, and you can adjust can adjust the dose, and you can adjust can adjust the dose, and you can adjust it next time, but once it's in you, it's it next time, but once it's in you, it's it next time, but once it's in you, it's in you, and there's going to be some in you, and there's going to be some in you, and there's going to be some period of time before you can modulate period of time before you can modulate period of time before you can modulate it. What I've offered today are ways in it. What I've offered today are ways in it. What I've offered today are ways in which you can use temperature to which you can use temperature to which you can use temperature to powerfully improve performance. And if you think improve performance. And if you think improve performance. And if you think about it, you can vary that from set to about it, you can vary that from set to about it, you can vary that from set to set. You could do your pull-ups or your set. You could do your pull-ups or your set. You could do your pull-ups or your sprints, and then cool your palms, and sprints, and then cool your palms, and sprints, and then cool your palms, and then try and go with colder water the then try and go with colder water the then try and go with colder water the next round, or warmer water the next round, or warmer water the next round, or warmer water the next round, or do both feet and palms and round, or do both feet and palms and round, or do both feet and palms and face. I mean, you can do all sorts of face. I mean, you can do all sorts of face. I mean, you can do all sorts of things moment to moment and see what things moment to moment and see what things moment to moment and see what works for you. Again, essentially zero works for you. Again, essentially zero works for you. Again, essentially zero cost or no cost. Whereas when you pop cost or no cost. Whereas when you pop cost or no cost. Whereas when you pop something, you take a pill, you're something, you take a pill, you're something, you take a pill, you're basically in that regimen for the next basically in that regimen for the next basically in that regimen for the next hour or two or more. You can always take hour or two or more. You can always take hour or two or more. You can always take more, but you can't really take less. more, but you can't really take less. more, but you can't really take less. You can't really extract it from your You can't really extract it from your You can't really extract it from your body in real time. So, it doesn't give body in real time. So, it doesn't give body in real time. So, it doesn't give you a lot of opportunity to play you a lot of opportunity to play you a lot of opportunity to play scientist, which is what I like to do, scientist, which is what I like to do, scientist, which is what I like to do, because what I'm always trying to do is because what I'm always trying to do is because what I'm always trying to do is trying to dial in the best protocols trying to dial in the best protocols trying to dial in the best protocols possible based on the mechanisms and possible based on the mechanisms and possible based on the mechanisms and data. And if you can do that moment to data. And if you can do that moment to data. And if you can do that moment to moment, that places you in a position of moment, that places you in a position of moment, that places you in a position of power. Once again, we've covered a lot of Once again, we've covered a lot of Once again, we've covered a lot of material. By now, after seeing this material. By now, after seeing this material. By now, after seeing this episode or listening to this episode, episode or listening to this episode, episode or listening to this episode, you should understand a lot about how you should understand a lot about how you should understand a lot about how your body heats and cools itself and the your body heats and cools itself and the your body heats and cools itself and the value of that for physical performance. value of that for physical performance. value of that for physical performance. I hope you also appreciate that you have I hope you also appreciate that you have I hope you also appreciate that you have tools at your disposal to vastly improve tools at your disposal to vastly improve tools at your disposal to vastly improve your physical performance. your physical performance. your physical performance. And should you try those, please let us And should you try those, please let us And should you try those, please let us know how it goes. know how it goes. know how it goes. If you decide to do palmar cooling If you decide to do palmar cooling If you decide to do palmar cooling during your runs or after your runs, during your runs or after your runs, during your runs or after your runs, during your weight workouts, during your during your weight workouts, during your during your weight workouts, during your yoga sessions, whatever it is, let us yoga sessions, whatever it is, let us yoga sessions, whatever it is, let us know. Please place that in the comments. know. Please place that in the comments. know. Please place that in the comments. I've given you specific protocols and I've given you specific protocols and I've given you specific protocols and some direction, but I've also left it some direction, but I've also left it some direction, but I've also left it slightly vague because it as I mentioned slightly vague because it as I mentioned slightly vague because it as I mentioned earlier, I don't know all the earlier, I don't know all the earlier, I don't know all the environmental conditions. I don't know environmental conditions. I don't know environmental conditions. I don't know how hot your yoga studio is or how cool how hot your yoga studio is or how cool how hot your yoga studio is or how cool your gym happens to be or your body your gym happens to be or your body your gym happens to be or your body temperature or time of day. Remember, temperature or time of day. Remember, temperature or time of day. Remember, your temperature will vary according to your temperature will vary according to your temperature will vary according to time of day. We did a whole episode time of day. We did a whole episode time of day. We did a whole episode about that related to sleep. Typically, about that related to sleep. Typically, about that related to sleep. Typically, your body temperature is rising early in your body temperature is rising early in your body temperature is rising early in the day and is coming down as you the day and is coming down as you the day and is coming down as you approach the late evening and late night approach the late evening and late night approach the late evening and late night hours for sleep. In the middle of the hours for sleep. In the middle of the hours for sleep. In the middle of the night, your temperature is very low. At night, your temperature is very low. At night, your temperature is very low. At its absolute lowest, something we call its absolute lowest, something we call its absolute lowest, something we call the temperature minimum. So, we don't the temperature minimum. So, we don't the temperature minimum. So, we don't know exactly where you're at. You need know exactly where you're at. You need know exactly where you're at. You need to take the information that you to take the information that you to take the information that you received today and should you try and received today and should you try and received today and should you try and incorporate it, incorporate it, incorporate it, try and do it intelligently. Don't cool try and do it intelligently. Don't cool try and do it intelligently. Don't cool yourself off so much that you, yourself off so much that you, yourself off so much that you, you know, become cryogenic and please you know, become cryogenic and please you know, become cryogenic and please don't warm yourself up. In fact, we don't warm yourself up. In fact, we don't warm yourself up. In fact, we didn't talk at all about warming didn't talk at all about warming didn't talk at all about warming yourself up uh because warming yourself up uh because warming yourself up uh because warming yourself up too much can be quite dangerous. You up too much can be quite dangerous. You up too much can be quite dangerous. You never, ever, ever want to be never, ever, ever want to be never, ever, ever want to be hypothermic. That's what your body and hypothermic. That's what your body and hypothermic. That's what your body and your brain are trying to avoid. your brain are trying to avoid. your brain are trying to avoid. We talked a little bit about We talked a little bit about We talked a little bit about supplements, but not the standard sorts supplements, but not the standard sorts supplements, but not the standard sorts of supplements I usually list off on of supplements I usually list off on of supplements I usually list off on these episodes. Rather, we talked about these episodes. Rather, we talked about these episodes. Rather, we talked about caffeine, nonsteroidal caffeine, nonsteroidal caffeine, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, and how those can anti-inflammatories, and how those can anti-inflammatories, and how those can impact temperature, how alcohol can impact temperature, how alcohol can impact temperature, how alcohol can impact temperature. And I should just impact temperature. And I should just impact temperature. And I should just mention in closing that every time we mention in closing that every time we mention in closing that every time we eat, we also increase temperature. eat, we also increase temperature. eat, we also increase temperature. There's a eating-induced thermogenic There's a eating-induced thermogenic There's a eating-induced thermogenic effect, but that's a minor one. That's a effect, but that's a minor one. That's a effect, but that's a minor one. That's a small one. So, you wouldn't worry about small one. So, you wouldn't worry about small one. So, you wouldn't worry about eating before training eating before training eating before training uh because of its effects on temperature uh because of its effects on temperature uh because of its effects on temperature because it tends to be really minor. because it tends to be really minor. because it tends to be really minor. Going forward, we're going to talk more Going forward, we're going to talk more Going forward, we're going to talk more about temperature and other ways to about temperature and other ways to about temperature and other ways to improve physical performance and skill improve physical performance and skill improve physical performance and skill learning. We're going to talk about learning. We're going to talk about learning. We're going to talk about specific ways to accelerate fat loss, to specific ways to accelerate fat loss, to specific ways to accelerate fat loss, to improve muscle growth, to improve muscle growth, to improve muscle growth, to improve suppleness and flexibility. suppleness and flexibility. suppleness and flexibility. These approaches and mechanisms are These approaches and mechanisms are These approaches and mechanisms are anchored deeply in neuroscience and anchored deeply in neuroscience and anchored deeply in neuroscience and physiology and the relationship between physiology and the relationship between physiology and the relationship between our peripheral organs, which include our peripheral organs, which include our peripheral organs, which include our skin, and our brain, and all the organs in and our brain, and all the organs in and our brain, and all the organs in between. So, it's really a pleasure for between. So, it's really a pleasure for between. So, it's really a pleasure for me because I'm able to look to the me because I'm able to look to the me because I'm able to look to the textbook literature that exists and textbook literature that exists and textbook literature that exists and really came out over the last 50 to 100 really came out over the last 50 to 100 really came out over the last 50 to 100 years, and unlike a lot of areas of years, and unlike a lot of areas of years, and unlike a lot of areas of neuroscience which are still sort of neuroscience which are still sort of neuroscience which are still sort of mystical like consciousness and mystical like consciousness and mystical like consciousness and dreaming, of which we understand a dreaming, of which we understand a dreaming, of which we understand a little bit about, these core mechanisms little bit about, these core mechanisms little bit about, these core mechanisms of temperature and physiology, which are of temperature and physiology, which are of temperature and physiology, which are so powerful, so powerful, so powerful, involve very concrete studies that, as involve very concrete studies that, as involve very concrete studies that, as you learn today, are very actionable. you learn today, are very actionable. you learn today, are very actionable. If you're enjoying this podcast and you If you're enjoying this podcast and you If you're enjoying this podcast and you like the information that you're like the information that you're like the information that you're receiving, if you're incorporating into your life if you're incorporating into your life if you're incorporating into your life in useful ways, please recommend the in useful ways, please recommend the in useful ways, please recommend the podcast to other people if you think podcast to other people if you think podcast to other people if you think they could benefit from it as well. they could benefit from it as well. they could benefit from it as well. Please subscribe to the podcast on Please subscribe to the podcast on Please subscribe to the podcast on YouTube. So, you want to hit the YouTube. So, you want to hit the YouTube. So, you want to hit the subscribe button. As well, hit the subscribe button. As well, hit the subscribe button. As well, hit the notifications button. We come out with notifications button. We come out with notifications button. We come out with new episodes every Monday, but from time new episodes every Monday, but from time new episodes every Monday, but from time to time we also release shorter content, to time we also release shorter content, to time we also release shorter content, and we will be releasing additional and we will be releasing additional and we will be releasing additional content in between episodes from time to content in between episodes from time to content in between episodes from time to time. If you don't already subscribe on Apple If you don't already subscribe on Apple If you don't already subscribe on Apple and or Spotify, please do so. Also, on and or Spotify, please do so. Also, on and or Spotify, please do so. Also, on Apple you have the opportunity to leave Apple you have the opportunity to leave Apple you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review if you think us up to a five-star review if you think us up to a five-star review if you think that we deserve a five-star review, and that we deserve a five-star review, and that we deserve a five-star review, and to leave us feedback. They have a to leave us feedback. They have a to leave us feedback. They have a comment section there. It's really a comment section there. It's really a comment section there. It's really a feedback section where you can rate and feedback section where you can rate and feedback section where you can rate and describe the podcast as you experience describe the podcast as you experience describe the podcast as you experience it. If you'd like to support the podcast in If you'd like to support the podcast in If you'd like to support the podcast in other ways, other ways, other ways, please check out our sponsors. That's a please check out our sponsors. That's a please check out our sponsors. That's a terrific way to support us. We also have terrific way to support us. We also have terrific way to support us. We also have a Patreon. You can find it at a Patreon. You can find it at a Patreon. You can find it at patreon.com/andrewhuberman. That allows you to support the podcast That allows you to support the podcast That allows you to support the podcast at any level that you like. at any level that you like. at any level that you like. Today, we didn't focus so heavily on Today, we didn't focus so heavily on Today, we didn't focus so heavily on supplements, but in other episodes I supplements, but in other episodes I supplements, but in other episodes I have, and there are certainly have, and there are certainly have, and there are certainly supplements that are beneficial for supplements that are beneficial for supplements that are beneficial for sleep, for performance, for learning, sleep, for performance, for learning, sleep, for performance, for learning, immunity, and so forth. immunity, and so forth. immunity, and so forth. We've partnered with Thorne, We've partnered with Thorne, We've partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e.com, t h o r n e.com, t h o r n e.com, because Thorne supplements we believe to because Thorne supplements we believe to because Thorne supplements we believe to be the most stringent in terms of be the most stringent in terms of be the most stringent in terms of what they put on the bottle is actually what they put on the bottle is actually what they put on the bottle is actually what's in the bottle. So, the amounts what's in the bottle. So, the amounts what's in the bottle. So, the amounts are precise, and the quality of the are precise, and the quality of the are precise, and the quality of the ingredients is very precise. They ingredients is very precise. They ingredients is very precise. They partner with the Mayo Clinic, all the partner with the Mayo Clinic, all the partner with the Mayo Clinic, all the major sports teams. So, we're delighted major sports teams. So, we're delighted major sports teams. So, we're delighted that we're partnered with Thorne. If you that we're partnered with Thorne. If you that we're partnered with Thorne. If you want to see the supplements that I take, want to see the supplements that I take, want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to you can go to you can go to thorne.com/theletteru/huberman, and you can see the supplements that I and you can see the supplements that I and you can see the supplements that I take. You could get 20% off any of those take. You could get 20% off any of those take. You could get 20% off any of those supplements, should you choose to order supplements, should you choose to order supplements, should you choose to order them, as well as 20% off any other them, as well as 20% off any other them, as well as 20% off any other supplements that Thorne happens to make. supplements that Thorne happens to make. supplements that Thorne happens to make. That's thorne, t h o r n That's thorne, t h o r n That's thorne, t h o r n e.com/theletteru/huberman, to get 20% off any of the supplements to get 20% off any of the supplements to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. that Thorne makes. that Thorne makes. And last but not least, And last but not least, And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and I want to thank you for your time and I want to thank you for your time and attention. I realize this is a lot of attention. I realize this is a lot of attention. I realize this is a lot of information. I hope you'll find some of information. I hope you'll find some of information. I hope you'll find some of it to be actionable and useful for you it to be actionable and useful for you it to be actionable and useful for you and for people that you know. And as and for people that you know. And as and for people that you know. And as always, thank you for your interest in always, thank you for your interest in always, thank you for your interest in science.