Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing music and your Today, we are discussing music and your Today, we are discussing music and your brain. However, this episode could have just as However, this episode could have just as However, this episode could have just as easily been entitled music is your brain easily been entitled music is your brain easily been entitled music is your brain or your brain is music. And that's or your brain is music. And that's or your brain is music. And that's because music, believe it or not, is a because music, believe it or not, is a because music, believe it or not, is a neurological phenomenon. Most of us neurological phenomenon. Most of us neurological phenomenon. Most of us think of music as something that happens think of music as something that happens think of music as something that happens outside of us. The sounds we hear, the outside of us. The sounds we hear, the outside of us. The sounds we hear, the lyrics we hear, their meaning, how they lyrics we hear, their meaning, how they lyrics we hear, their meaning, how they anchor us to pieces of our history, both anchor us to pieces of our history, both anchor us to pieces of our history, both emotional or social. emotional or social. emotional or social. It turns out that when we listen to It turns out that when we listen to It turns out that when we listen to music, it activates nearly every piece music, it activates nearly every piece music, it activates nearly every piece of our brain. of our brain. of our brain. Moreover, when we listen to music, it Moreover, when we listen to music, it Moreover, when we listen to music, it activates our brain in ways that our activates our brain in ways that our activates our brain in ways that our brain itself, and indeed our body as brain itself, and indeed our body as brain itself, and indeed our body as well, help to create that music at the well, help to create that music at the well, help to create that music at the level of so-called neural ensembles. level of so-called neural ensembles. level of so-called neural ensembles. That is, the firing of neurons. In other That is, the firing of neurons. In other That is, the firing of neurons. In other words, when we listen to music, our words, when we listen to music, our words, when we listen to music, our brain and our body become part of the brain and our body become part of the brain and our body become part of the instrument that contributes to our instrument that contributes to our instrument that contributes to our perception of that music. Today, I'm perception of that music. Today, I'm perception of that music. Today, I'm going to make clear how all of that going to make clear how all of that going to make clear how all of that happens. We will also discuss how music happens. We will also discuss how music happens. We will also discuss how music can be leveraged toward shifting our can be leveraged toward shifting our can be leveraged toward shifting our brain states and our bodily states. For brain states and our bodily states. For brain states and our bodily states. For instance, what sorts of music to listen instance, what sorts of music to listen instance, what sorts of music to listen to in order to make ourselves happy. to in order to make ourselves happy. to in order to make ourselves happy. Yes, studies have been done on that. As Yes, studies have been done on that. As Yes, studies have been done on that. As well as how long to listen to music in well as how long to listen to music in well as how long to listen to music in order to shift our mood or our overall order to shift our mood or our overall order to shift our mood or our overall bodily state, including how to process bodily state, including how to process bodily state, including how to process feelings of sadness. Many of you are feelings of sadness. Many of you are feelings of sadness. Many of you are probably familiar with particular songs probably familiar with particular songs probably familiar with particular songs that anchor us to particular times in that anchor us to particular times in that anchor us to particular times in our history or people in our history. our history or people in our history. our history or people in our history. And there's an age-old question really And there's an age-old question really And there's an age-old question really as to whether or not listening to sad as to whether or not listening to sad as to whether or not listening to sad music can help us process our feelings music can help us process our feelings music can help us process our feelings of sadness or whether or not they drive of sadness or whether or not they drive of sadness or whether or not they drive us further down the spiral of sadness us further down the spiral of sadness us further down the spiral of sadness and despair. And indeed, studies have and despair. And indeed, studies have and despair. And indeed, studies have explored this as well. So, today I will explored this as well. So, today I will explored this as well. So, today I will explain how music, indeed how different explain how music, indeed how different explain how music, indeed how different types of music, activate different types of music, activate different types of music, activate different neural circuits in your brain to create neural circuits in your brain to create neural circuits in your brain to create different brain and bodily states. How different brain and bodily states. How different brain and bodily states. How we can leverage music toward things like we can leverage music toward things like we can leverage music toward things like emotional processing, shifting our emotional processing, shifting our emotional processing, shifting our emotions, as well as to enhance learning emotions, as well as to enhance learning emotions, as well as to enhance learning and memory. And we will also talk about and memory. And we will also talk about and memory. And we will also talk about the use of music to enhance brain the use of music to enhance brain the use of music to enhance brain plasticity. That is, your brain's plasticity. That is, your brain's plasticity. That is, your brain's ability to change in response to ability to change in response to ability to change in response to experience. Not just in response to that experience. Not just in response to that experience. Not just in response to that music, but rather using music as a tool music, but rather using music as a tool music, but rather using music as a tool to expand our capacity for to expand our capacity for to expand our capacity for neuroplasticity, giving us the ability neuroplasticity, giving us the ability neuroplasticity, giving us the ability to learn far more in other contexts and to learn far more in other contexts and to learn far more in other contexts and areas of life. I confess that in areas of life. I confess that in areas of life. I confess that in researching this episode, I found myself researching this episode, I found myself researching this episode, I found myself continually delighted as to, first of continually delighted as to, first of continually delighted as to, first of all, how impressive the science of the all, how impressive the science of the all, how impressive the science of the study of music and the brain is, and study of music and the brain is, and study of music and the brain is, and secondly, how fundamental music is to secondly, how fundamental music is to secondly, how fundamental music is to all of our lives. And this is true all of our lives. And this is true all of our lives. And this is true whether or not you're somebody who whether or not you're somebody who whether or not you're somebody who listens to music often, or you're listens to music often, or you're listens to music often, or you're somebody that really prefers silence. somebody that really prefers silence. somebody that really prefers silence. Indeed, we will talk about whether or Indeed, we will talk about whether or Indeed, we will talk about whether or not it's better to listen to music or not it's better to listen to music or not it's better to listen to music or remain in silence when you perform remain in silence when you perform remain in silence when you perform certain kinds of work. It turns out that certain kinds of work. It turns out that certain kinds of work. It turns out that there's a very clear answer to that. If there's a very clear answer to that. If there's a very clear answer to that. If you want a little bit of a hint, it is you want a little bit of a hint, it is you want a little bit of a hint, it is best to listen to music in between bouts best to listen to music in between bouts best to listen to music in between bouts of work or during brief rest periods, of work or during brief rest periods, of work or during brief rest periods, as opposed to listening to music while as opposed to listening to music while as opposed to listening to music while you work. And for those of you that you work. And for those of you that you work. And for those of you that listen to music while you work and listen to music while you work and listen to music while you work and thoroughly enjoy listening to music thoroughly enjoy listening to music thoroughly enjoy listening to music while you work, we will also discuss while you work, we will also discuss while you work, we will also discuss what that means about your brain in what that means about your brain in what that means about your brain in particular, because it's likely that it particular, because it's likely that it particular, because it's likely that it got wired up that way at a particular got wired up that way at a particular got wired up that way at a particular phase of development. And each and all phase of development. And each and all phase of development. And each and all of you can learn today how to best of you can learn today how to best of you can learn today how to best leverage music toward productivity, but leverage music toward productivity, but leverage music toward productivity, but perhaps equally important, how to perhaps equally important, how to perhaps equally important, how to leverage music for enrichment and leverage music for enrichment and leverage music for enrichment and enjoyment of life. I'm pleased to enjoyment of life. I'm pleased to enjoyment of life. I'm pleased to announce that we will be hosting three announce that we will be hosting three announce that we will be hosting three live events in Australia. live events in Australia. live events in Australia. All three events will cover science and All three events will cover science and All three events will cover science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. There physical health, and performance. There physical health, and performance. There will also be a live question and answer will also be a live question and answer will also be a live question and answer session. The first live event will take session. The first live event will take session. The first live event will take place on February 10th in Melbourne at place on February 10th in Melbourne at place on February 10th in Melbourne at the Plenary Theater. the Plenary Theater. the Plenary Theater. The second live event will take place on The second live event will take place on The second live event will take place on February 17th in Sydney at the Sydney February 17th in Sydney at the Sydney February 17th in Sydney at the Sydney Opera House. And the third event will Opera House. And the third event will Opera House. And the third event will take place on February 23rd in Brisbane take place on February 23rd in Brisbane take place on February 23rd in Brisbane at the Great Hall. To access tickets to at the Great Hall. To access tickets to at the Great Hall. To access tickets to any of these events, simply go to any of these events, simply go to any of these events, simply go to hubermanlab.com/tour and use the code Huberman. I hope to see and use the code Huberman. I hope to see and use the code Huberman. I hope to see you there. And last but certainly not you there. And last but certainly not you there. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. Before we begin, I'd like to science. Before we begin, I'd like to science. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost desire and effort to bring zero-cost desire and effort to bring zero-cost consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Eight podcast. Our first sponsor is Eight podcast. Our first sponsor is Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken many tracking capacity. I've spoken many tracking capacity. I've spoken many times before on this podcast about the times before on this podcast about the times before on this podcast about the fact that sleep, that is, getting enough fact that sleep, that is, getting enough fact that sleep, that is, getting enough quality sleep each night, is the quality sleep each night, is the quality sleep each night, is the foundation of mental health, physical foundation of mental health, physical foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. One of the key health, and performance. One of the key health, and performance. One of the key things to getting a great night's sleep things to getting a great night's sleep things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that your body is to make sure that your body is to make sure that your body temperature drops by about 1 to 3 temperature drops by about 1 to 3 temperature drops by about 1 to 3 degrees at the beginning of the night. degrees at the beginning of the night. degrees at the beginning of the night. Indeed, that is how your body falls and Indeed, that is how your body falls and Indeed, that is how your body falls and stays deeply asleep. As well, in order stays deeply asleep. As well, in order stays deeply asleep. As well, in order to wake up in the morning feeling to wake up in the morning feeling to wake up in the morning feeling refreshed, your bodily temperature needs refreshed, your bodily temperature needs refreshed, your bodily temperature needs to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. Eight Sleep mattress covers make it Eight Sleep mattress covers make it Eight Sleep mattress covers make it extremely easy to control the extremely easy to control the extremely easy to control the temperature of your sleeping temperature of your sleeping temperature of your sleeping environment, allowing you to fall and environment, allowing you to fall and environment, allowing you to fall and stay deeply asleep throughout the night stay deeply asleep throughout the night stay deeply asleep throughout the night and to wake up feeling refreshed. I and to wake up feeling refreshed. I and to wake up feeling refreshed. I started sleeping on an Eight Sleep started sleeping on an Eight Sleep started sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover well over 2 years ago and mattress cover well over 2 years ago and mattress cover well over 2 years ago and it has completely transformed my sleep. it has completely transformed my sleep. it has completely transformed my sleep. It's allowed me to fall asleep more It's allowed me to fall asleep more It's allowed me to fall asleep more quickly. It's allowed me to sleep more quickly. It's allowed me to sleep more quickly. It's allowed me to sleep more deeply throughout the night. And if I deeply throughout the night. And if I deeply throughout the night. And if I happen to wake up during the middle of happen to wake up during the middle of happen to wake up during the middle of the night, something that's perfectly the night, something that's perfectly the night, something that's perfectly normal to do once or even twice, I fall normal to do once or even twice, I fall normal to do once or even twice, I fall back asleep far more quickly and I wake back asleep far more quickly and I wake back asleep far more quickly and I wake up feeling refreshed. As a consequence, up feeling refreshed. As a consequence, up feeling refreshed. As a consequence, my mood, focus, and alertness throughout my mood, focus, and alertness throughout my mood, focus, and alertness throughout the day is greatly elevated as compared the day is greatly elevated as compared the day is greatly elevated as compared to prior to sleeping on my Eight Sleep to prior to sleeping on my Eight Sleep to prior to sleeping on my Eight Sleep mattress cover. If you'd like to try an mattress cover. If you'd like to try an mattress cover. If you'd like to try an Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can go Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can go Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to eightsleep.com/huberman to eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's and Australia. Again, that's and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest sunglasses that are the absolute highest sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working quality. I've spent a lifetime working quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system, and on the biology of the visual system, and on the biology of the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system I can tell you that your visual system I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number has to contend with an enormous number has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be of challenges in order for you to be of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly in different able to see clearly in different able to see clearly in different environments. Roka understands the environments. Roka understands the environments. Roka understands the biology of the visual system and has biology of the visual system and has biology of the visual system and has designed their eyeglasses and sunglasses designed their eyeglasses and sunglasses designed their eyeglasses and sunglasses so that you always see with crystal so that you always see with crystal so that you always see with crystal clarity. Originally, their glasses were clarity. Originally, their glasses were clarity. Originally, their glasses were designed for performance, that is, for designed for performance, that is, for designed for performance, that is, for running and cycling and for sport, and running and cycling and for sport, and running and cycling and for sport, and indeed, they can still be used for indeed, they can still be used for indeed, they can still be used for performance. They won't slip off your performance. They won't slip off your performance. They won't slip off your face if you get sweaty, they're face if you get sweaty, they're face if you get sweaty, they're extremely lightweight, but I should extremely lightweight, but I should extremely lightweight, but I should mention that Roka eyeglasses and mention that Roka eyeglasses and mention that Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses come in some of the sunglasses come in some of the sunglasses come in some of the aesthetics more typically associated aesthetics more typically associated aesthetics more typically associated with performance glasses, like those with performance glasses, like those with performance glasses, like those cyborg-style glasses, but they also have cyborg-style glasses, but they also have cyborg-style glasses, but they also have a number of styles that you'd be a number of styles that you'd be a number of styles that you'd be perfectly comfortable wearing out to perfectly comfortable wearing out to perfectly comfortable wearing out to dinner or to work. I wear readers at dinner or to work. I wear readers at dinner or to work. I wear readers at night or when I drive, and I wear night or when I drive, and I wear night or when I drive, and I wear sunglasses during the day if I happen to sunglasses during the day if I happen to sunglasses during the day if I happen to be driving into bright light or outside be driving into bright light or outside be driving into bright light or outside and it's just overwhelmingly bright. I and it's just overwhelmingly bright. I and it's just overwhelmingly bright. I do not wear sunglasses when I do my do not wear sunglasses when I do my do not wear sunglasses when I do my morning sunlight viewing to set my morning sunlight viewing to set my morning sunlight viewing to set my circadian rhythm, and I suggest that you circadian rhythm, and I suggest that you circadian rhythm, and I suggest that you do the same. If you'd like to try Roka do the same. If you'd like to try Roka do the same. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to roka, r o k a.com, and enter the code roka, r o k a.com, and enter the code roka, r o k a.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first Huberman to save 20% off your first Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka, r o k a.com, order. Again, that's roka, r o k a.com, order. Again, that's roka, r o k a.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Okay, let's talk about music and your Okay, let's talk about music and your Okay, let's talk about music and your brain. And to start off, I just want to take a And to start off, I just want to take a And to start off, I just want to take a step back and acknowledge something that step back and acknowledge something that step back and acknowledge something that is absolutely remarkable about music, is absolutely remarkable about music, is absolutely remarkable about music, which is which is which is if you think about language, if you think about language, if you think about language, I could describe to you I could describe to you I could describe to you a glass. I could describe to you an a glass. I could describe to you an a glass. I could describe to you an apple. I could describe to you a story. apple. I could describe to you a story. apple. I could describe to you a story. I could describe to you a face. I could I could describe to you a face. I could I could describe to you a face. I could describe to you any number of different describe to you any number of different describe to you any number of different things, and you could do the same for things, and you could do the same for things, and you could do the same for me. Language is essentially infinite in the Language is essentially infinite in the Language is essentially infinite in the number of things that it can explain and number of things that it can explain and number of things that it can explain and the ways that it can explain it. the ways that it can explain it. the ways that it can explain it. And yet, if you think about music, And yet, if you think about music, And yet, if you think about music, provided there are no lyrics in that provided there are no lyrics in that provided there are no lyrics in that music, can't explain how a glass is shaped. It can't explain how a glass is shaped. It can't explain how a glass is shaped. It can't even tell you that there's a glass can't even tell you that there's a glass can't even tell you that there's a glass present in the room or on a table. It present in the room or on a table. It present in the room or on a table. It can't tell you what a face looks like. can't tell you what a face looks like. can't tell you what a face looks like. It can't tell you what that person who It can't tell you what that person who It can't tell you what that person who owns that face did or is doing. So, in owns that face did or is doing. So, in owns that face did or is doing. So, in some ways, you might think, "Wow, music some ways, you might think, "Wow, music some ways, you might think, "Wow, music is fairly diminished in terms of its is fairly diminished in terms of its is fairly diminished in terms of its qualitative depth compared to language." qualitative depth compared to language." qualitative depth compared to language." And yet, if you take a step back and And yet, if you take a step back and And yet, if you take a step back and think about what music can do, it's think about what music can do, it's think about what music can do, it's astonishing and it actually overwhelms astonishing and it actually overwhelms astonishing and it actually overwhelms what language can do. What can music do? what language can do. What can music do? what language can do. What can music do? Well, even in the absence of any lyrics, Well, even in the absence of any lyrics, Well, even in the absence of any lyrics, any words put to music, music can any words put to music, music can any words put to music, music can describe an emotion. describe an emotion. describe an emotion. In fact, music can describe numerous In fact, music can describe numerous In fact, music can describe numerous types of emotions and it can do it with types of emotions and it can do it with types of emotions and it can do it with a lot of nuance. So, not just displaying a lot of nuance. So, not just displaying a lot of nuance. So, not just displaying for us happy or sad, but rather for us happy or sad, but rather for us happy or sad, but rather different degrees of happiness, different degrees of happiness, different degrees of happiness, different degrees of sadness. Music can different degrees of sadness. Music can different degrees of sadness. Music can be used to convey a sense of longing, a be used to convey a sense of longing, a be used to convey a sense of longing, a sense of nostalgia, a sense of delight, sense of nostalgia, a sense of delight, sense of nostalgia, a sense of delight, a sense of awe, and on and on. So, a sense of awe, and on and on. So, a sense of awe, and on and on. So, whereas music can't describe nouns very whereas music can't describe nouns very whereas music can't describe nouns very well, it can beautifully describe well, it can beautifully describe well, it can beautifully describe emotions. And not only can music describe emotions And not only can music describe emotions And not only can music describe emotions with a tremendous degree of nuance, with a tremendous degree of nuance, with a tremendous degree of nuance, music can evoke emotions with a music can evoke emotions with a music can evoke emotions with a tremendous degree of nuance. tremendous degree of nuance. tremendous degree of nuance. Now, this is spectacular and it's not Now, this is spectacular and it's not Now, this is spectacular and it's not only spectacular, it is important only spectacular, it is important only spectacular, it is important because as we move through today's because as we move through today's because as we move through today's episode, you'll soon come to realize episode, you'll soon come to realize episode, you'll soon come to realize that it's very likely, that it's very likely, that it's very likely, and indeed we have a lot of scientific and indeed we have a lot of scientific and indeed we have a lot of scientific evidence to support the fact that music evidence to support the fact that music evidence to support the fact that music evolved prior to spoken language. evolved prior to spoken language. evolved prior to spoken language. Moreover, it's very likely that singing Moreover, it's very likely that singing Moreover, it's very likely that singing evolved prior to spoken language and evolved prior to spoken language and evolved prior to spoken language and that music, singing, and dance together that music, singing, and dance together that music, singing, and dance together evolved prior to language, making music, evolved prior to language, making music, evolved prior to language, making music, as well as singing and dance, but really as well as singing and dance, but really as well as singing and dance, but really just music even on its own in the just music even on its own in the just music even on its own in the absence of any lyrics or any bodily absence of any lyrics or any bodily absence of any lyrics or any bodily movement as the fundamental form of movement as the fundamental form of movement as the fundamental form of human communication. Indeed, music can human communication. Indeed, music can human communication. Indeed, music can evoke empathy. Again, we're talking evoke empathy. Again, we're talking evoke empathy. Again, we're talking about music in the absence of any about music in the absence of any about music in the absence of any lyrics. And when I say music can evoke lyrics. And when I say music can evoke lyrics. And when I say music can evoke empathy, I'm not talking about the sort empathy, I'm not talking about the sort empathy, I'm not talking about the sort of empathy where you look at somebody of empathy where you look at somebody of empathy where you look at somebody and nod and understand, so-called and nod and understand, so-called and nod and understand, so-called cognitive empathy, which is important by cognitive empathy, which is important by cognitive empathy, which is important by the way in relational dynamics, or the way in relational dynamics, or the way in relational dynamics, or emotional empathy where you're actually emotional empathy where you're actually emotional empathy where you're actually feeling what the other person is feeling what the other person is feeling what the other person is feeling, but of course, you never really feeling, but of course, you never really feeling, but of course, you never really know what somebody else is feeling. How know what somebody else is feeling. How know what somebody else is feeling. How could you? You can only have a sense of could you? You can only have a sense of could you? You can only have a sense of what they might be feeling, what they might be feeling, what they might be feeling, and you have a sense of what you're and you have a sense of what you're and you have a sense of what you're feeling, but let's be honest, um as one feeling, but let's be honest, um as one feeling, but let's be honest, um as one of our prior guests on the Huberman Lab of our prior guests on the Huberman Lab of our prior guests on the Huberman Lab podcast, Dr. Karl Deisseroth, um so podcast, Dr. Karl Deisseroth, um so podcast, Dr. Karl Deisseroth, um so aptly noted, uh rarely do we ever aptly noted, uh rarely do we ever aptly noted, uh rarely do we ever understand how anyone else truly feels understand how anyone else truly feels understand how anyone else truly feels because indeed rarely do we ever because indeed rarely do we ever because indeed rarely do we ever understand how we ourselves truly feel. understand how we ourselves truly feel. understand how we ourselves truly feel. And certainly with language, it's very And certainly with language, it's very And certainly with language, it's very hard to explain our feelings with words hard to explain our feelings with words hard to explain our feelings with words in a way that can convey the way that we in a way that can convey the way that we in a way that can convey the way that we feel with the kind of nuance that feel with the kind of nuance that feel with the kind of nuance that represents our own reality. Even in a represents our own reality. Even in a represents our own reality. Even in a state of extreme happiness or extreme state of extreme happiness or extreme state of extreme happiness or extreme sadness, words fall short of explaining sadness, words fall short of explaining sadness, words fall short of explaining how we feel inside. And yet, as I how we feel inside. And yet, as I how we feel inside. And yet, as I mentioned earlier, music not only can mentioned earlier, music not only can mentioned earlier, music not only can describe emotions, it can evoke emotions describe emotions, it can evoke emotions describe emotions, it can evoke emotions within us. And in doing so, it can evoke within us. And in doing so, it can evoke within us. And in doing so, it can evoke emotions that give us a sense of empathy emotions that give us a sense of empathy emotions that give us a sense of empathy for the person playing the music or for the person playing the music or for the person playing the music or simply for others in the world. And simply for others in the world. And simply for others in the world. And music can do that so powerfully because music can do that so powerfully because music can do that so powerfully because not only does music come in through our not only does music come in through our not only does music come in through our ears, and we'll talk about the process ears, and we'll talk about the process ears, and we'll talk about the process of how sound is converted into what we of how sound is converted into what we of how sound is converted into what we perceive as music in a little bit, perceive as music in a little bit, perceive as music in a little bit, because indeed, it comes in through our because indeed, it comes in through our because indeed, it comes in through our ears and we can hear that music, of ears and we can hear that music, of ears and we can hear that music, of course, but the nerve cells, the neurons course, but the nerve cells, the neurons course, but the nerve cells, the neurons in your brain, as well as the nerve in your brain, as well as the nerve in your brain, as well as the nerve cells in your body, cells in your body, cells in your body, can become activated by music in a way can become activated by music in a way can become activated by music in a way that the firing of those neurons, literally the firing of those neurons, literally the firing of those neurons, literally the frequency of those neural impulses, the frequency of those neural impulses, the frequency of those neural impulses, comes to match the frequency of the comes to match the frequency of the comes to match the frequency of the sounds that you're hearing in your sounds that you're hearing in your sounds that you're hearing in your outside environment. In other words, outside environment. In other words, outside environment. In other words, when you listen to music, not only is when you listen to music, not only is when you listen to music, not only is that music coming into your body through that music coming into your body through that music coming into your body through your sense organs, your hearing, your sense organs, your hearing, your sense organs, your hearing, but your body itself is an instrument but your body itself is an instrument but your body itself is an instrument playing that music from within. So, for playing that music from within. So, for playing that music from within. So, for instance, if you listen to a piece of instance, if you listen to a piece of instance, if you listen to a piece of music that has a lightness to it that music that has a lightness to it that music that has a lightness to it that evokes a sense in you of the turning of evokes a sense in you of the turning of evokes a sense in you of the turning of the seasons from winter to spring. Yeah, the seasons from winter to spring. Yeah, the seasons from winter to spring. Yeah, something that's common in certain something that's common in certain something that's common in certain classical music but other forms of music classical music but other forms of music classical music but other forms of music as well. as well. as well. When you hear that music, indeed, it's When you hear that music, indeed, it's When you hear that music, indeed, it's coming in through your ears, but also coming in through your ears, but also coming in through your ears, but also the firing of the neurons in your brain the firing of the neurons in your brain the firing of the neurons in your brain and body responding to those particular and body responding to those particular and body responding to those particular frequencies of sound is frequencies of sound is frequencies of sound is such that your body itself is an such that your body itself is an such that your body itself is an instrument playing that sense of the instrument playing that sense of the instrument playing that sense of the turning of the seasons from winter to turning of the seasons from winter to turning of the seasons from winter to spring within you, which is why your spring within you, which is why your spring within you, which is why your body starts to feel lifted in some cases body starts to feel lifted in some cases body starts to feel lifted in some cases or it starts to feel a lightness in some or it starts to feel a lightness in some or it starts to feel a lightness in some cases, and entire set of emotions starts cases, and entire set of emotions starts cases, and entire set of emotions starts to be recruited that at least for you to be recruited that at least for you to be recruited that at least for you resemble the turning of the seasons from resemble the turning of the seasons from resemble the turning of the seasons from winter to spring. Now, that may sound winter to spring. Now, that may sound winter to spring. Now, that may sound rather complex, but we're going to break rather complex, but we're going to break rather complex, but we're going to break that process down into its component that process down into its component that process down into its component parts. But, what I essentially just said parts. But, what I essentially just said parts. But, what I essentially just said is that when you listen to music, not is that when you listen to music, not is that when you listen to music, not only are you hearing that music, but only are you hearing that music, but only are you hearing that music, but your body, that is, your neurons and your body, that is, your neurons and your body, that is, your neurons and indeed your hormones as well, things indeed your hormones as well, things indeed your hormones as well, things like oxytocin and some other hormones in like oxytocin and some other hormones in like oxytocin and some other hormones in your brain and body that we'll discuss, your brain and body that we'll discuss, your brain and body that we'll discuss, are contributing to a symphony of are contributing to a symphony of are contributing to a symphony of emotion from within your body and brain. emotion from within your body and brain. emotion from within your body and brain. Okay, so while music can't explain Okay, so while music can't explain Okay, so while music can't explain objects, it can't describe them, it can objects, it can't describe them, it can objects, it can't describe them, it can explain in a very nuanced ways emotions explain in a very nuanced ways emotions explain in a very nuanced ways emotions and it can evoke emotions within us. and it can evoke emotions within us. and it can evoke emotions within us. Now, if that's not amazing enough, music Now, if that's not amazing enough, music Now, if that's not amazing enough, music cannot only describe and evoke emotions, cannot only describe and evoke emotions, cannot only describe and evoke emotions, it can also imply intent. Think, for it can also imply intent. Think, for it can also imply intent. Think, for instance, about drumming that you would instance, about drumming that you would instance, about drumming that you would hear off in the distance. And we're not hear off in the distance. And we're not hear off in the distance. And we're not talking about talking about talking about we're talking drumming of this sort. And perhaps the cadence of that drumming And perhaps the cadence of that drumming And perhaps the cadence of that drumming changes such that as it's approaching it changes such that as it's approaching it changes such that as it's approaching it gets more and more frequent. What is the intent being implied? Well, What is the intent being implied? Well, What is the intent being implied? Well, we know from numerous studies and you we know from numerous studies and you we know from numerous studies and you know from numerous movies that you've know from numerous movies that you've know from numerous movies that you've seen and heard that sort of low and heard that sort of low and heard that sort of low frequency drumming of increasing cadence frequency drumming of increasing cadence frequency drumming of increasing cadence as it approaches as it approaches as it approaches is implying the intent of aggression or is implying the intent of aggression or is implying the intent of aggression or war. Or at least is implying that something Or at least is implying that something Or at least is implying that something serious is going to happen. Now contrast serious is going to happen. Now contrast serious is going to happen. Now contrast that with a different frequency of sound that with a different frequency of sound that with a different frequency of sound played Now the second set of tones are far less clear in terms of what they are far less clear in terms of what they are far less clear in terms of what they mean, what their intent is but if we mean, what their intent is but if we mean, what their intent is but if we contrast them with let's just call them contrast them with let's just call them contrast them with let's just call them what they're typically called, the war what they're typically called, the war what they're typically called, the war drums or the drums that convey a drums or the drums that convey a drums or the drums that convey a sense of aggressive intent. What we create then is a juxtaposition What we create then is a juxtaposition What we create then is a juxtaposition of two different emotional states in you of two different emotional states in you of two different emotional states in you perhaps or maybe you don't respond to perhaps or maybe you don't respond to perhaps or maybe you don't respond to those with any robust emotional shift those with any robust emotional shift those with any robust emotional shift but we are conveying two separate or but we are conveying two separate or but we are conveying two separate or distinct sets of intent. distinct sets of intent. distinct sets of intent. Now of course spoken language can convey Now of course spoken language can convey Now of course spoken language can convey intent. I could say for instance, you intent. I could say for instance, you intent. I could say for instance, you know, I'm going to help you. How can I know, I'm going to help you. How can I know, I'm going to help you. How can I help you today? Or I could say I'm going help you today? Or I could say I'm going help you today? Or I could say I'm going to hurt you. Right? You of course with to hurt you. Right? You of course with to hurt you. Right? You of course with spoken language you could do that and spoken language you could do that and spoken language you could do that and you could change the intonation of that you could change the intonation of that you could change the intonation of that language, you could change the language, you could change the language, you could change the frequency. So if I were to say, I'm frequency. So if I were to say, I'm frequency. So if I were to say, I'm going to hurt you. It's very different going to hurt you. It's very different going to hurt you. It's very different than if I say, I'm going to hurt you. than if I say, I'm going to hurt you. than if I say, I'm going to hurt you. Okay? Or if I put it as a question, I'm Okay? Or if I put it as a question, I'm Okay? Or if I put it as a question, I'm going to hurt you? Okay? So with going to hurt you? Okay? So with going to hurt you? Okay? So with language of course there's also the language of course there's also the language of course there's also the opportunity for a lot of nuance opportunity for a lot of nuance opportunity for a lot of nuance depending on where the inflections, depending on where the inflections, depending on where the inflections, where the accents are on a particular where the accents are on a particular where the accents are on a particular phrase, even a particular word. phrase, even a particular word. phrase, even a particular word. But, with music, as you recall, But, with music, as you recall, But, with music, as you recall, when we convey a sense of intent, we are when we convey a sense of intent, we are when we convey a sense of intent, we are also conveying that sense of intent also conveying that sense of intent also conveying that sense of intent through the body of the listener, not through the body of the listener, not through the body of the listener, not just bringing it in through their ears. just bringing it in through their ears. just bringing it in through their ears. And so, when we do that, what we do is And so, when we do that, what we do is And so, when we do that, what we do is we start to recruit a huge number of we start to recruit a huge number of we start to recruit a huge number of neural circuits that are involved not neural circuits that are involved not neural circuits that are involved not just in understanding or a sense of just in understanding or a sense of just in understanding or a sense of empathy for an emotion, but rather that empathy for an emotion, but rather that empathy for an emotion, but rather that can recruit movement, or what we call can recruit movement, or what we call can recruit movement, or what we call pre-motor circuits in the body. pre-motor circuits in the body. pre-motor circuits in the body. Pre-motor circuits are the neurons that Pre-motor circuits are the neurons that Pre-motor circuits are the neurons that start to fire before a particular start to fire before a particular start to fire before a particular pattern of action is generated. And so, pattern of action is generated. And so, pattern of action is generated. And so, when we hear music that conveys emotion, when we hear music that conveys emotion, when we hear music that conveys emotion, that evokes emotion, and especially when that evokes emotion, and especially when that evokes emotion, and especially when we hear music that conveys a sense of we hear music that conveys a sense of we hear music that conveys a sense of intent from the outside, we, too, start intent from the outside, we, too, start intent from the outside, we, too, start to feel as if we need to move or respond to feel as if we need to move or respond to feel as if we need to move or respond to that music in a particular way. Now, to that music in a particular way. Now, to that music in a particular way. Now, what I just described to you is not what I just described to you is not what I just described to you is not something that's learned. In fact, it is something that's learned. In fact, it is something that's learned. In fact, it is innate. How do we know that? Well, there innate. How do we know that? Well, there innate. How do we know that? Well, there are some beautiful studies that have are some beautiful studies that have are some beautiful studies that have explored how babies respond to music, explored how babies respond to music, explored how babies respond to music, indeed how babies respond to specific indeed how babies respond to specific indeed how babies respond to specific types of music, specific frequencies of types of music, specific frequencies of types of music, specific frequencies of a sound, spacing between particular a sound, spacing between particular a sound, spacing between particular notes, and on and on. notes, and on and on. notes, and on and on. It's been demonstrated, for instance, It's been demonstrated, for instance, It's been demonstrated, for instance, that babies as young as 3 months old that babies as young as 3 months old that babies as young as 3 months old respond to music very differently than respond to music very differently than respond to music very differently than they respond to just other forms of they respond to just other forms of they respond to just other forms of sound scrambled in time. Now, of course, sound scrambled in time. Now, of course, sound scrambled in time. Now, of course, babies that are 3 months old aren't babies that are 3 months old aren't babies that are 3 months old aren't speaking, so you could ask them, "Does speaking, so you could ask them, "Does speaking, so you could ask them, "Does that sound like music? How does it make that sound like music? How does it make that sound like music? How does it make you feel?" etc. They're not going to you feel?" etc. They're not going to you feel?" etc. They're not going to answer, at least not with any coherence, answer, at least not with any coherence, answer, at least not with any coherence, because they don't have spoken language because they don't have spoken language because they don't have spoken language yet. But, despite their absence of yet. But, despite their absence of yet. But, despite their absence of language, we know that babies as young language, we know that babies as young language, we know that babies as young as 3 months old respond to music because as 3 months old respond to music because as 3 months old respond to music because they do so with rhythmic movements of they do so with rhythmic movements of they do so with rhythmic movements of their bodily limbs and actually their bodily limbs and actually their bodily limbs and actually their torso, as well. Now, a little bit later torso, as well. Now, a little bit later torso, as well. Now, a little bit later we will touch on this issue of what we will touch on this issue of what we will touch on this issue of what types of music evoke movement of the types of music evoke movement of the types of music evoke movement of the torso versus movement of the limbs torso versus movement of the limbs torso versus movement of the limbs versus movement of the torso and limbs. versus movement of the torso and limbs. versus movement of the torso and limbs. No, I'm not going to dance for you No, I'm not going to dance for you No, I'm not going to dance for you during this podcast. However, there's a during this podcast. However, there's a during this podcast. However, there's a really interesting story there that really interesting story there that really interesting story there that relates to how primitive or evolved the relates to how primitive or evolved the relates to how primitive or evolved the motor neurons, the neurons that actually motor neurons, the neurons that actually motor neurons, the neurons that actually move the musculature, are, and how move the musculature, are, and how move the musculature, are, and how primitive or evolved the music that one primitive or evolved the music that one primitive or evolved the music that one listens to is. But just to give you a listens to is. But just to give you a listens to is. But just to give you a sense of where that's headed, sense of where that's headed, sense of where that's headed, in this study where they examined the in this study where they examined the in this study where they examined the responses of very young babies to music, responses of very young babies to music, responses of very young babies to music, what they found is that certain what they found is that certain what they found is that certain frequencies of sound evoked movements in frequencies of sound evoked movements in frequencies of sound evoked movements in those babies that were rhythmic, where those babies that were rhythmic, where those babies that were rhythmic, where it was mostly their torso moving back it was mostly their torso moving back it was mostly their torso moving back and forth, and maybe their head a little and forth, and maybe their head a little and forth, and maybe their head a little bit. Whereas other patterns of sound, bit. Whereas other patterns of sound, bit. Whereas other patterns of sound, different frequencies in different frequencies in different frequencies in different arrangements, evoked movement of their limbs more than evoked movement of their limbs more than evoked movement of their limbs more than their torso, and still other patterns of their torso, and still other patterns of their torso, and still other patterns of sounds evoked movement of their torso, sounds evoked movement of their torso, sounds evoked movement of their torso, limbs, and head. In other words, babies limbs, and head. In other words, babies limbs, and head. In other words, babies dancing. And if you've ever been to a dancing. And if you've ever been to a dancing. And if you've ever been to a wedding or a party or been out dancing, wedding or a party or been out dancing, wedding or a party or been out dancing, you will see people who include more you will see people who include more you will see people who include more torso versus limb versus limb and torso versus limb versus limb and torso versus limb versus limb and torso movement when they dance. And yes, of movement when they dance. And yes, of movement when they dance. And yes, of course, some of this relates to course, some of this relates to course, some of this relates to proficiency in dancing, comfort on the proficiency in dancing, comfort on the proficiency in dancing, comfort on the dance floor, etc. But there are some dance floor, etc. But there are some dance floor, etc. But there are some universal rules out there about how universal rules out there about how universal rules out there about how certain frequencies and patterns of certain frequencies and patterns of certain frequencies and patterns of sound, aka music, sound, aka music, sound, aka music, evokes different types of bodily evokes different types of bodily evokes different types of bodily movements. So, starting from a very movements. So, starting from a very movements. So, starting from a very young age, prior to any instruction in young age, prior to any instruction in young age, prior to any instruction in terms of how to dance terms of how to dance terms of how to dance or what music is, babies are dancing to or what music is, babies are dancing to or what music is, babies are dancing to music. And that highlights an important music. And that highlights an important music. And that highlights an important point that we will return to again and point that we will return to again and point that we will return to again and again throughout today's episode, which again throughout today's episode, which again throughout today's episode, which is that is that is that the systems of the brain that respond the systems of the brain that respond the systems of the brain that respond specifically to movement, not just specifically to movement, not just specifically to movement, not just sound, but specifically to musical sound, but specifically to musical sound, but specifically to musical sounds, are intimately tied to the sounds, are intimately tied to the sounds, are intimately tied to the neural circuits of the body that neural circuits of the body that neural circuits of the body that generate movement. And this is generate movement. And this is generate movement. And this is especially important to understand when especially important to understand when especially important to understand when we get into our discussion about music we get into our discussion about music we get into our discussion about music and our sense of motivation. Okay, so and our sense of motivation. Okay, so and our sense of motivation. Okay, so the list of incredible things that music the list of incredible things that music the list of incredible things that music can evoke within us by way of how it can evoke within us by way of how it can evoke within us by way of how it activates our nervous system and body is activates our nervous system and body is activates our nervous system and body is starting to grow. We've talked about how starting to grow. We've talked about how starting to grow. We've talked about how music can convey emotion, how music can music can convey emotion, how music can music can convey emotion, how music can evoke emotion, and how music can convey evoke emotion, and how music can convey evoke emotion, and how music can convey a sense of intent. As well now as how a sense of intent. As well now as how a sense of intent. As well now as how music can generate action within us. music can generate action within us. music can generate action within us. This is a pretty spectacular list if you This is a pretty spectacular list if you This is a pretty spectacular list if you think about it. think about it. think about it. In addition, In addition, In addition, music causes changes within our bodily music causes changes within our bodily music causes changes within our bodily physiology that extends beyond the physiology that extends beyond the physiology that extends beyond the nervous system, although it has a nervous system, although it has a nervous system, although it has a relationship to the nervous system. relationship to the nervous system. relationship to the nervous system. In particular, there've been a lot of In particular, there've been a lot of In particular, there've been a lot of studies that have explored how music studies that have explored how music studies that have explored how music changes things like our blood pressure changes things like our blood pressure changes things like our blood pressure or how fast our heart is beating, our or how fast our heart is beating, our or how fast our heart is beating, our so-called resting heart rate. so-called resting heart rate. so-called resting heart rate. And here we've made some important And here we've made some important And here we've made some important discoveries in recent years. And when I discoveries in recent years. And when I discoveries in recent years. And when I say we, I don't mean my laboratory. I say we, I don't mean my laboratory. I say we, I don't mean my laboratory. I mean laboratories that focus on the mean laboratories that focus on the mean laboratories that focus on the relationship between music and our relationship between music and our relationship between music and our bodily physiology because we've long bodily physiology because we've long bodily physiology because we've long known that music can change various known that music can change various known that music can change various health metrics. There's some really nice health metrics. There's some really nice health metrics. There's some really nice studies and I'll link to one or two of studies and I'll link to one or two of studies and I'll link to one or two of the meta-analyses of these studies in the meta-analyses of these studies in the meta-analyses of these studies in the show note captions the show note captions the show note captions that have showed that if people listen that have showed that if people listen that have showed that if people listen to anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes of to anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes of to anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes of music per day, and by the way, the music per day, and by the way, the music per day, and by the way, the selection of music in the studies ranged selection of music in the studies ranged selection of music in the studies ranged everything from rock and roll to everything from rock and roll to everything from rock and roll to classical music to country music, classical music to country music, classical music to country music, typically these studies would ask typically these studies would ask typically these studies would ask subjects what their favorite music is subjects what their favorite music is subjects what their favorite music is and then they would have them listen to and then they would have them listen to and then they would have them listen to that particular genre of music for that particular genre of music for that particular genre of music for anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes per day. anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes per day. anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes per day. And if you look at the meta-analyses of And if you look at the meta-analyses of And if you look at the meta-analyses of those studies, what you find is that those studies, what you find is that those studies, what you find is that almost all of them see some sort of almost all of them see some sort of almost all of them see some sort of significant effect. That is some significant effect. That is some significant effect. That is some statistically significant shift in the statistically significant shift in the statistically significant shift in the bodily physiology of people that bodily physiology of people that bodily physiology of people that deliberately listen to music for 10 to deliberately listen to music for 10 to deliberately listen to music for 10 to 30 minutes per day. 30 minutes per day. 30 minutes per day. Not while doing anything else, but just Not while doing anything else, but just Not while doing anything else, but just listening to that music. They find for listening to that music. They find for listening to that music. They find for instance that their resting heart rate instance that their resting heart rate instance that their resting heart rate is reduced if not during the period in is reduced if not during the period in is reduced if not during the period in which they're listening to the music which they're listening to the music which they're listening to the music then after the time in which they're then after the time in which they're then after the time in which they're listening to the music. They find that listening to the music. They find that listening to the music. They find that their so-called heart rate variability their so-called heart rate variability their so-called heart rate variability tends to increase. For those of you that tends to increase. For those of you that tends to increase. For those of you that aren't familiar with heart rate aren't familiar with heart rate aren't familiar with heart rate variability, having increased heart rate variability, having increased heart rate variability, having increased heart rate variability is a good thing and that's variability is a good thing and that's variability is a good thing and that's because heart rate variability reflects because heart rate variability reflects because heart rate variability reflects the sort of push and pull or the balance the sort of push and pull or the balance the sort of push and pull or the balance rather of the activation of the rather of the activation of the rather of the activation of the so-called sympathetic nervous system so-called sympathetic nervous system so-called sympathetic nervous system which is the one sometimes called the which is the one sometimes called the which is the one sometimes called the fight or flight system although I don't fight or flight system although I don't fight or flight system although I don't really like that nomenclature. The really like that nomenclature. The really like that nomenclature. The sympathetic nervous system, by the way, sympathetic nervous system, by the way, sympathetic nervous system, by the way, is not about emotional sympathy. It's is not about emotional sympathy. It's is not about emotional sympathy. It's what drives your heart rate higher, what drives your heart rate higher, what drives your heart rate higher, tends to put us into activated states tends to put us into activated states tends to put us into activated states where we favor movement and motion and where we favor movement and motion and where we favor movement and motion and makes us alert whereas the makes us alert whereas the makes us alert whereas the parasympathetic aspect of our nervous system is the aspect of our nervous system is the aspect of our nervous system is the portion of our autonomic nervous system, portion of our autonomic nervous system, portion of our autonomic nervous system, sometimes called the rest and digest sometimes called the rest and digest sometimes called the rest and digest system, the parasympathetic nervous system, the parasympathetic nervous system, the parasympathetic nervous system drives states of deeper system drives states of deeper system drives states of deeper relaxation, of calm. In any event, heart relaxation, of calm. In any event, heart relaxation, of calm. In any event, heart rate variability reflects a periodic rate variability reflects a periodic rate variability reflects a periodic breaking, a slowing down of heart rate breaking, a slowing down of heart rate breaking, a slowing down of heart rate and breathing and other aspects of our and breathing and other aspects of our and breathing and other aspects of our neural system function that neural system function that neural system function that works alongside with sympathetic works alongside with sympathetic works alongside with sympathetic activation. Think of sympathetic activation. Think of sympathetic activation. Think of sympathetic activation as an accelerator, activation as an accelerator, activation as an accelerator, parasympathetic activation as a brake parasympathetic activation as a brake parasympathetic activation as a brake and when heart rate variability is and when heart rate variability is and when heart rate variability is higher it reflects the fact that our higher it reflects the fact that our higher it reflects the fact that our parasympathetic nervous system is parasympathetic nervous system is parasympathetic nervous system is periodically engaging, it's getting periodically engaging, it's getting periodically engaging, it's getting activated and slowing our heart rate, activated and slowing our heart rate, activated and slowing our heart rate, slowing our breathing down. Music seems slowing our breathing down. Music seems slowing our breathing down. Music seems to have the effect of activating that to have the effect of activating that to have the effect of activating that parasympathetic aspect of our nervous parasympathetic aspect of our nervous parasympathetic aspect of our nervous system and so we are pumping the brake system and so we are pumping the brake system and so we are pumping the brake every once in a while, slowing down our every once in a while, slowing down our every once in a while, slowing down our heart rate, slowing down our breathing. heart rate, slowing down our breathing. heart rate, slowing down our breathing. In other words, when people listen to In other words, when people listen to In other words, when people listen to music for a dedicated period of time music for a dedicated period of time music for a dedicated period of time each day of about 10 to 30 minutes, some each day of about 10 to 30 minutes, some each day of about 10 to 30 minutes, some studies looked at as much as 60 minutes studies looked at as much as 60 minutes studies looked at as much as 60 minutes but typically 10 to 30 minutes, what one but typically 10 to 30 minutes, what one but typically 10 to 30 minutes, what one finds is that heart rate variability finds is that heart rate variability finds is that heart rate variability increases not just during the period increases not just during the period increases not just during the period when they're listening to the music. when they're listening to the music. when they're listening to the music. This is very important but also heart This is very important but also heart This is very important but also heart rate variability is increased around the rate variability is increased around the rate variability is increased around the clock in those subjects even during clock in those subjects even during clock in those subjects even during sleep making listening to 10 to 30 sleep making listening to 10 to 30 sleep making listening to 10 to 30 minutes of your favorite music each day minutes of your favorite music each day minutes of your favorite music each day not just what I would think to be a not just what I would think to be a not just what I would think to be a enjoyable protocol if you could even enjoyable protocol if you could even enjoyable protocol if you could even call it a protocol it's so enjoyable to call it a protocol it's so enjoyable to call it a protocol it's so enjoyable to listen to your favorite music that it listen to your favorite music that it listen to your favorite music that it feels almost inappropriate to call it a feels almost inappropriate to call it a feels almost inappropriate to call it a protocol because protocol sounds kind of protocol because protocol sounds kind of protocol because protocol sounds kind of rigid like you're imposing that on rigid like you're imposing that on rigid like you're imposing that on yourself but if you need an excuse to yourself but if you need an excuse to yourself but if you need an excuse to listen to your favorite music for 10 to listen to your favorite music for 10 to listen to your favorite music for 10 to 30 maybe 60 minutes per day and just 30 maybe 60 minutes per day and just 30 maybe 60 minutes per day and just attending to that music not while doing attending to that music not while doing attending to that music not while doing anything else which is what these anything else which is what these anything else which is what these studies had subjects do studies had subjects do studies had subjects do well indeed that's been shown to well indeed that's been shown to well indeed that's been shown to increase heart rate variability around increase heart rate variability around increase heart rate variability around the clock which we know is beneficial the clock which we know is beneficial the clock which we know is beneficial for your mental and physical health more for your mental and physical health more for your mental and physical health more generally okay so there are dozens if generally okay so there are dozens if generally okay so there are dozens if not hundreds of studies that have not hundreds of studies that have not hundreds of studies that have explored how music impacts our explored how music impacts our explored how music impacts our physiology and physiology and physiology and as I just mentioned it seems that if we as I just mentioned it seems that if we as I just mentioned it seems that if we listen to music that we like for 10 to listen to music that we like for 10 to listen to music that we like for 10 to 30 maybe 60 minutes a day our physiology 30 maybe 60 minutes a day our physiology 30 maybe 60 minutes a day our physiology certain health metrics heart rate certain health metrics heart rate certain health metrics heart rate variability in particular improve now in variability in particular improve now in variability in particular improve now in light of the positive effects of light of the positive effects of light of the positive effects of listening to music on one's health listening to music on one's health listening to music on one's health there's a recent meta-analysis that I there's a recent meta-analysis that I there's a recent meta-analysis that I found particularly interesting the title found particularly interesting the title found particularly interesting the title of this meta-analysis is effects of this meta-analysis is effects of this meta-analysis is effects of music on the cardiovascular system and music on the cardiovascular system and music on the cardiovascular system and it was published in trends in it was published in trends in it was published in trends in cardiovascular medicine now from the cardiovascular medicine now from the cardiovascular medicine now from the title of this paper title of this paper title of this paper effects of music on the cardiovascular effects of music on the cardiovascular effects of music on the cardiovascular system you might think that it's just system you might think that it's just system you might think that it's just yet another meta-analysis exploring how yet another meta-analysis exploring how yet another meta-analysis exploring how music impacts heart rate variability and music impacts heart rate variability and music impacts heart rate variability and things of that sort but what's things of that sort but what's things of that sort but what's interesting about this study is that it interesting about this study is that it interesting about this study is that it identifies that the way in which identifies that the way in which identifies that the way in which listening to one's favorite music listening to one's favorite music listening to one's favorite music positively impacts the cardiovascular positively impacts the cardiovascular positively impacts the cardiovascular system and other aspects of our system and other aspects of our system and other aspects of our physiology is very likely not through physiology is very likely not through physiology is very likely not through direct changes on our heart rate simply direct changes on our heart rate simply direct changes on our heart rate simply by listening to music but rather through by listening to music but rather through by listening to music but rather through changes in our breathing and this is changes in our breathing and this is changes in our breathing and this is true even if people were not singing true even if people were not singing true even if people were not singing along with the music by the way along with the music by the way along with the music by the way now the relationship between breathing now the relationship between breathing now the relationship between breathing and heart rate is something that I've and heart rate is something that I've and heart rate is something that I've touched on before but if If haven't touched on before but if If haven't touched on before but if If haven't heard me discuss this I'm just going to heard me discuss this I'm just going to heard me discuss this I'm just going to briefly tell you the relationship in two briefly tell you the relationship in two briefly tell you the relationship in two or three sentences, and then I'll or three sentences, and then I'll or three sentences, and then I'll explain the mechanism also in about two explain the mechanism also in about two explain the mechanism also in about two to three sentences. So, if you have a to three sentences. So, if you have a to three sentences. So, if you have a background in biology, or even if you background in biology, or even if you background in biology, or even if you don't, this will all be very simple and don't, this will all be very simple and don't, this will all be very simple and very clear. very clear. very clear. When you deliberately inhale When you deliberately inhale When you deliberately inhale with a lot of vigor, or you deliberately with a lot of vigor, or you deliberately with a lot of vigor, or you deliberately make your inhale longer than you make your inhale longer than you make your inhale longer than you naturally would. So, for instance, if I naturally would. So, for instance, if I naturally would. So, for instance, if I breathe in very vigorously through my breathe in very vigorously through my breathe in very vigorously through my nose, something very specific happens to your something very specific happens to your something very specific happens to your heart rate. heart rate. heart rate. It increases. Whereas, when you It increases. Whereas, when you It increases. Whereas, when you deliberately exhale, deliberately exhale, deliberately exhale, meaning when you exhale and deliberately meaning when you exhale and deliberately meaning when you exhale and deliberately make that exhale longer, or you make that exhale longer, or you make that exhale longer, or you deliberately add vigor to that exhale, or even a shorter, deliberate, more or even a shorter, deliberate, more or even a shorter, deliberate, more vigorous exhale, vigorous exhale, vigorous exhale, you slow down your heart rate. And you slow down your heart rate. And you slow down your heart rate. And that's because of a phenomenon called that's because of a phenomenon called that's because of a phenomenon called respiratory sinus arrhythmia, which, respiratory sinus arrhythmia, which, respiratory sinus arrhythmia, which, because it includes the word arrhythmia, because it includes the word arrhythmia, because it includes the word arrhythmia, sounds like a bad thing, but it's sounds like a bad thing, but it's sounds like a bad thing, but it's actually a wonderful thing. actually a wonderful thing. actually a wonderful thing. It has to do with the relationship It has to do with the relationship It has to do with the relationship between a particular muscle in your body between a particular muscle in your body between a particular muscle in your body called the diaphragm, called the diaphragm, called the diaphragm, which, when you inhale, our lungs fill which, when you inhale, our lungs fill which, when you inhale, our lungs fill with air, our diaphragm moves down, with air, our diaphragm moves down, with air, our diaphragm moves down, and our heart therefore has a little bit and our heart therefore has a little bit and our heart therefore has a little bit more space. It actually gets bigger, more space. It actually gets bigger, more space. It actually gets bigger, temporarily bigger, but bigger. temporarily bigger, but bigger. temporarily bigger, but bigger. And when it does that, whatever volume And when it does that, whatever volume And when it does that, whatever volume of blood is in the heart is now moving of blood is in the heart is now moving of blood is in the heart is now moving through a larger space. So, it's the through a larger space. So, it's the through a larger space. So, it's the same amount of blood moving through a same amount of blood moving through a same amount of blood moving through a larger space, and the nervous system larger space, and the nervous system larger space, and the nervous system registers that as the blood moving more registers that as the blood moving more registers that as the blood moving more slowly through that temporarily enlarged slowly through that temporarily enlarged slowly through that temporarily enlarged heart. And as a consequence, there's a heart. And as a consequence, there's a heart. And as a consequence, there's a signal sent through various stations of signal sent through various stations of signal sent through various stations of the nervous system to the heart to speed the nervous system to the heart to speed the nervous system to the heart to speed the heart up. In other words, just as I the heart up. In other words, just as I the heart up. In other words, just as I said before, when we inhale, our heart said before, when we inhale, our heart said before, when we inhale, our heart rate speeds up. rate speeds up. rate speeds up. Conversely, when we exhale, our lungs Conversely, when we exhale, our lungs Conversely, when we exhale, our lungs empty out some air, our diaphragm moves empty out some air, our diaphragm moves empty out some air, our diaphragm moves up, and as a consequence of that, up, and as a consequence of that, up, and as a consequence of that, there's a less space for the heart. And there's a less space for the heart. And there's a less space for the heart. And so, our heart temporarily becomes so, our heart temporarily becomes so, our heart temporarily becomes smaller. And when that happens, the smaller. And when that happens, the smaller. And when that happens, the volume of blood within that smaller volume of blood within that smaller volume of blood within that smaller heart moves more quickly. heart moves more quickly. heart moves more quickly. And that's detected by the nervous And that's detected by the nervous And that's detected by the nervous system, which then triggers a neural system, which then triggers a neural system, which then triggers a neural signal from the parasympathetic arm of signal from the parasympathetic arm of signal from the parasympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is the autonomic nervous system, which is the autonomic nervous system, which is just fancy nerd speak for a neural just fancy nerd speak for a neural just fancy nerd speak for a neural signal is sent to your heart every time signal is sent to your heart every time signal is sent to your heart every time you exhale to slow your heart down. So, you exhale to slow your heart down. So, you exhale to slow your heart down. So, the well-established effects of the well-established effects of the well-established effects of listening to your favorite music, listening to your favorite music, listening to your favorite music, increasing your heart rate variability, increasing your heart rate variability, increasing your heart rate variability, is not a direct interaction between the is not a direct interaction between the is not a direct interaction between the sounds coming in through your ears and sounds coming in through your ears and sounds coming in through your ears and changes in your heart rate while you're changes in your heart rate while you're changes in your heart rate while you're listening to the music. That's actually listening to the music. That's actually listening to the music. That's actually what I would have thought happened, but what I would have thought happened, but what I would have thought happened, but this more recent meta-analysis pulls this more recent meta-analysis pulls this more recent meta-analysis pulls apart the variables in these different apart the variables in these different apart the variables in these different studies. It really illustrates that when we are It really illustrates that when we are It really illustrates that when we are listening to music, we are listening to music, we are listening to music, we are subconsciously, most of the time subconsciously, most of the time subconsciously, most of the time subconsciously, changing our patterns of breathing. We changing our patterns of breathing. We changing our patterns of breathing. We are inhaling in anticipation of certain are inhaling in anticipation of certain are inhaling in anticipation of certain things happening in the music. We're things happening in the music. We're things happening in the music. We're exhaling when we feel a relief of exhaling when we feel a relief of exhaling when we feel a relief of tension. We get excited. We may get sad. tension. We get excited. We may get sad. tension. We get excited. We may get sad. We may get happy. We may even just be We may get happy. We may even just be We may get happy. We may even just be listening to music that we don't think listening to music that we don't think listening to music that we don't think is impacting our physiology at such a is impacting our physiology at such a is impacting our physiology at such a core level, but indeed it is. Music is core level, but indeed it is. Music is core level, but indeed it is. Music is able to route into our nervous system at able to route into our nervous system at able to route into our nervous system at levels below our conscious awareness and levels below our conscious awareness and levels below our conscious awareness and literally turn the various knobs, if you literally turn the various knobs, if you literally turn the various knobs, if you will, of our cardiovascular system, of will, of our cardiovascular system, of will, of our cardiovascular system, of our breathing apparatus, the diaphragm, our breathing apparatus, the diaphragm, our breathing apparatus, the diaphragm, the lungs. It can evoke respiratory the lungs. It can evoke respiratory the lungs. It can evoke respiratory sinus arrhythmia, which again sounds sinus arrhythmia, which again sounds sinus arrhythmia, which again sounds like a terrible thing, but is actually like a terrible thing, but is actually like a terrible thing, but is actually the reflection of a healthy nervous the reflection of a healthy nervous the reflection of a healthy nervous system and heart. And in doing so, yes, system and heart. And in doing so, yes, system and heart. And in doing so, yes, it increases heart rate variability, it increases heart rate variability, it increases heart rate variability, something that is beneficial to all of something that is beneficial to all of something that is beneficial to all of us, but it's doing so by changing our us, but it's doing so by changing our us, but it's doing so by changing our patterns of breathing. So, if you've patterns of breathing. So, if you've patterns of breathing. So, if you've ever wondered why music can change how ever wondered why music can change how ever wondered why music can change how you feel so robustly, well, it's doing you feel so robustly, well, it's doing you feel so robustly, well, it's doing that at a deep foundational level of that at a deep foundational level of that at a deep foundational level of your nervous system. Indeed, at the your nervous system. Indeed, at the your nervous system. Indeed, at the levels of your nervous system that levels of your nervous system that levels of your nervous system that typically are not in your conscious typically are not in your conscious typically are not in your conscious awareness. Because I have to imagine awareness. Because I have to imagine awareness. Because I have to imagine that most of you are probably not that most of you are probably not that most of you are probably not listening to music and thinking, "Oh, listening to music and thinking, "Oh, listening to music and thinking, "Oh, here comes that one chorus or here comes here comes that one chorus or here comes here comes that one chorus or here comes that one melody and this is where I that one melody and this is where I that one melody and this is where I always exhale or this is where I always exhale or this is where I always exhale or this is where I always hold my breath." This sort of thing. No, hold my breath." This sort of thing. No, hold my breath." This sort of thing. No, most people are just listening to music. most people are just listening to music. most people are just listening to music. It's coming in through their ears. It's coming in through their ears. It's coming in through their ears. They're experiencing some bodily They're experiencing some bodily They're experiencing some bodily sensations. Maybe they're moving their sensations. Maybe they're moving their sensations. Maybe they're moving their torso, arms, maybe your arms and torso, arms, maybe your arms and torso, arms, maybe your arms and torso, maybe you're not moving at all, no maybe you're not moving at all, no maybe you're not moving at all, no dancing, maybe just listening within dancing, maybe just listening within dancing, maybe just listening within your head, or maybe it's just dropped your head, or maybe it's just dropped your head, or maybe it's just dropped into the background below your conscious into the background below your conscious into the background below your conscious awareness at all. And yet that music is awareness at all. And yet that music is awareness at all. And yet that music is communicating emotion, it's evoking communicating emotion, it's evoking communicating emotion, it's evoking emotion, it's communicating intent, it's emotion, it's communicating intent, it's emotion, it's communicating intent, it's activating those pre-motor circuits that activating those pre-motor circuits that activating those pre-motor circuits that would have you move if it could. Yeah, would have you move if it could. Yeah, would have you move if it could. Yeah, we'll talk about dance a little bit we'll talk about dance a little bit we'll talk about dance a little bit later, but even if you're not dancing, later, but even if you're not dancing, later, but even if you're not dancing, even if you're not swaying the tiniest even if you're not swaying the tiniest even if you're not swaying the tiniest bit, your patterns of breathing are bit, your patterns of breathing are bit, your patterns of breathing are changing and through respiratory sinus changing and through respiratory sinus changing and through respiratory sinus arrhythmia, your heart rate is changing arrhythmia, your heart rate is changing arrhythmia, your heart rate is changing and through changes in your heart rate, and through changes in your heart rate, and through changes in your heart rate, your heart rate variability is your heart rate variability is your heart rate variability is increasing. So, if ever you wanted a increasing. So, if ever you wanted a increasing. So, if ever you wanted a tool or protocol that was easy to use tool or protocol that was easy to use tool or protocol that was easy to use but could positively impact your mental but could positively impact your mental but could positively impact your mental and physical health, well, listening to and physical health, well, listening to and physical health, well, listening to your favorite music for 10 to 30, maybe your favorite music for 10 to 30, maybe your favorite music for 10 to 30, maybe 60 minutes, maybe more per day is that 60 minutes, maybe more per day is that 60 minutes, maybe more per day is that protocol. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 daily since 2012. So, I'm delighted AG1 daily since 2012. So, I'm delighted AG1 daily since 2012. So, I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. AG1 that they're sponsoring the podcast. AG1 that they're sponsoring the podcast. AG1 is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your that's designed to meet all of your that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs. Now, of foundational nutrition needs. Now, of foundational nutrition needs. Now, of course, I try to get enough servings of course, I try to get enough servings of course, I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole food vitamins and minerals through whole food vitamins and minerals through whole food sources that include vegetables and sources that include vegetables and sources that include vegetables and fruits every day, but oftentimes I fruits every day, but oftentimes I fruits every day, but oftentimes I simply can't get enough servings. But simply can't get enough servings. But simply can't get enough servings. But with AG1, I'm sure to get enough with AG1, I'm sure to get enough with AG1, I'm sure to get enough vitamins and minerals and the probiotics vitamins and minerals and the probiotics vitamins and minerals and the probiotics that I need and it also contains that I need and it also contains that I need and it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress. Simply adaptogens to help buffer stress. Simply adaptogens to help buffer stress. Simply put, I always feel better when I take put, I always feel better when I take put, I always feel better when I take AG1. I have more focus and energy and I AG1. I have more focus and energy and I AG1. I have more focus and energy and I sleep better and it also happens to sleep better and it also happens to sleep better and it also happens to taste great. For all these reasons, taste great. For all these reasons, taste great. For all these reasons, whenever I'm asked, "If you could take whenever I'm asked, "If you could take whenever I'm asked, "If you could take just one supplement, what would it be?" just one supplement, what would it be?" just one supplement, what would it be?" I answer AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, I answer AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, I answer AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, go to drinkag1.com/huberman go to drinkag1.com/huberman go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give to claim a special offer. They'll give to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs plus a year you five free travel packs plus a year you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's drinkag1.com/huberman. So, hopefully it's becoming clear just So, hopefully it's becoming clear just So, hopefully it's becoming clear just how absolutely powerful music is at how absolutely powerful music is at how absolutely powerful music is at evoking different physiological evoking different physiological evoking different physiological responses within you, that is within responses within you, that is within responses within you, that is within your brain and body. But, there's an your brain and body. But, there's an your brain and body. But, there's an additional one that I find particularly additional one that I find particularly additional one that I find particularly interesting because it addresses and interesting because it addresses and interesting because it addresses and indeed answers one of the most common indeed answers one of the most common indeed answers one of the most common questions that I receive all of the questions that I receive all of the questions that I receive all of the time, which is how can I get more motivated? which is how can I get more motivated? which is how can I get more motivated? Not how I, Andrew, can get more Not how I, Andrew, can get more Not how I, Andrew, can get more motivated, although of course I ask motivated, although of course I ask motivated, although of course I ask myself that question from time to time. myself that question from time to time. myself that question from time to time. Although admittedly, most of the time Although admittedly, most of the time Although admittedly, most of the time I'm wondering how I'm just going to get I'm wondering how I'm just going to get I'm wondering how I'm just going to get everything that I need to get done done, everything that I need to get done done, everything that I need to get done done, but I often get the question I often get the question I often get the question how can I feel more motivated or what how can I feel more motivated or what how can I feel more motivated or what can I do to sustain my motivation over can I do to sustain my motivation over can I do to sustain my motivation over time? And you know, we hear a lot of time? And you know, we hear a lot of time? And you know, we hear a lot of different strategies about how to do different strategies about how to do different strategies about how to do that. We hear about the quote unquote that. We hear about the quote unquote that. We hear about the quote unquote just do it strategy, the incredible just do it strategy, the incredible just do it strategy, the incredible slogan that Nike created slogan that Nike created slogan that Nike created and that persists to this day, and that persists to this day, and that persists to this day, has become commonplace in culture. And has become commonplace in culture. And has become commonplace in culture. And indeed the just do it form of advice can indeed the just do it form of advice can indeed the just do it form of advice can be a good one, but for a lot of people be a good one, but for a lot of people be a good one, but for a lot of people just hearing just do it or telling just hearing just do it or telling just hearing just do it or telling themselves just do it is not something themselves just do it is not something themselves just do it is not something that can evoke action in them. that can evoke action in them. that can evoke action in them. Other people will listen to motivational Other people will listen to motivational Other people will listen to motivational speeches, they'll look at motivational speeches, they'll look at motivational speeches, they'll look at motivational videos, they'll read motivational books. videos, they'll read motivational books. videos, they'll read motivational books. They may even hire coaches. In other They may even hire coaches. In other They may even hire coaches. In other words, people invest a ton of time, words, people invest a ton of time, words, people invest a ton of time, energy and money into trying to be more energy and money into trying to be more energy and money into trying to be more motivated. And indeed, a number of motivated. And indeed, a number of motivated. And indeed, a number of episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast have focused on the relationship between have focused on the relationship between have focused on the relationship between say motivation, drive and the say motivation, drive and the say motivation, drive and the neuromodulator dopamine. We have several neuromodulator dopamine. We have several neuromodulator dopamine. We have several episodes about that as well as a episodes about that as well as a episodes about that as well as a toolkit, all of which are available at toolkit, all of which are available at toolkit, all of which are available at zero cost at hubermanlab.com. You can zero cost at hubermanlab.com. You can zero cost at hubermanlab.com. You can access those easily by putting access those easily by putting access those easily by putting motivation into the search function at motivation into the search function at motivation into the search function at hubermanlab.com. All of that will come hubermanlab.com. All of that will come hubermanlab.com. All of that will come up timestamped, etc. up timestamped, etc. up timestamped, etc. But perhaps surprisingly, today's But perhaps surprisingly, today's But perhaps surprisingly, today's conversation about music offers us a conversation about music offers us a conversation about music offers us a particularly potent tool to increase particularly potent tool to increase particularly potent tool to increase motivation. And that's because one of motivation. And that's because one of motivation. And that's because one of the fundamental properties of listening the fundamental properties of listening the fundamental properties of listening to music is that it evokes activation of to music is that it evokes activation of to music is that it evokes activation of these pre-motor and motor circuits these pre-motor and motor circuits these pre-motor and motor circuits within our brain and body. That is, the within our brain and body. That is, the within our brain and body. That is, the neural circuits whose specific job is to neural circuits whose specific job is to neural circuits whose specific job is to mobilize our body from its current mobilize our body from its current mobilize our body from its current position and state to a new position and position and state to a new position and position and state to a new position and state. So, for those of you that listen to So, for those of you that listen to So, for those of you that listen to music while you work out or prior to music while you work out or prior to music while you work out or prior to when you work out, you are definitely on when you work out, you are definitely on when you work out, you are definitely on to something. For those of you that to something. For those of you that to something. For those of you that don't, that's fine, too. What I'm going don't, that's fine, too. What I'm going don't, that's fine, too. What I'm going to describe now are the specific sets of to describe now are the specific sets of to describe now are the specific sets of neural circuits that listening to music neural circuits that listening to music neural circuits that listening to music activates. As I mentioned earlier, activates. As I mentioned earlier, activates. As I mentioned earlier, listening to music activates so many listening to music activates so many listening to music activates so many circuits throughout the brain and body circuits throughout the brain and body circuits throughout the brain and body that really one can take a step back that really one can take a step back that really one can take a step back from the scientific literature on this from the scientific literature on this from the scientific literature on this and say, "Anytime someone has done a and say, "Anytime someone has done a and say, "Anytime someone has done a study where human beings listen to music study where human beings listen to music study where human beings listen to music and people record from a particular and people record from a particular and people record from a particular brain area, believe it or not, even from brain area, believe it or not, even from brain area, believe it or not, even from the olfactory system, from the system in the olfactory system, from the system in the olfactory system, from the system in the brain responsible for smell, there the brain responsible for smell, there the brain responsible for smell, there seems to be some significant shift in seems to be some significant shift in seems to be some significant shift in terms of the neural firing there or the terms of the neural firing there or the terms of the neural firing there or the release of neurochemicals, release of neurochemicals, release of neurochemicals, which on the one hand might lead you to which on the one hand might lead you to which on the one hand might lead you to conclude that listening to music is just conclude that listening to music is just conclude that listening to music is just sort of a non-specific generalized sort of a non-specific generalized sort of a non-specific generalized activator of nervous system function. activator of nervous system function. activator of nervous system function. It's kind of like turning all the lights It's kind of like turning all the lights It's kind of like turning all the lights on." But, on." But, on." But, that's not the case. Music, in fact, is that's not the case. Music, in fact, is that's not the case. Music, in fact, is activating different neural circuits activating different neural circuits activating different neural circuits differently in time and space to evoke a differently in time and space to evoke a differently in time and space to evoke a whole set of specific reactions in your whole set of specific reactions in your whole set of specific reactions in your brain and body. But, not the least of brain and body. But, not the least of brain and body. But, not the least of which is the propensity for you to move. which is the propensity for you to move. which is the propensity for you to move. And this is something that you can And this is something that you can And this is something that you can leverage and indeed I'll describe a leverage and indeed I'll describe a leverage and indeed I'll describe a protocol by which you can leverage music protocol by which you can leverage music protocol by which you can leverage music in order to greatly increase your state in order to greatly increase your state in order to greatly increase your state of motivation. Okay, so this is the of motivation. Okay, so this is the of motivation. Okay, so this is the portion of today's episode where we're portion of today's episode where we're portion of today's episode where we're going to discuss some specific neural going to discuss some specific neural going to discuss some specific neural circuits. But, I want to assure you that circuits. But, I want to assure you that circuits. But, I want to assure you that if you're a neurobiologist, you can if you're a neurobiologist, you can if you're a neurobiologist, you can understand this. If you are not a understand this. If you are not a understand this. If you are not a neurobiologist, in fact, if you took no neurobiologist, in fact, if you took no neurobiologist, in fact, if you took no biology ever in your life, I'm going to biology ever in your life, I'm going to biology ever in your life, I'm going to make it clear and easy for you to make it clear and easy for you to make it clear and easy for you to understand. As I mentioned before, when understand. As I mentioned before, when understand. As I mentioned before, when we hear music, it activates many, many we hear music, it activates many, many we hear music, it activates many, many circuits throughout the brain and body. circuits throughout the brain and body. circuits throughout the brain and body. When I say circuits, I mean neurons, When I say circuits, I mean neurons, When I say circuits, I mean neurons, nerve cells that communicate with one nerve cells that communicate with one nerve cells that communicate with one another in sort of chains of reactions. another in sort of chains of reactions. another in sort of chains of reactions. When I say respond to one another, what When I say respond to one another, what When I say respond to one another, what I mean is when neurons are {quote} I mean is when neurons are {quote} I mean is when neurons are {quote} activated, they release chemicals. Those activated, they release chemicals. Those activated, they release chemicals. Those chemicals are called neurotransmitters, chemicals are called neurotransmitters, chemicals are called neurotransmitters, things like glutamate, GABA. things like glutamate, GABA. things like glutamate, GABA. They're also called neuromodulators, They're also called neuromodulators, They're also called neuromodulators, things like dopamine, serotonin. The things like dopamine, serotonin. The things like dopamine, serotonin. The names don't really matter for the sake names don't really matter for the sake names don't really matter for the sake of today's discussion, but what those of today's discussion, but what those of today's discussion, but what those things do is they influence the things do is they influence the things do is they influence the likelihood that the next neuron will be likelihood that the next neuron will be likelihood that the next neuron will be active or less active. Okay, so neurons active or less active. Okay, so neurons active or less active. Okay, so neurons speak the language, if you will, of speak the language, if you will, of speak the language, if you will, of electricity, cuz that's how they evoke electricity, cuz that's how they evoke electricity, cuz that's how they evoke release of these chemicals and release of these chemicals and release of these chemicals and chemistry. They chemistry. They chemistry. They vomit out these chemicals, those vomit out these chemicals, those vomit out these chemicals, those chemicals then bind to little parking chemicals then bind to little parking chemicals then bind to little parking spots on the next neuron called spots on the next neuron called spots on the next neuron called receptors, and then the next neuron gets receptors, and then the next neuron gets receptors, and then the next neuron gets activated electrically, and then to the activated electrically, and then to the activated electrically, and then to the next neuron and next neuron, and so on. next neuron and next neuron, and so on. next neuron and next neuron, and so on. It's a chain of electrochemical It's a chain of electrochemical It's a chain of electrochemical reactions. Okay? So, there's your reactions. Okay? So, there's your reactions. Okay? So, there's your neuroscience 101 lesson for today. When people listen to music, there is When people listen to music, there is When people listen to music, there is heightened activation of the so-called heightened activation of the so-called heightened activation of the so-called frontal cortex, the area of your brain frontal cortex, the area of your brain frontal cortex, the area of your brain which is on the surface below your which is on the surface below your which is on the surface below your skull, but just behind your forehead, skull, but just behind your forehead, skull, but just behind your forehead, more or less. And that area of your more or less. And that area of your more or less. And that area of your brain is involved in a lot of different brain is involved in a lot of different brain is involved in a lot of different things. It's involved in understanding things. It's involved in understanding things. It's involved in understanding context, you know, what sorts of context, you know, what sorts of context, you know, what sorts of behaviors and thoughts and actions are behaviors and thoughts and actions are behaviors and thoughts and actions are appropriate for a given environment. By appropriate for a given environment. By appropriate for a given environment. By the way, if any of you have ever been in the way, if any of you have ever been in the way, if any of you have ever been in an environment where everyone was really an environment where everyone was really an environment where everyone was really quiet and you thought, "Oh my gosh, quiet and you thought, "Oh my gosh, quiet and you thought, "Oh my gosh, what's keeping me from just blurting out what's keeping me from just blurting out what's keeping me from just blurting out my name right now?" or saying something my name right now?" or saying something my name right now?" or saying something totally inappropriate, totally inappropriate, totally inappropriate, your frontal cortex is the one providing your frontal cortex is the one providing your frontal cortex is the one providing the shh, the shh, the shh, the so-called top-down inhibition on the so-called top-down inhibition on the so-called top-down inhibition on that impulse that impulse that impulse to blurt something inappropriate out. to blurt something inappropriate out. to blurt something inappropriate out. And by the way, your thoughts about that And by the way, your thoughts about that And by the way, your thoughts about that impulse are perfectly normal. They impulse are perfectly normal. They impulse are perfectly normal. They actually reflect a heightened sense of actually reflect a heightened sense of actually reflect a heightened sense of normalcy, um because it means that your normalcy, um because it means that your normalcy, um because it means that your brain is thinking about how it's not brain is thinking about how it's not brain is thinking about how it's not going to do that and so therefore you're going to do that and so therefore you're going to do that and so therefore you're not going to do that. Likewise, if you not going to do that. Likewise, if you not going to do that. Likewise, if you are ever at the edge of a high bridge, are ever at the edge of a high bridge, are ever at the edge of a high bridge, please stay on the safe side of the please stay on the safe side of the please stay on the safe side of the railing, but if you think, "Oh my railing, but if you think, "Oh my railing, but if you think, "Oh my goodness, what's keeping me from just goodness, what's keeping me from just goodness, what's keeping me from just jumping off the bridge right now?" jumping off the bridge right now?" jumping off the bridge right now?" What's keeping you from doing that is What's keeping you from doing that is What's keeping you from doing that is your frontal cortex. It's suppressing your frontal cortex. It's suppressing your frontal cortex. It's suppressing certain actions in a context-dependent certain actions in a context-dependent certain actions in a context-dependent way, in particular actions that are way, in particular actions that are way, in particular actions that are dangerous to you socially, physically, dangerous to you socially, physically, dangerous to you socially, physically, dangerous to others socially, dangerous to others socially, dangerous to others socially, physically, etc. physically, etc. physically, etc. Now, the frontal cortex, in order to do that, the frontal cortex, in order to do that, the frontal cortex, in order to do that, also has an incredible ability to make also has an incredible ability to make also has an incredible ability to make predictions. So, this is the function of predictions. So, this is the function of predictions. So, this is the function of the frontal cortex that I want to focus the frontal cortex that I want to focus the frontal cortex that I want to focus on for the moment. Your frontal cortex on for the moment. Your frontal cortex on for the moment. Your frontal cortex is great at doing the if this, then that is great at doing the if this, then that is great at doing the if this, then that type of analysis. If I say this, type of analysis. If I say this, type of analysis. If I say this, everyone will be offended, or if I say everyone will be offended, or if I say everyone will be offended, or if I say this, maybe they'll laugh, or if I don't this, maybe they'll laugh, or if I don't this, maybe they'll laugh, or if I don't say this, I'll be safe. If I do say this, I'll be safe. If I do say this, I'll be safe. If I do say that, I won't be safe. This kind of that, I won't be safe. This kind of that, I won't be safe. This kind of thing. Frontal cortex is activated when we Frontal cortex is activated when we Frontal cortex is activated when we listen to music because within music, listen to music because within music, listen to music because within music, there are some regularities. there are some regularities. there are some regularities. Sometimes these are described as motifs Sometimes these are described as motifs Sometimes these are described as motifs or melodies or choruses. Again, this is or melodies or choruses. Again, this is or melodies or choruses. Again, this is the entire landscape of discussion that the entire landscape of discussion that the entire landscape of discussion that we could have and we will have with an we could have and we will have with an we could have and we will have with an expert guest about how the mathematics expert guest about how the mathematics expert guest about how the mathematics of music impacts the electrochemical of music impacts the electrochemical of music impacts the electrochemical signaling within the brain and the signaling within the brain and the signaling within the brain and the coding that is the mathematics of brain coding that is the mathematics of brain coding that is the mathematics of brain function, which leads us to predict that function, which leads us to predict that function, which leads us to predict that certain things, because they just certain things, because they just certain things, because they just happened, are likely to happen again or happened, are likely to happen again or happened, are likely to happen again or not happen again. But, let's set all not happen again. But, let's set all not happen again. But, let's set all that aside for the moment and just state that aside for the moment and just state that aside for the moment and just state the simple fact, which is that when you the simple fact, which is that when you the simple fact, which is that when you listen to music, your frontal cortex listen to music, your frontal cortex listen to music, your frontal cortex increases in activation increases in activation increases in activation because it is predicting what you're because it is predicting what you're because it is predicting what you're going to hear next based on what you're going to hear next based on what you're going to hear next based on what you're currently hearing and what you heard currently hearing and what you heard currently hearing and what you heard before. Now, I am from the generation before. Now, I am from the generation before. Now, I am from the generation that we didn't have iPods when I was a that we didn't have iPods when I was a that we didn't have iPods when I was a kid. We did have CDs, we did have tapes, kid. We did have CDs, we did have tapes, kid. We did have CDs, we did have tapes, but you had to fast forward or rewind a but you had to fast forward or rewind a but you had to fast forward or rewind a cassette tape, or you had to skip on the cassette tape, or you had to skip on the cassette tape, or you had to skip on the CD in order to move about the album in CD in order to move about the album in CD in order to move about the album in time. Nowadays, you can queue up different Nowadays, you can queue up different Nowadays, you can queue up different songs in different order really easily, songs in different order really easily, songs in different order really easily, but if you are somebody who listens to but if you are somebody who listens to but if you are somebody who listens to albums start to finish, or if you're albums start to finish, or if you're albums start to finish, or if you're like me and you grew up listening to like me and you grew up listening to like me and you grew up listening to albums start to finish, maybe albums start to finish, maybe albums start to finish, maybe occasionally skipping a song, but occasionally skipping a song, but occasionally skipping a song, but you will be very familiar with this you will be very familiar with this you will be very familiar with this phenomenon, which is that right as a phenomenon, which is that right as a phenomenon, which is that right as a given song ends, if you're familiar with given song ends, if you're familiar with given song ends, if you're familiar with that album, you already anticipate the that album, you already anticipate the that album, you already anticipate the start of the next song in your head. And start of the next song in your head. And start of the next song in your head. And that just speaks to the predictive that just speaks to the predictive that just speaks to the predictive function that the frontal cortex plays. function that the frontal cortex plays. function that the frontal cortex plays. So, if you have a mixtape with a bunch So, if you have a mixtape with a bunch So, if you have a mixtape with a bunch of different songs, sure, you don't of different songs, sure, you don't of different songs, sure, you don't expect one song of a given artist to expect one song of a given artist to expect one song of a given artist to lead into the next, but if you're lead into the next, but if you're lead into the next, but if you're somebody who's listened to that mixtape somebody who's listened to that mixtape somebody who's listened to that mixtape a lot, so you're familiar with what song a lot, so you're familiar with what song a lot, so you're familiar with what song comes next, or if you're listening to a comes next, or if you're listening to a comes next, or if you're listening to a given album start to finish and you're given album start to finish and you're given album start to finish and you're very familiar with it, well, then you'll very familiar with it, well, then you'll very familiar with it, well, then you'll immediately resonate with what I'm immediately resonate with what I'm immediately resonate with what I'm saying here, which is that your frontal saying here, which is that your frontal saying here, which is that your frontal cortex is always anticipating what sound cortex is always anticipating what sound cortex is always anticipating what sound is likely to come next. And this is very is likely to come next. And this is very is likely to come next. And this is very important because one of the key things important because one of the key things important because one of the key things about music and its ability to evoke our about music and its ability to evoke our about music and its ability to evoke our sense of surprise or delight sense of surprise or delight sense of surprise or delight through the release of a neuromodulator through the release of a neuromodulator through the release of a neuromodulator called dopamine, we'll get to this a bit called dopamine, we'll get to this a bit called dopamine, we'll get to this a bit more later, is because that prediction more later, is because that prediction more later, is because that prediction machinery is thinking, "Oh, I heard that machinery is thinking, "Oh, I heard that machinery is thinking, "Oh, I heard that set of chords a moment ago. I'm going to set of chords a moment ago. I'm going to set of chords a moment ago. I'm going to hear it again." And then when it changes hear it again." And then when it changes hear it again." And then when it changes up, your brain goes, "Oh, whoa, hold on. up, your brain goes, "Oh, whoa, hold on. up, your brain goes, "Oh, whoa, hold on. That wasn't what I expected." And it That wasn't what I expected." And it That wasn't what I expected." And it sometimes does that with a sense of sometimes does that with a sense of sometimes does that with a sense of delight, like, "Oh, yes." And sometimes delight, like, "Oh, yes." And sometimes delight, like, "Oh, yes." And sometimes it hears that and it goes, "Oh, wait, it hears that and it goes, "Oh, wait, it hears that and it goes, "Oh, wait, what's this? I don't really like this what's this? I don't really like this what's this? I don't really like this that much. I like the opener of that much. I like the opener of that much. I like the opener of that song, but I don't really like the rest." song, but I don't really like the rest." song, but I don't really like the rest." I think of that as um you know, there's I think of that as um you know, there's I think of that as um you know, there's certain pastries, muffins in particular, certain pastries, muffins in particular, certain pastries, muffins in particular, where I really like the top. It's got where I really like the top. It's got where I really like the top. It's got the little crumbs, it's got the berries the little crumbs, it's got the berries the little crumbs, it's got the berries and stuff, and then you like get down and stuff, and then you like get down and stuff, and then you like get down past the top, and then you get to the past the top, and then you get to the past the top, and then you get to the middle of the thing and you're like, middle of the thing and you're like, middle of the thing and you're like, "Oh, well, this thing is not that good." "Oh, well, this thing is not that good." "Oh, well, this thing is not that good." Okay, there's certain songs like that Okay, there's certain songs like that Okay, there's certain songs like that for me, so I always thought of those as for me, so I always thought of those as for me, so I always thought of those as muffin songs, because the top of the muffin songs, because the top of the muffin songs, because the top of the muffin is always the best, whereas a muffin is always the best, whereas a muffin is always the best, whereas a donut is great the whole way through. donut is great the whole way through. donut is great the whole way through. And now I'm going on a tangent because And now I'm going on a tangent because And now I'm going on a tangent because I'm thinking about muffins and donuts, I'm thinking about muffins and donuts, I'm thinking about muffins and donuts, so I'm going to take us back to music, so I'm going to take us back to music, so I'm going to take us back to music, but the point is relevant nonetheless, but the point is relevant nonetheless, but the point is relevant nonetheless, which is that your frontal cortex is which is that your frontal cortex is which is that your frontal cortex is making predictions. And when those making predictions. And when those making predictions. And when those predictions are broken, predictions are broken, predictions are broken, that's a sense of novelty. And when that that's a sense of novelty. And when that that's a sense of novelty. And when that novelty is something that you like, novelty is something that you like, novelty is something that you like, okay, so it evokes a sense of yes, I okay, so it evokes a sense of yes, I okay, so it evokes a sense of yes, I like that. Well, then dopamine is like that. Well, then dopamine is like that. Well, then dopamine is deployed. And when that novelty is deployed. And when that novelty is deployed. And when that novelty is something you don't like, typically something you don't like, typically something you don't like, typically there's a reduction in the amount of there's a reduction in the amount of there's a reduction in the amount of dopamine released in a separate set of dopamine released in a separate set of dopamine released in a separate set of brain circuits below whatever level of brain circuits below whatever level of brain circuits below whatever level of dopamine happen to be there prior, your dopamine happen to be there prior, your dopamine happen to be there prior, your so-called baseline level of dopamine, so-called baseline level of dopamine, so-called baseline level of dopamine, okay? So, when you listen to music, okay? So, when you listen to music, okay? So, when you listen to music, there's a strong activation of the there's a strong activation of the there's a strong activation of the prediction machinery in your brain. prediction machinery in your brain. prediction machinery in your brain. There's also activation of the circuits There's also activation of the circuits There's also activation of the circuits in your brain that register novelty. in your brain that register novelty. in your brain that register novelty. What are those circuits? These are What are those circuits? These are What are those circuits? These are things like the ventral tegmental area things like the ventral tegmental area things like the ventral tegmental area and the nucleus accumbens. and the nucleus accumbens. and the nucleus accumbens. I've talked about these before on the I've talked about these before on the I've talked about these before on the podcast. Again, you don't need to know podcast. Again, you don't need to know podcast. Again, you don't need to know those names. Those are the names given those names. Those are the names given those names. Those are the names given to certain brain areas that to certain brain areas that to certain brain areas that control the release of dopamine in time control the release of dopamine in time control the release of dopamine in time according to whatever you happen to be according to whatever you happen to be according to whatever you happen to be experiencing in that moment, okay? So, experiencing in that moment, okay? So, experiencing in that moment, okay? So, the mesolimbic reward pathway could the mesolimbic reward pathway could the mesolimbic reward pathway could perhaps better be called the mesolimbic perhaps better be called the mesolimbic perhaps better be called the mesolimbic reinforcement pathway. So, for those of reinforcement pathway. So, for those of reinforcement pathway. So, for those of you out there shouting, "Wait, the you out there shouting, "Wait, the you out there shouting, "Wait, the mesolimbic pathway does a bunch of other mesolimbic pathway does a bunch of other mesolimbic pathway does a bunch of other things. It's not just dopamine." I things. It's not just dopamine." I things. It's not just dopamine." I agree. It's also serotonin. It's a bunch agree. It's also serotonin. It's a bunch agree. It's also serotonin. It's a bunch of other things. But, for today's of other things. But, for today's of other things. But, for today's discussion, we're thinking about the discussion, we're thinking about the discussion, we're thinking about the mesolimbic pathway as deploying mesolimbic pathway as deploying mesolimbic pathway as deploying dopamine, which it does, when we hear dopamine, which it does, when we hear dopamine, which it does, when we hear something novel, something novel, something novel, meaning not what we predicted, and we meaning not what we predicted, and we meaning not what we predicted, and we like what we hear. And then there are a like what we hear. And then there are a like what we hear. And then there are a bunch of other brain centers and bunch of other brain centers and bunch of other brain centers and circuits that listening to music circuits that listening to music circuits that listening to music activates. I'll just list off a few. activates. I'll just list off a few. activates. I'll just list off a few. Again, this isn't intended to confuse Again, this isn't intended to confuse Again, this isn't intended to confuse anybody or add a lot of useless anybody or add a lot of useless anybody or add a lot of useless nomenclature, but since I am a nomenclature, but since I am a nomenclature, but since I am a neuroscientist and this is a science and neuroscientist and this is a science and neuroscientist and this is a science and science informed tools podcast, science informed tools podcast, science informed tools podcast, I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that we get strong activation of a brain we get strong activation of a brain we get strong activation of a brain structure, you actually have two of structure, you actually have two of structure, you actually have two of them, one on each side of the brain, them, one on each side of the brain, them, one on each side of the brain, called the amygdala. This is a brain called the amygdala. This is a brain called the amygdala. This is a brain area that's part of a larger set of area that's part of a larger set of area that's part of a larger set of circuits that's associated with arousal, circuits that's associated with arousal, circuits that's associated with arousal, okay, meaning becoming more alert, okay, meaning becoming more alert, okay, meaning becoming more alert, becoming more aware of our surroundings becoming more aware of our surroundings becoming more aware of our surroundings and the particular sensory stimuli that and the particular sensory stimuli that and the particular sensory stimuli that are coming in at the particular time are coming in at the particular time are coming in at the particular time such as the notes of the music or a such as the notes of the music or a such as the notes of the music or a particular set of lyrics. And music also particular set of lyrics. And music also particular set of lyrics. And music also activates areas of the brain such as the activates areas of the brain such as the activates areas of the brain such as the parahippocampal formation, the cortex parahippocampal formation, the cortex parahippocampal formation, the cortex and the hippocampus itself. Brain areas and the hippocampus itself. Brain areas and the hippocampus itself. Brain areas that encode and store memories. And this that encode and store memories. And this that encode and store memories. And this is something that I think everyone will is something that I think everyone will is something that I think everyone will be familiar with. When you hear certain be familiar with. When you hear certain be familiar with. When you hear certain songs or even songs that sound like songs or even songs that sound like songs or even songs that sound like certain songs or even songs that you certain songs or even songs that you certain songs or even songs that you swear you've never heard before, it can swear you've never heard before, it can swear you've never heard before, it can evoke a sense of nostalgia, of longing evoke a sense of nostalgia, of longing evoke a sense of nostalgia, of longing for something, of missing somebody, of for something, of missing somebody, of for something, of missing somebody, of sadness or of delight and happiness and sadness or of delight and happiness and sadness or of delight and happiness and positive memories of somebody or positive memories of somebody or positive memories of somebody or something. Indeed, I think it's fair to something. Indeed, I think it's fair to something. Indeed, I think it's fair to say that hearing particular pieces of say that hearing particular pieces of say that hearing particular pieces of music, particular songs, music, particular songs, music, particular songs, more than any other experience can more than any other experience can more than any other experience can activate a whole library of memory and activate a whole library of memory and activate a whole library of memory and emotions within us. And that's because emotions within us. And that's because emotions within us. And that's because of its ability to activate the of its ability to activate the of its ability to activate the parahippocampal regions of the brain, parahippocampal regions of the brain, parahippocampal regions of the brain, the cortex and the hippocampus itself. the cortex and the hippocampus itself. the cortex and the hippocampus itself. Again, um several different brain areas all um several different brain areas all um several different brain areas all which communicate with one another and which communicate with one another and which communicate with one another and other areas of the brain in order to other areas of the brain in order to other areas of the brain in order to encode our memories, encode our memories, encode our memories, our sense of self, our sense of others, our sense of self, our sense of others, our sense of self, our sense of others, our sense of history with those people our sense of history with those people our sense of history with those people and on and on. Now, and on and on. Now, and on and on. Now, rather than just make this a catalog of rather than just make this a catalog of rather than just make this a catalog of different brain areas that music evokes, different brain areas that music evokes, different brain areas that music evokes, what I'm trying to do is spell out how what I'm trying to do is spell out how what I'm trying to do is spell out how music activating these different brain music activating these different brain music activating these different brain areas is creating different components areas is creating different components areas is creating different components of what we are familiar with as our of what we are familiar with as our of what we are familiar with as our experience of music. So, frontal cortex experience of music. So, frontal cortex experience of music. So, frontal cortex prediction, mesolimbic reward pathway, prediction, mesolimbic reward pathway, prediction, mesolimbic reward pathway, novelty, amygdala, a sense of emotion novelty, amygdala, a sense of emotion novelty, amygdala, a sense of emotion and arousal. and arousal. and arousal. Parahippocampal cortex and cortex and Parahippocampal cortex and cortex and Parahippocampal cortex and cortex and hippocampus, our memories, in particular hippocampus, our memories, in particular hippocampus, our memories, in particular our emotional memories and our location our emotional memories and our location our emotional memories and our location memories associated with a particular memories associated with a particular memories associated with a particular piece of music, right? Haven't you ever piece of music, right? Haven't you ever piece of music, right? Haven't you ever heard a song from, let's say, a summer heard a song from, let's say, a summer heard a song from, let's say, a summer camp that you went to when you were a camp that you went to when you were a camp that you went to when you were a kid? All of a sudden, you're remembering kid? All of a sudden, you're remembering kid? All of a sudden, you're remembering the smell of the grasses at that summer the smell of the grasses at that summer the smell of the grasses at that summer camp. You're remembering how some of the camp. You're remembering how some of the camp. You're remembering how some of the kids were really great and how some of kids were really great and how some of kids were really great and how some of the kids were really obnoxious. You're the kids were really obnoxious. You're the kids were really obnoxious. You're remembering some things that you did. remembering some things that you did. remembering some things that you did. You remember your counselors. I mean, You remember your counselors. I mean, You remember your counselors. I mean, there's just an a whole landscape of there's just an a whole landscape of there's just an a whole landscape of neural information there, life neural information there, life neural information there, life information stored in your head that information stored in your head that information stored in your head that hearing a particular song that was sung hearing a particular song that was sung hearing a particular song that was sung when you were what, 8 years old, 10 when you were what, 8 years old, 10 when you were what, 8 years old, 10 years old at camp just years old at camp just years old at camp just flips the lid on and it comes guzzering flips the lid on and it comes guzzering flips the lid on and it comes guzzering out. Remarkable. Now, there are two out. Remarkable. Now, there are two out. Remarkable. Now, there are two other sets of brain circuits that are other sets of brain circuits that are other sets of brain circuits that are activated by music activated by music activated by music that deserve specific attention and deserve specific attention and deserve specific attention and deserve that specific attention now in the that specific attention now in the that specific attention now in the context of discussing motivation and context of discussing motivation and context of discussing motivation and music's ability to motivate us in music's ability to motivate us in music's ability to motivate us in particular ways. particular ways. particular ways. And those brain circuits are the basal And those brain circuits are the basal And those brain circuits are the basal ganglia. Okay, so this is a set of ganglia. Okay, so this is a set of ganglia. Okay, so this is a set of circuits within the brain they're circuits within the brain they're circuits within the brain they're associated with action initiation, associated with action initiation, associated with action initiation, so-called go circuits, and withholding so-called go circuits, and withholding so-called go circuits, and withholding action, so-called no-go circuits. But action, so-called no-go circuits. But action, so-called no-go circuits. But basically the basal ganglia are involved basically the basal ganglia are involved basically the basal ganglia are involved in regulating movement. in regulating movement. in regulating movement. And the cerebellum. The cerebellum is the cerebellum. The cerebellum is the cerebellum. The cerebellum is sometimes referred to as the mini brain. sometimes referred to as the mini brain. sometimes referred to as the mini brain. It looks like a little mini brain in the It looks like a little mini brain in the It looks like a little mini brain in the bottom back of the human brain. bottom back of the human brain. bottom back of the human brain. In some species the cerebellum is much In some species the cerebellum is much In some species the cerebellum is much larger relative to the rest of the larger relative to the rest of the larger relative to the rest of the brain, but in humans it's like this brain, but in humans it's like this brain, but in humans it's like this little piece in the back that looks like little piece in the back that looks like little piece in the back that looks like a little mini brain, like you're a little mini brain, like you're a little mini brain, like you're carrying a second brain back there. carrying a second brain back there. carrying a second brain back there. That's why I call it mini brain, That's why I call it mini brain, That's why I call it mini brain, cerebellum. It's involved in a lot of cerebellum. It's involved in a lot of cerebellum. It's involved in a lot of things, but one of its primary functions things, but one of its primary functions things, but one of its primary functions is to encode rhythmic timing and is to encode rhythmic timing and is to encode rhythmic timing and processing. And along with its outputs processing. And along with its outputs processing. And along with its outputs to some deeper brain stem areas, things to some deeper brain stem areas, things to some deeper brain stem areas, things like the vestibular and cochlear nuclei, like the vestibular and cochlear nuclei, like the vestibular and cochlear nuclei, we'll talk about this, the parabrachial we'll talk about this, the parabrachial we'll talk about this, the parabrachial nucleus. Again, you don't need to know nucleus. Again, you don't need to know nucleus. Again, you don't need to know these names. It, meaning the cerebellum, these names. It, meaning the cerebellum, these names. It, meaning the cerebellum, along with the basal ganglia, creates along with the basal ganglia, creates along with the basal ganglia, creates patterns of activity in our brain that patterns of activity in our brain that patterns of activity in our brain that cascade down to particular circuits in cascade down to particular circuits in cascade down to particular circuits in our body. our body. our body. So these are so-called pre-motor So these are so-called pre-motor So these are so-called pre-motor circuits and motor circuits that circuits and motor circuits that circuits and motor circuits that generate the sense that we not only can generate the sense that we not only can generate the sense that we not only can move, but that we want to move, and that move, but that we want to move, and that move, but that we want to move, and that we want to move in particular ways. So we want to move in particular ways. So we want to move in particular ways. So if you internalize nothing from the last if you internalize nothing from the last if you internalize nothing from the last 5 minutes or so in which I've been 5 minutes or so in which I've been 5 minutes or so in which I've been describing how music impacts different describing how music impacts different describing how music impacts different neural circuits in the brain, please do neural circuits in the brain, please do neural circuits in the brain, please do take away this important point, which is take away this important point, which is take away this important point, which is that when and listen to music, we think that when and listen to music, we think that when and listen to music, we think of that as an auditory experience, but of that as an auditory experience, but of that as an auditory experience, but now you know that it's also an emotional now you know that it's also an emotional now you know that it's also an emotional experience. And and this is a very important and when we and this is a very important and when we and this is a very important and when we listen to music, it is programming a listen to music, it is programming a listen to music, it is programming a specific set of motor actions that are specific set of motor actions that are specific set of motor actions that are more likely to occur. Put differently, more likely to occur. Put differently, more likely to occur. Put differently, when we listen to music, we are more when we listen to music, we are more when we listen to music, we are more likely to move our body. likely to move our body. likely to move our body. And not just dance, not just move our And not just dance, not just move our And not just dance, not just move our torso, our limbs, our limbs and torso torso, our limbs, our limbs and torso torso, our limbs, our limbs and torso together in concert with the music, but together in concert with the music, but together in concert with the music, but rather move our body from its current rather move our body from its current rather move our body from its current position to another position. And this position to another position. And this position to another position. And this is one of the most important things to is one of the most important things to is one of the most important things to understand about music. Music, despite understand about music. Music, despite understand about music. Music, despite being an auditory stimulus coming in being an auditory stimulus coming in being an auditory stimulus coming in through our ears, evokes the activation through our ears, evokes the activation through our ears, evokes the activation of neural circuits in our brain that of neural circuits in our brain that of neural circuits in our brain that creates a sort of inertia. It creates a creates a sort of inertia. It creates a creates a sort of inertia. It creates a propensity for action across our entire propensity for action across our entire propensity for action across our entire body. So, now that you understand that body. So, now that you understand that body. So, now that you understand that listening to music activates lots of listening to music activates lots of listening to music activates lots of different brain circuits. Of course, the different brain circuits. Of course, the different brain circuits. Of course, the circuits that respond to auditory circuits that respond to auditory circuits that respond to auditory stimuli, so-called primary auditory stimuli, so-called primary auditory stimuli, so-called primary auditory cortex, is powerfully activated by cortex, is powerfully activated by cortex, is powerfully activated by listening to music, but also circuits listening to music, but also circuits listening to music, but also circuits associated with novelty, anticipation. associated with novelty, anticipation. associated with novelty, anticipation. We talked about circuits in the brain We talked about circuits in the brain We talked about circuits in the brain associated with memory, but also associated with memory, but also associated with memory, but also circuits in the brain that are circuits in the brain that are circuits in the brain that are associated with generating movement. And associated with generating movement. And associated with generating movement. And not just movement that is in sync with not just movement that is in sync with not just movement that is in sync with or corresponds to the music that we're or corresponds to the music that we're or corresponds to the music that we're listening to, but all forms of movement. listening to, but all forms of movement. listening to, but all forms of movement. But when we listen to music that has a But when we listen to music that has a But when we listen to music that has a relatively fast cadence and we can relatively fast cadence and we can relatively fast cadence and we can actually define what that cadence needs actually define what that cadence needs actually define what that cadence needs to be, and we'll do that in a moment, to be, and we'll do that in a moment, to be, and we'll do that in a moment, when we do that, so-called pre-motor when we do that, so-called pre-motor when we do that, so-called pre-motor circuitry, the circuitry that's going to circuitry, the circuitry that's going to circuitry, the circuitry that's going to initiate that kind of inertia or that initiate that kind of inertia or that initiate that kind of inertia or that pressure for movement within the neural pressure for movement within the neural pressure for movement within the neural circuits that actually evoke movement, circuits that actually evoke movement, circuits that actually evoke movement, are all activated. So, for those of you are all activated. So, for those of you are all activated. So, for those of you that like to listen to music while you that like to listen to music while you that like to listen to music while you exercise, you're familiar with the fact exercise, you're familiar with the fact exercise, you're familiar with the fact that listening to great songs with a that listening to great songs with a that listening to great songs with a great beat, with particular lyrics or great beat, with particular lyrics or great beat, with particular lyrics or that associate you with a particular that associate you with a particular that associate you with a particular time or place in your life can be very time or place in your life can be very time or place in your life can be very motivating. But there are data showing motivating. But there are data showing motivating. But there are data showing that when people listen to music that's that when people listen to music that's that when people listen to music that's faster than about 140 to 150 beats per faster than about 140 to 150 beats per faster than about 140 to 150 beats per minute that it creates a heightened minute that it creates a heightened minute that it creates a heightened state of motivation in the body to move. state of motivation in the body to move. state of motivation in the body to move. And the way that it does that is by way And the way that it does that is by way And the way that it does that is by way of shifting the balance between those go of shifting the balance between those go of shifting the balance between those go circuits and no go circuits of the basal circuits and no go circuits of the basal circuits and no go circuits of the basal ganglia. There's some other ways that it ganglia. There's some other ways that it ganglia. There's some other ways that it does it as well. For instance, music can does it as well. For instance, music can does it as well. For instance, music can evoke the release of certain evoke the release of certain evoke the release of certain neurochemicals called the neurochemicals called the neurochemicals called the catecholamines. These include dopamine, catecholamines. These include dopamine, catecholamines. These include dopamine, but also norepinephrine and epinephrine but also norepinephrine and epinephrine but also norepinephrine and epinephrine from centers in the brain and body, from centers in the brain and body, from centers in the brain and body, glands in the body like the adrenal glands in the body like the adrenal glands in the body like the adrenal gland, that shift the body toward a gland, that shift the body toward a gland, that shift the body toward a predisposition of being more likely to predisposition of being more likely to predisposition of being more likely to move. So, if we want to distill all this move. So, if we want to distill all this move. So, if we want to distill all this out to a simple actionable takeaway, out to a simple actionable takeaway, out to a simple actionable takeaway, simply know this. Listening to music, simply know this. Listening to music, simply know this. Listening to music, relatively faster music, predisposes you relatively faster music, predisposes you relatively faster music, predisposes you to be more motivated to move. And that to be more motivated to move. And that to be more motivated to move. And that is independent, this is what I find so is independent, this is what I find so is independent, this is what I find so cool, it's independent of whether or not cool, it's independent of whether or not cool, it's independent of whether or not you're familiar with the song, you're familiar with the song, you're familiar with the song, independent of whether or not the lyrics independent of whether or not the lyrics independent of whether or not the lyrics of the song are motivating lyrics. If of the song are motivating lyrics. If of the song are motivating lyrics. If they are, that's just going to layer on they are, that's just going to layer on they are, that's just going to layer on top of the faster cadence, which is top of the faster cadence, which is top of the faster cadence, which is going to predispose you to move. But, going to predispose you to move. But, going to predispose you to move. But, what's remarkable is that just listening what's remarkable is that just listening what's remarkable is that just listening to that faster cadence music is creating to that faster cadence music is creating to that faster cadence music is creating a neuronal resonance, if you will, a neuronal resonance, if you will, a neuronal resonance, if you will, a pattern of neuronal firing within you pattern of neuronal firing within you pattern of neuronal firing within you that is going to essentially take your that is going to essentially take your that is going to essentially take your and here I'm using metaphor, is going to and here I'm using metaphor, is going to and here I'm using metaphor, is going to put your state of motivation from either put your state of motivation from either put your state of motivation from either back on your heels to being flat-footed, back on your heels to being flat-footed, back on your heels to being flat-footed, or let's say you're mildly motivated, so or let's say you're mildly motivated, so or let's say you're mildly motivated, so I'll call that flat-footed, to being I'll call that flat-footed, to being I'll call that flat-footed, to being forward center of mass. So, for any of forward center of mass. So, for any of forward center of mass. So, for any of you that are suffering from lack of you that are suffering from lack of you that are suffering from lack of motivation, in particular to exercise, motivation, in particular to exercise, motivation, in particular to exercise, but believe it or not, also to do but believe it or not, also to do but believe it or not, also to do cognitive work where you're going to be cognitive work where you're going to be cognitive work where you're going to be still and you're going to sit down and still and you're going to sit down and still and you're going to sit down and you're going to read or learn or you're going to read or learn or you're going to read or learn or practice something, listening to music practice something, listening to music practice something, listening to music for 10 to 15 minutes prior to doing that for 10 to 15 minutes prior to doing that for 10 to 15 minutes prior to doing that work, prior to doing that exercise, is work, prior to doing that exercise, is work, prior to doing that exercise, is one of the best ways to get motivated in one of the best ways to get motivated in one of the best ways to get motivated in order to engage in that work or engage order to engage in that work or engage order to engage in that work or engage in that exercise. That's been in that exercise. That's been in that exercise. That's been demonstrated in the data very demonstrated in the data very demonstrated in the data very conclusively using a variety of conclusively using a variety of conclusively using a variety of different types of music. And again, different types of music. And again, different types of music. And again, there are multiple mechanisms that there are multiple mechanisms that there are multiple mechanisms that converge to create that heightened state converge to create that heightened state converge to create that heightened state of motivation. Some of those mechanisms of motivation. Some of those mechanisms of motivation. Some of those mechanisms are neurochemical, like the release of are neurochemical, like the release of are neurochemical, like the release of the so-called catecholamines, dopamine, the so-called catecholamines, dopamine, the so-called catecholamines, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Some of norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Some of norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Some of them are strictly neural circuit-based, them are strictly neural circuit-based, them are strictly neural circuit-based, so activation of pre-motor circuitry, so activation of pre-motor circuitry, so activation of pre-motor circuitry, and those are going to combine with and those are going to combine with and those are going to combine with neural circuits that are going to narrow neural circuits that are going to narrow neural circuits that are going to narrow your field of vision. This is a good your field of vision. This is a good your field of vision. This is a good thing whenever you want to be motivated. thing whenever you want to be motivated. thing whenever you want to be motivated. They're going to literally constrict They're going to literally constrict They're going to literally constrict your field of vision to more of a tunnel your field of vision to more of a tunnel your field of vision to more of a tunnel type of vision as opposed to more type of vision as opposed to more type of vision as opposed to more panoramic vision, and that I described panoramic vision, and that I described panoramic vision, and that I described it as placing you into a forward center it as placing you into a forward center it as placing you into a forward center of mass. I don't necessarily mean of mass. I don't necessarily mean of mass. I don't necessarily mean literally a forward center of mass. literally a forward center of mass. literally a forward center of mass. Unless perhaps you're exercising, like Unless perhaps you're exercising, like Unless perhaps you're exercising, like running leaning slightly forward. What running leaning slightly forward. What running leaning slightly forward. What I'm talking about is using music as a I'm talking about is using music as a I'm talking about is using music as a way to deliberately shift your state of way to deliberately shift your state of way to deliberately shift your state of mind and body from one that is mind and body from one that is mind and body from one that is amotivated, not motivated, to more amotivated, not motivated, to more amotivated, not motivated, to more motivated. And it's a very simple motivated. And it's a very simple motivated. And it's a very simple protocol extracted from the protocol extracted from the protocol extracted from the peer-reviewed literature. You simply peer-reviewed literature. You simply peer-reviewed literature. You simply find some faster music, hopefully music find some faster music, hopefully music find some faster music, hopefully music that you like. It would be even better that you like. It would be even better that you like. It would be even better if it was music that had lyrics that you if it was music that had lyrics that you if it was music that had lyrics that you find motivating, and listening to that find motivating, and listening to that find motivating, and listening to that for 10 to 15 minutes prior to engaging for 10 to 15 minutes prior to engaging for 10 to 15 minutes prior to engaging in whatever that work may be, physical in whatever that work may be, physical in whatever that work may be, physical or cognitive. On the topic of cognitive or cognitive. On the topic of cognitive or cognitive. On the topic of cognitive work, one of the most common questions I work, one of the most common questions I work, one of the most common questions I get is what sorts of sounds or music get is what sorts of sounds or music get is what sorts of sounds or music should I listen to in order to increase should I listen to in order to increase should I listen to in order to increase my state of productivity, motivation, my state of productivity, motivation, my state of productivity, motivation, concentration, et cetera. On previous concentration, et cetera. On previous concentration, et cetera. On previous podcasts related to focus and podcasts related to focus and podcasts related to focus and motivation, I touched on the use of motivation, I touched on the use of motivation, I touched on the use of so-called binaural beats, which are so-called binaural beats, which are so-called binaural beats, which are different frequencies of beats presented different frequencies of beats presented different frequencies of beats presented to one or the other ear. This is best to one or the other ear. This is best to one or the other ear. This is best accomplished with headphones, and there accomplished with headphones, and there accomplished with headphones, and there are a lot of different frequencies of are a lot of different frequencies of are a lot of different frequencies of binaural beats that you can get out binaural beats that you can get out binaural beats that you can get out there. Um if you want to get detailed there. Um if you want to get detailed there. Um if you want to get detailed about this, binaural beats also about this, binaural beats also about this, binaural beats also uh involve the differential between the uh involve the differential between the uh involve the differential between the frequency of beats between the two frequency of beats between the two frequency of beats between the two presented to the two ears, and then that presented to the two ears, and then that presented to the two ears, and then that difference then is heard by higher-order difference then is heard by higher-order difference then is heard by higher-order processing centers in the brain. In any processing centers in the brain. In any processing centers in the brain. In any event, we don't have to get too event, we don't have to get too event, we don't have to get too technical about it. We can simply say technical about it. We can simply say technical about it. We can simply say that yes, there are some decent that yes, there are some decent that yes, there are some decent peer-reviewed studies demonstrating that peer-reviewed studies demonstrating that peer-reviewed studies demonstrating that when people listen to so-called 40 when people listen to so-called 40 when people listen to so-called 40 hertz, it's a particular frequency of hertz, it's a particular frequency of hertz, it's a particular frequency of sound, 40 hertz binaural beats, that it sound, 40 hertz binaural beats, that it sound, 40 hertz binaural beats, that it can enhance concentration and focus. can enhance concentration and focus. can enhance concentration and focus. However, and this is important, there's However, and this is important, there's However, and this is important, there's some recent studies that show that some recent studies that show that some recent studies that show that binaural beats sometimes can impede binaural beats sometimes can impede binaural beats sometimes can impede concentration and focus and thereby can concentration and focus and thereby can concentration and focus and thereby can impede cognitive performance on various impede cognitive performance on various impede cognitive performance on various tasks. However, the studies that show tasks. However, the studies that show tasks. However, the studies that show that binaural beats can be detrimental that binaural beats can be detrimental that binaural beats can be detrimental to performance on various cognitive to performance on various cognitive to performance on various cognitive tasks did not use 40-Hz binaural beats tasks did not use 40-Hz binaural beats tasks did not use 40-Hz binaural beats specifically. So, we are still awaiting specifically. So, we are still awaiting specifically. So, we are still awaiting more studies on binaural beats. more studies on binaural beats. more studies on binaural beats. Meanwhile, I'll just restate what I said Meanwhile, I'll just restate what I said Meanwhile, I'll just restate what I said before is that there is some evidence before is that there is some evidence before is that there is some evidence that listening to 40-Hz binaural beats that listening to 40-Hz binaural beats that listening to 40-Hz binaural beats can enhance concentration and focus. can enhance concentration and focus. can enhance concentration and focus. There are also data showing that other There are also data showing that other There are also data showing that other frequencies of binaural beats might be frequencies of binaural beats might be frequencies of binaural beats might be detrimental to concentration and detrimental to concentration and detrimental to concentration and cognitive performance. And previously, cognitive performance. And previously, cognitive performance. And previously, I've also discussed studies showing I've also discussed studies showing I've also discussed studies showing that, for instance, if people listen to that, for instance, if people listen to that, for instance, if people listen to white noise in the background, you could white noise in the background, you could white noise in the background, you could do this on your computer or speakers in do this on your computer or speakers in do this on your computer or speakers in the room or headphones or so-called the room or headphones or so-called the room or headphones or so-called brown noise, which is essentially like brown noise, which is essentially like brown noise, which is essentially like white noise, shh, all frequencies of white noise, shh, all frequencies of white noise, shh, all frequencies of sound or most frequencies of sound or most frequencies of sound or most frequencies of sound combined, but with particular combined, but with particular combined, but with particular frequencies of sounds that are frequencies of sounds that are frequencies of sounds that are accentuated and others are notched out, accentuated and others are notched out, accentuated and others are notched out, as it's called, so-called brown noise. as it's called, so-called brown noise. as it's called, so-called brown noise. Rather than understand all of this at Rather than understand all of this at Rather than understand all of this at the technical level, cuz I've covered the technical level, cuz I've covered the technical level, cuz I've covered that before in previous podcasts, that before in previous podcasts, that before in previous podcasts, suffice to say, if you go to YouTube and suffice to say, if you go to YouTube and suffice to say, if you go to YouTube and you just put in white noise background you just put in white noise background you just put in white noise background for cognitive focus or brown noise for cognitive focus or brown noise for cognitive focus or brown noise background for cognitive focus, you can background for cognitive focus, you can background for cognitive focus, you can just try those if you like just try those if you like just try those if you like during a session in which you're trying during a session in which you're trying during a session in which you're trying to read or learn or do mathematics or to read or learn or do mathematics or to read or learn or do mathematics or music or any kind of cognitive work. music or any kind of cognitive work. music or any kind of cognitive work. If you don't like them, if they don't If you don't like them, if they don't If you don't like them, if they don't work for you, then, um, you know, work for you, then, um, you know, work for you, then, um, you know, there's certainly no obligation to use there's certainly no obligation to use there's certainly no obligation to use them. Likewise with 40-Hz binaural them. Likewise with 40-Hz binaural them. Likewise with 40-Hz binaural beats. And for binaural beats, you can beats. And for binaural beats, you can beats. And for binaural beats, you can also find those as zero-cost YouTube also find those as zero-cost YouTube also find those as zero-cost YouTube scripts. There are a number of zero-cost scripts. There are a number of zero-cost scripts. There are a number of zero-cost apps that will allow you to listen to apps that will allow you to listen to apps that will allow you to listen to binaural beats. I've used the app binaural beats. I've used the app binaural beats. I've used the app Brainwave for some period of time now. Brainwave for some period of time now. Brainwave for some period of time now. To be honest, I've never done the strict To be honest, I've never done the strict To be honest, I've never done the strict control experiment on myself of control experiment on myself of control experiment on myself of listening to the 40-Hz binaural beats or listening to the 40-Hz binaural beats or listening to the 40-Hz binaural beats or not listening to 40-Hz binaural beats not listening to 40-Hz binaural beats not listening to 40-Hz binaural beats doing the equivalent types of tasks. I, doing the equivalent types of tasks. I, doing the equivalent types of tasks. I, um, can be fairly regimented with my, um, can be fairly regimented with my, um, can be fairly regimented with my, uh, work and behavior, but I haven't run uh, work and behavior, but I haven't run uh, work and behavior, but I haven't run a detailed controlled study on myself a detailed controlled study on myself a detailed controlled study on myself around this. Rather, if I want to around this. Rather, if I want to around this. Rather, if I want to heighten my level of focus or rule out heighten my level of focus or rule out heighten my level of focus or rule out distractions, what I will do is I will distractions, what I will do is I will distractions, what I will do is I will listen to either white noise or brown listen to either white noise or brown listen to either white noise or brown noise while I do work or I will listen noise while I do work or I will listen noise while I do work or I will listen to 40 hertz binaural beats while I do to 40 hertz binaural beats while I do to 40 hertz binaural beats while I do certain types of work or sometimes certain types of work or sometimes certain types of work or sometimes frankly I just work in silence. Other frankly I just work in silence. Other frankly I just work in silence. Other times I will listen to classical music times I will listen to classical music times I will listen to classical music in the background. I'm a big fan of in the background. I'm a big fan of in the background. I'm a big fan of listening to listening to listening to classical piano. I particularly like classical piano. I particularly like classical piano. I particularly like Glenn Gould the Bach variations are very Glenn Gould the Bach variations are very Glenn Gould the Bach variations are very pleasant to me but and this is really pleasant to me but and this is really pleasant to me but and this is really important in researching this episode important in researching this episode important in researching this episode about music in the brain, what I about music in the brain, what I about music in the brain, what I discovered was in the discovered was in the discovered was in the controlled studies that have been controlled studies that have been controlled studies that have been carried out as to whether or not people carried out as to whether or not people carried out as to whether or not people perform better on perform better on perform better on cognitive tasks that require a lot of cognitive tasks that require a lot of cognitive tasks that require a lot of focus especially learning tasks that focus especially learning tasks that focus especially learning tasks that compared silence in the background to compared silence in the background to compared silence in the background to purely instrumental music in the purely instrumental music in the purely instrumental music in the background to music with lyrics in the background to music with lyrics in the background to music with lyrics in the background to background to background to one's favorite music with or without one's favorite music with or without one's favorite music with or without lyrics, the data the data the data are very clear. It's very clear that are very clear. It's very clear that are very clear. It's very clear that most people that means statistically on most people that means statistically on most people that means statistically on average people perform best on cognitive average people perform best on cognitive average people perform best on cognitive tasks or tasks that require a lot of tasks or tasks that require a lot of tasks or tasks that require a lot of focus to perform. focus to perform. focus to perform. Again, these are mental tasks, not Again, these are mental tasks, not Again, these are mental tasks, not physical tasks when they are physical tasks when they are physical tasks when they are doing those tasks in complete silence. doing those tasks in complete silence. doing those tasks in complete silence. Okay, so that was somewhat surprising to Okay, so that was somewhat surprising to Okay, so that was somewhat surprising to me. Second best conditions are to do those Second best conditions are to do those Second best conditions are to do those tasks in the presence of instrumental tasks in the presence of instrumental tasks in the presence of instrumental music only and in that case there was a music only and in that case there was a music only and in that case there was a lot of variation as to whether or not lot of variation as to whether or not lot of variation as to whether or not people preferred faster cadence music so people preferred faster cadence music so people preferred faster cadence music so 140 to 150 beats per minute or faster or 140 to 150 beats per minute or faster or 140 to 150 beats per minute or faster or slower music 60 beats per minute or slower music 60 beats per minute or slower music 60 beats per minute or slower. I'll get back to those specific slower. I'll get back to those specific slower. I'll get back to those specific numbers later because they represent numbers later because they represent numbers later because they represent thresholds for inducing different types thresholds for inducing different types thresholds for inducing different types of emotional states either happy or sad of emotional states either happy or sad of emotional states either happy or sad but meanwhile but meanwhile but meanwhile it's very clear when people work in it's very clear when people work in it's very clear when people work in silence, they perform better than when silence, they perform better than when silence, they perform better than when they work with music instrumentals in they work with music instrumentals in they work with music instrumentals in background and they perform even less well when and they perform even less well when and they perform even less well when they listen to music with lyrics in the they listen to music with lyrics in the they listen to music with lyrics in the background. We'll talk about why that is background. We'll talk about why that is background. We'll talk about why that is the case in a moment. And then the case in a moment. And then the case in a moment. And then people perform especially poorly people perform especially poorly people perform especially poorly relative to their performance in silence relative to their performance in silence relative to their performance in silence or any of the other conditions I or any of the other conditions I or any of the other conditions I mentioned when they listen to their mentioned when they listen to their mentioned when they listen to their favorite music while doing cognitive favorite music while doing cognitive favorite music while doing cognitive work. And that to me was a bit work. And that to me was a bit work. And that to me was a bit surprising especially since I spent a surprising especially since I spent a surprising especially since I spent a lot of my university years studying lot of my university years studying lot of my university years studying while listening to my favorite music in while listening to my favorite music in while listening to my favorite music in different forms. I'd listen to slower different forms. I'd listen to slower different forms. I'd listen to slower music than faster music and go back and music than faster music and go back and music than faster music and go back and forth and then sometimes turn it off all forth and then sometimes turn it off all forth and then sometimes turn it off all together and work in silence. But the together and work in silence. But the together and work in silence. But the center of mass of the literature around center of mass of the literature around center of mass of the literature around this issue of whether or not to listen this issue of whether or not to listen this issue of whether or not to listen to music while one studies or tries to music while one studies or tries to music while one studies or tries to learn something, the data are pretty learn something, the data are pretty learn something, the data are pretty clear. The data show that it's best to clear. The data show that it's best to clear. The data show that it's best to study and learn either in silence or study and learn either in silence or study and learn either in silence or with quiet instrumentals in the with quiet instrumentals in the with quiet instrumentals in the background. Now, I mentioned before that background. Now, I mentioned before that background. Now, I mentioned before that previous studies compared the effects of previous studies compared the effects of previous studies compared the effects of working in silence versus working with working in silence versus working with working in silence versus working with 40 hertz binaural beats or white noise 40 hertz binaural beats or white noise 40 hertz binaural beats or white noise or brown noise in the background. And in or brown noise in the background. And in or brown noise in the background. And in those studies, it was found that the those studies, it was found that the those studies, it was found that the white noise, brown noise, and 40 hertz white noise, brown noise, and 40 hertz white noise, brown noise, and 40 hertz binaural beats background produced binaural beats background produced binaural beats background produced better levels of focus, I should say better levels of focus, I should say better levels of focus, I should say heightened levels of focus and cognitive heightened levels of focus and cognitive heightened levels of focus and cognitive performance and learning than working in performance and learning than working in performance and learning than working in silence. But I've not yet seen a study that But I've not yet seen a study that But I've not yet seen a study that compared 40 hertz binaural beats, compared 40 hertz binaural beats, compared 40 hertz binaural beats, brown noise, white noise to music brown noise, white noise to music brown noise, white noise to music directly. Yeah, perhaps there's one out directly. Yeah, perhaps there's one out directly. Yeah, perhaps there's one out there. If there is, please send it to there. If there is, please send it to there. If there is, please send it to me. I'd be very curious to learn what me. I'd be very curious to learn what me. I'd be very curious to learn what the results of those are. Now, that the results of those are. Now, that the results of those are. Now, that might seem like a lot of information, might seem like a lot of information, might seem like a lot of information, but the takeaways from it are very but the takeaways from it are very but the takeaways from it are very clear. And it's always nice when things clear. And it's always nice when things clear. And it's always nice when things are clear, right? are clear, right? are clear, right? It's clear that if we want to focus and It's clear that if we want to focus and It's clear that if we want to focus and learn that learn that learn that working in silence or with white noise working in silence or with white noise working in silence or with white noise or brown noise or 40 hertz binaural or brown noise or 40 hertz binaural or brown noise or 40 hertz binaural beats is going to be preferable to beats is going to be preferable to beats is going to be preferable to working while listening to music. But if working while listening to music. But if working while listening to music. But if you're going to listen to music while you're going to listen to music while you're going to listen to music while you work, that is do cognitive work, you work, that is do cognitive work, you work, that is do cognitive work, then you're going to want to listen to then you're going to want to listen to then you're going to want to listen to music that is purely instrumental. And music that is purely instrumental. And music that is purely instrumental. And ideally, the music would be somewhat ideally, the music would be somewhat ideally, the music would be somewhat faster than 140 to 150 beats per minute. faster than 140 to 150 beats per minute. faster than 140 to 150 beats per minute. Now, I do not expect you to go and measure I do not expect you to go and measure I do not expect you to go and measure the frequency of beats per minute in the frequency of beats per minute in the frequency of beats per minute in the music that you listen to. And of course, music that you listen to. And of course, music that you listen to. And of course, the beats per minute are going to the beats per minute are going to the beats per minute are going to change, right? That's an average 140 to change, right? That's an average 140 to change, right? That's an average 140 to 150 beats per minute. 150 beats per minute. 150 beats per minute. I don't expect you to get super I don't expect you to get super I don't expect you to get super technical, break down the music that technical, break down the music that technical, break down the music that you're listening to. That is not my you're listening to. That is not my you're listening to. That is not my goal, nor is that really what this goal, nor is that really what this goal, nor is that really what this podcast is about. I think occasionally podcast is about. I think occasionally podcast is about. I think occasionally people think that, you know, the people think that, you know, the people think that, you know, the goal of a science and science-based goal of a science and science-based goal of a science and science-based protocols podcast is to optimize protocols podcast is to optimize protocols podcast is to optimize everything. In fact, I not such a fan of everything. In fact, I not such a fan of everything. In fact, I not such a fan of the word optimize because optimal really the word optimize because optimal really the word optimize because optimal really depends on the situation that you happen depends on the situation that you happen depends on the situation that you happen to be in. The point here is simply this, to be in. The point here is simply this, to be in. The point here is simply this, that many people out there, including that many people out there, including that many people out there, including myself, have been listening to some of myself, have been listening to some of myself, have been listening to some of our favorite music while working, but our favorite music while working, but our favorite music while working, but it's very clear as to why that degrades it's very clear as to why that degrades it's very clear as to why that degrades cognitive performance. cognitive performance. cognitive performance. We know for instance that when we read, We know for instance that when we read, We know for instance that when we read, we are creating a semantic narrative in we are creating a semantic narrative in we are creating a semantic narrative in our own head. And when we listen to our own head. And when we listen to our own head. And when we listen to music with lyrics, especially music with music with lyrics, especially music with music with lyrics, especially music with lyrics that we recognize, lyrics that we recognize, lyrics that we recognize, the semantic content of the song, the semantic content of the song, the semantic content of the song, the lyrics, competes with our comprehension of the competes with our comprehension of the competes with our comprehension of the narrative within our head from the narrative within our head from the narrative within our head from the material that we're supposed to be material that we're supposed to be material that we're supposed to be learning. So, now it should be sort of learning. So, now it should be sort of learning. So, now it should be sort of obvious why listening to your favorite obvious why listening to your favorite obvious why listening to your favorite music that includes lyrics while trying music that includes lyrics while trying music that includes lyrics while trying to learn something else is going to learn something else is going to learn something else is going to impede learning. It's because you've got impede learning. It's because you've got impede learning. It's because you've got multiple scripts, multiple dialogues multiple scripts, multiple dialogues multiple scripts, multiple dialogues happening in your head. And in fact, happening in your head. And in fact, happening in your head. And in fact, this is an opportunity for me to take a this is an opportunity for me to take a this is an opportunity for me to take a slight tangent, but a relevant one, slight tangent, but a relevant one, slight tangent, but a relevant one, which is to say a lot of times people which is to say a lot of times people which is to say a lot of times people will ask me, will ask me, will ask me, you know, how I can retain a lot of you know, how I can retain a lot of you know, how I can retain a lot of information. I confess I never use a information. I confess I never use a information. I confess I never use a teleprompter for podcasting. teleprompter for podcasting. teleprompter for podcasting. I do have a usually a short stack of I do have a usually a short stack of I do have a usually a short stack of notes, you know, anywhere from one to, notes, you know, anywhere from one to, notes, you know, anywhere from one to, you know, six or seven pages of just you know, six or seven pages of just you know, six or seven pages of just bullet-pointed notes that queue up bullet-pointed notes that queue up bullet-pointed notes that queue up things that I want to talk about and things that I want to talk about and things that I want to talk about and that I have researched in the that I have researched in the that I have researched in the literature. And then of course, I'll literature. And then of course, I'll literature. And then of course, I'll refer to papers from time to time. But refer to papers from time to time. But refer to papers from time to time. But one of the things that's been very one of the things that's been very one of the things that's been very useful for me, which was taught to me by useful for me, which was taught to me by useful for me, which was taught to me by the way by a professor when I was in the way by a professor when I was in the way by a professor when I was in university, to read and retain university, to read and retain university, to read and retain information that I've read by memory, is information that I've read by memory, is information that I've read by memory, is that when I read, I'm trying to listen that when I read, I'm trying to listen that when I read, I'm trying to listen to the words being spoken in my head, to the words being spoken in my head, to the words being spoken in my head, typically in my own voice, although typically in my own voice, although typically in my own voice, although sometimes in someone else's voice. sometimes in someone else's voice. sometimes in someone else's voice. Doesn't really matter, I find. So, when Doesn't really matter, I find. So, when Doesn't really matter, I find. So, when I'm reading, yes, it's a process of I'm reading, yes, it's a process of I'm reading, yes, it's a process of visual scanning, but I'm also listening visual scanning, but I'm also listening visual scanning, but I'm also listening to the words within my head as if to the words within my head as if to the words within my head as if they're being spoken. Some of you may be they're being spoken. Some of you may be they're being spoken. Some of you may be familiar with this because you do it, familiar with this because you do it, familiar with this because you do it, others of you perhaps might find this a others of you perhaps might find this a others of you perhaps might find this a bit more foreign. I'd be curious to know bit more foreign. I'd be curious to know bit more foreign. I'd be curious to know what your process of reading and what your process of reading and what your process of reading and retaining that information is, whether retaining that information is, whether retaining that information is, whether or not it includes an internal dialogue. or not it includes an internal dialogue. or not it includes an internal dialogue. But, nevertheless, it should be very straightforward now to it should be very straightforward now to it should be very straightforward now to see why, see why, see why, if you're listening to words that you're if you're listening to words that you're if you're listening to words that you're reading on a page, maybe even mumbling reading on a page, maybe even mumbling reading on a page, maybe even mumbling them, you know, a little bit, moving them, you know, a little bit, moving them, you know, a little bit, moving your lips a little bit while you your lips a little bit while you your lips a little bit while you read, which by the way, if you heard our read, which by the way, if you heard our read, which by the way, if you heard our episode on language and auditory episode on language and auditory episode on language and auditory processing with Dr. Eddie Chang, who's processing with Dr. Eddie Chang, who's processing with Dr. Eddie Chang, who's chair of neurosurgery at UCSF, he talked chair of neurosurgery at UCSF, he talked chair of neurosurgery at UCSF, he talked about the fact that when we read about the fact that when we read about the fact that when we read any material, that the brain is any material, that the brain is any material, that the brain is generating pre-motor activity, you now generating pre-motor activity, you now generating pre-motor activity, you now know what pre-motor activity is. know what pre-motor activity is. know what pre-motor activity is. Pre-motor activity down to the muscles Pre-motor activity down to the muscles Pre-motor activity down to the muscles of the throat, the larynx and pharynx, of the throat, the larynx and pharynx, of the throat, the larynx and pharynx, which would speak those words were those which would speak those words were those which would speak those words were those signals to get above a certain level, signals to get above a certain level, signals to get above a certain level, but that when we read typically, but that when we read typically, but that when we read typically, the signals that are getting sent the signals that are getting sent the signals that are getting sent through those pre-motor circuits are through those pre-motor circuits are through those pre-motor circuits are just below the threshold of a what would just below the threshold of a what would just below the threshold of a what would have us actually speak those words. Put have us actually speak those words. Put have us actually speak those words. Put simply, when we read, we are just shy of simply, when we read, we are just shy of simply, when we read, we are just shy of saying what we are reading. And so, when saying what we are reading. And so, when saying what we are reading. And so, when I say that when I read, I'm listening to I say that when I read, I'm listening to I say that when I read, I'm listening to the words in my head, that's what I'm the words in my head, that's what I'm the words in my head, that's what I'm referring to. So, we're starting to referring to. So, we're starting to referring to. So, we're starting to funnel in on some general principles of funnel in on some general principles of funnel in on some general principles of music and how it impacts the brain and music and how it impacts the brain and music and how it impacts the brain and how that can be leveraged toward better how that can be leveraged toward better how that can be leveraged toward better learning and better motivation, both in learning and better motivation, both in learning and better motivation, both in the context of physical and cognitive the context of physical and cognitive the context of physical and cognitive endeavors. Okay, so if you want to get endeavors. Okay, so if you want to get endeavors. Okay, so if you want to get motivated listening to music prior to motivated listening to music prior to motivated listening to music prior to doing something that you're trying to doing something that you're trying to doing something that you're trying to motivate to do, motivate to do, motivate to do, is a good idea. That's what the data is a good idea. That's what the data is a good idea. That's what the data say. If you're trying to learn something say. If you're trying to learn something say. If you're trying to learn something that's cognitive, that requires reading, that's cognitive, that requires reading, that's cognitive, that requires reading, focus, and concentration, silence, 40 focus, and concentration, silence, 40 focus, and concentration, silence, 40 hertz binaural beats, white noise, or hertz binaural beats, white noise, or hertz binaural beats, white noise, or brown noise is probably best. And if you brown noise is probably best. And if you brown noise is probably best. And if you are going to listen to music, listening are going to listen to music, listening are going to listen to music, listening to music to music to music that includes instrumentals but not that includes instrumentals but not that includes instrumentals but not lyrics would be best, and listening to lyrics would be best, and listening to lyrics would be best, and listening to music that includes lyrics that you're music that includes lyrics that you're music that includes lyrics that you're very familiar with would be very familiar with would be very familiar with would be the worst condition. Now, with that the worst condition. Now, with that the worst condition. Now, with that said, there are nice studies, and by the said, there are nice studies, and by the said, there are nice studies, and by the way, I'm going to link to a number of way, I'm going to link to a number of way, I'm going to link to a number of reviews and primary studies in the show reviews and primary studies in the show reviews and primary studies in the show note captions that refer back to this note captions that refer back to this note captions that refer back to this point I'm about to tell you, which is point I'm about to tell you, which is point I'm about to tell you, which is that listening to music while trying to that listening to music while trying to that listening to music while trying to do cognitive tasks can be detrimental do cognitive tasks can be detrimental do cognitive tasks can be detrimental toward learning that material. toward learning that material. toward learning that material. Turns out that if you listen to music in Turns out that if you listen to music in Turns out that if you listen to music in the breaks between trying to learn the breaks between trying to learn the breaks between trying to learn certain material, you can actually certain material, you can actually certain material, you can actually heighten your level of cognition and heighten your level of cognition and heighten your level of cognition and focus and your ability to learn. So, I focus and your ability to learn. So, I focus and your ability to learn. So, I find this particularly cool. It's not find this particularly cool. It's not find this particularly cool. It's not that music is bad for focus and that music is bad for focus and that music is bad for focus and cognition and learning. It's that cognition and learning. It's that cognition and learning. It's that listening to music, especially music listening to music, especially music listening to music, especially music that you're familiar with that includes that you're familiar with that includes that you're familiar with that includes lyrics, at the same time as trying to lyrics, at the same time as trying to lyrics, at the same time as trying to learn something else is not a good idea. learn something else is not a good idea. learn something else is not a good idea. But listening to music with lyrics, But listening to music with lyrics, But listening to music with lyrics, especially music with lyrics that you're especially music with lyrics that you're especially music with lyrics that you're familiar with that you find particularly familiar with that you find particularly familiar with that you find particularly uplifting and motivating, is a cognitive uplifting and motivating, is a cognitive uplifting and motivating, is a cognitive and performance enhancer when you go and performance enhancer when you go and performance enhancer when you go back to doing that work in silence or back to doing that work in silence or back to doing that work in silence or perhaps while listening to white noise, perhaps while listening to white noise, perhaps while listening to white noise, brown noise, or 40 hertz binaural beats. brown noise, or 40 hertz binaural beats. brown noise, or 40 hertz binaural beats. So, like so many things, the answer is So, like so many things, the answer is So, like so many things, the answer is not black and white. It's not that not black and white. It's not that not black and white. It's not that silence is better than music or that silence is better than music or that silence is better than music or that music is bad for learning. It turns out music is bad for learning. It turns out music is bad for learning. It turns out that listening to music, even music with that listening to music, even music with that listening to music, even music with lyrics you're very familiar with, can be lyrics you're very familiar with, can be lyrics you're very familiar with, can be highly beneficial for learning, but that highly beneficial for learning, but that highly beneficial for learning, but that you want to listen to that music in the you want to listen to that music in the you want to listen to that music in the breaks between these bouts of cognitive breaks between these bouts of cognitive breaks between these bouts of cognitive work. Now, I've done previous podcast work. Now, I've done previous podcast work. Now, I've done previous podcast that talk about how long a bout of that talk about how long a bout of that talk about how long a bout of cognitive work can or should be. cognitive work can or should be. cognitive work can or should be. Typically, 90 minutes is going to be the Typically, 90 minutes is going to be the Typically, 90 minutes is going to be the upper limit before you take a break. upper limit before you take a break. upper limit before you take a break. Some people Some people Some people can't work for 90 minutes without a can't work for 90 minutes without a can't work for 90 minutes without a break. And by the way, folks, when I say And by the way, folks, when I say And by the way, folks, when I say without a break, I don't mean remaining without a break, I don't mean remaining without a break, I don't mean remaining in a deep trench of focus for 90 in a deep trench of focus for 90 in a deep trench of focus for 90 minutes. Nobody does that. Actually, I minutes. Nobody does that. Actually, I minutes. Nobody does that. Actually, I suppose there are a few folks that with suppose there are a few folks that with suppose there are a few folks that with neurochemical assistance uh neurochemical assistance uh neurochemical assistance uh or just by way of training can get or just by way of training can get or just by way of training can get themselves into a deep trench of themselves into a deep trench of themselves into a deep trench of focus for 90 minutes or more, but most focus for 90 minutes or more, but most focus for 90 minutes or more, but most people are going to focus on something people are going to focus on something people are going to focus on something and then have their attention flip out and then have their attention flip out and then have their attention flip out of focus and then they're going to have of focus and then they're going to have of focus and then they're going to have to draw their focus back to whatever it to draw their focus back to whatever it to draw their focus back to whatever it is they're doing. That's not just is they're doing. That's not just is they're doing. That's not just typical, that's absolutely normal and typical, that's absolutely normal and typical, that's absolutely normal and you shouldn't be concerned at all if you shouldn't be concerned at all if you shouldn't be concerned at all if you try and focus for 3 minutes and find try and focus for 3 minutes and find try and focus for 3 minutes and find your attention jumping around two or your attention jumping around two or your attention jumping around two or three times during three times during three times during that attempt. But, if you're somebody that attempt. But, if you're somebody that attempt. But, if you're somebody who is going to do say a 90-minute or who is going to do say a 90-minute or who is going to do say a 90-minute or even 60-minute or even 30-minute bout of even 60-minute or even 30-minute bout of even 60-minute or even 30-minute bout of work and you are going to get up for a moment and you are going to get up for a moment and you are going to get up for a moment and use the restroom or you're going to and use the restroom or you're going to and use the restroom or you're going to take a break in between bouts of work. take a break in between bouts of work. take a break in between bouts of work. So, maybe you work for 30 minutes, take So, maybe you work for 30 minutes, take So, maybe you work for 30 minutes, take 10 minutes or 5 minutes off or 90 10 minutes or 5 minutes off or 90 10 minutes or 5 minutes off or 90 minutes, take 30 minutes off listening minutes, take 30 minutes off listening minutes, take 30 minutes off listening to music in those breaks, to music in those breaks, to music in those breaks, it seems can increase our ability to it seems can increase our ability to it seems can increase our ability to focus and to learn new material once we focus and to learn new material once we focus and to learn new material once we return to those bouts of cognitive return to those bouts of cognitive return to those bouts of cognitive focus. Now, when it comes to physical focus. Now, when it comes to physical focus. Now, when it comes to physical exertion, cardiovascular exercise, exertion, cardiovascular exercise, exertion, cardiovascular exercise, resistance training of any kind, many resistance training of any kind, many resistance training of any kind, many people including myself like to listen people including myself like to listen people including myself like to listen to music while performing to music while performing to music while performing that physical exercise or that physical that physical exercise or that physical that physical exercise or that physical exertion. The data on whether or not exertion. The data on whether or not exertion. The data on whether or not music improve physical performance is a music improve physical performance is a music improve physical performance is a bit mixed. bit mixed. bit mixed. Certainly, you can find studies that Certainly, you can find studies that Certainly, you can find studies that show that it improves physical output. show that it improves physical output. show that it improves physical output. Other studies will say that it doesn't Other studies will say that it doesn't Other studies will say that it doesn't make a difference. Other studies will make a difference. Other studies will make a difference. Other studies will say that it reduces say that it reduces say that it reduces physical output. However, this is a very physical output. However, this is a very physical output. However, this is a very important however, important however, important however, the type of physical exercise is not the type of physical exercise is not the type of physical exercise is not very well matched between those very well matched between those very well matched between those different studies. So, this is something different studies. So, this is something different studies. So, this is something that I believe is going to be highly that I believe is going to be highly that I believe is going to be highly individual. In accordance with the individual. In accordance with the individual. In accordance with the published data, I mix it up. There are published data, I mix it up. There are published data, I mix it up. There are times when I will head out for a run or times when I will head out for a run or times when I will head out for a run or I will do a resistance training session I will do a resistance training session I will do a resistance training session and I will listen to music, usually an and I will listen to music, usually an and I will listen to music, usually an album all the way through or a playlist album all the way through or a playlist album all the way through or a playlist all the way through. That's because I all the way through. That's because I all the way through. That's because I don't want to be going on to my phone don't want to be going on to my phone don't want to be going on to my phone very often. In fact, these days I use an very often. In fact, these days I use an very often. In fact, these days I use an older a phone that doesn't have any text older a phone that doesn't have any text older a phone that doesn't have any text messaging or communication to the messaging or communication to the messaging or communication to the outside world, but it has music loaded outside world, but it has music loaded outside world, but it has music loaded into it into it into it or onto it or onto it or onto it uh that allows me to just listen to uh that allows me to just listen to uh that allows me to just listen to music so that I don't run the risk of music so that I don't run the risk of music so that I don't run the risk of getting distracted, texting, and doing getting distracted, texting, and doing getting distracted, texting, and doing things like that. I just want to focus things like that. I just want to focus things like that. I just want to focus on my on my on my physical exercise. I should say that physical exercise. I should say that physical exercise. I should say that phone also has audiobooks, podcasts, phone also has audiobooks, podcasts, phone also has audiobooks, podcasts, things I've downloaded to it. things I've downloaded to it. things I've downloaded to it. So, it's a place where I can listen to So, it's a place where I can listen to So, it's a place where I can listen to things, but not communicate with the things, but not communicate with the things, but not communicate with the outside world, at least while outside world, at least while outside world, at least while exercising. Some people do very well to listen to Some people do very well to listen to Some people do very well to listen to music literally in between and during music literally in between and during music literally in between and during their sets of resistance training their sets of resistance training their sets of resistance training throughout their entire runs. throughout their entire runs. throughout their entire runs. It's going to be individual. You have to It's going to be individual. You have to It's going to be individual. You have to figure out what's best for you. However, figure out what's best for you. However, figure out what's best for you. However, one of the most interesting things about one of the most interesting things about one of the most interesting things about the scientific literature on this shows the scientific literature on this shows the scientific literature on this shows that if people listen to music, in that if people listen to music, in that if people listen to music, in particular music that tends to be particular music that tends to be particular music that tends to be faster, more upbeat, typically it's faster, more upbeat, typically it's faster, more upbeat, typically it's going to be in these studies rock and going to be in these studies rock and going to be in these studies rock and roll music as opposed to classical, roll music as opposed to classical, roll music as opposed to classical, although there are some studies that although there are some studies that although there are some studies that have explored classical and other forms have explored classical and other forms have explored classical and other forms of music as it relates to exercise, of music as it relates to exercise, of music as it relates to exercise, listening to that music in between bouts listening to that music in between bouts listening to that music in between bouts of exertion, so in the rest between sets of exertion, so in the rest between sets of exertion, so in the rest between sets of resistance training, or periodically of resistance training, or periodically of resistance training, or periodically during, say, a run during, say, a run during, say, a run or about of cycling or about of cycling or about of cycling can indeed enhance performance in a way can indeed enhance performance in a way can indeed enhance performance in a way that, at least by my read of the data, that, at least by my read of the data, that, at least by my read of the data, exceeds that which is observed when people just that which is observed when people just that which is observed when people just listen to music throughout. In other listen to music throughout. In other listen to music throughout. In other words, if you find it useful to listen words, if you find it useful to listen words, if you find it useful to listen to music before, during, and after your to music before, during, and after your to music before, during, and after your workouts, great, be my guest. However, workouts, great, be my guest. However, workouts, great, be my guest. However, what the data say is that switching up what the data say is that switching up what the data say is that switching up between silence and listening to music between silence and listening to music between silence and listening to music and in this case it would be listening and in this case it would be listening and in this case it would be listening to music that you're very familiar with to music that you're very familiar with to music that you're very familiar with and that can evoke a sense of motivation and that can evoke a sense of motivation and that can evoke a sense of motivation and desire to action in you for whatever and desire to action in you for whatever and desire to action in you for whatever reason, the music, the beat, the reason, the music, the beat, the reason, the music, the beat, the memories that it draws you to memories that it draws you to memories that it draws you to etc. Well, then that's going to be useful. Well, then that's going to be useful. Well, then that's going to be useful. So, there really isn't one protocol for So, there really isn't one protocol for So, there really isn't one protocol for how to get the most out of music for how to get the most out of music for how to get the most out of music for sake of physical exertion, but if you're sake of physical exertion, but if you're sake of physical exertion, but if you're interested in playing with some of these interested in playing with some of these interested in playing with some of these variables as they've been examined variables as they've been examined variables as they've been examined within the peer-reviewed literature, I within the peer-reviewed literature, I within the peer-reviewed literature, I find it interesting and indeed I found find it interesting and indeed I found find it interesting and indeed I found it useful to, for instance, do a workout it useful to, for instance, do a workout it useful to, for instance, do a workout where I only listen to music in between where I only listen to music in between where I only listen to music in between sets of resistance training or to listen sets of resistance training or to listen sets of resistance training or to listen to music prior to going out for a run. to music prior to going out for a run. to music prior to going out for a run. And then oftentimes when I do that, the And then oftentimes when I do that, the And then oftentimes when I do that, the song will or songs will be sort of on song will or songs will be sort of on song will or songs will be sort of on loop in my head, although I confess that loop in my head, although I confess that loop in my head, although I confess that a lot of times nowadays I listen to a lot of times nowadays I listen to a lot of times nowadays I listen to podcasts while I run or while I hike. podcasts while I run or while I hike. podcasts while I run or while I hike. And when I'm in the gym and I'm doing And when I'm in the gym and I'm doing And when I'm in the gym and I'm doing resistance training, I like to listen to resistance training, I like to listen to resistance training, I like to listen to music as opposed to content that music as opposed to content that music as opposed to content that requires that I really focus very requires that I really focus very requires that I really focus very heavily on that content such as a heavily on that content such as a heavily on that content such as a podcast, such as a book. I'd like to podcast, such as a book. I'd like to podcast, such as a book. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our take a quick break and acknowledge our take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor InsideTracker. sponsor InsideTracker. sponsor InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals. I'm a big meet your health goals. I'm a big meet your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work believer in getting regular blood work believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of done for the simple reason that many of done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. analyzed from a quality blood test. analyzed from a quality blood test. However, with a lot of blood tests out However, with a lot of blood tests out However, with a lot of blood tests out there, you get information back about there, you get information back about there, you get information back about blood lipids, about hormones, and so on, blood lipids, about hormones, and so on, blood lipids, about hormones, and so on, but you don't know what to do with that but you don't know what to do with that but you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they information. With InsideTracker, they information. With InsideTracker, they have a personalized platform that makes have a personalized platform that makes have a personalized platform that makes it very easy to understand your data, it very easy to understand your data, it very easy to understand your data, that is to understand what those lipids, that is to understand what those lipids, that is to understand what those lipids, what those hormone levels, etc. mean, what those hormone levels, etc. mean, what those hormone levels, etc. mean, and behavioral, supplement, nutrition, and behavioral, supplement, nutrition, and behavioral, supplement, nutrition, and other protocols to adjust those and other protocols to adjust those and other protocols to adjust those numbers to bring them into the ranges numbers to bring them into the ranges numbers to bring them into the ranges that are ideal for your immediate and that are ideal for your immediate and that are ideal for your immediate and long-term health. InsideTracker's long-term health. InsideTracker's long-term health. InsideTracker's ultimate plan now includes measures of ultimate plan now includes measures of ultimate plan now includes measures of both apoB and of insulin, which are key both apoB and of insulin, which are key both apoB and of insulin, which are key indicators of cardiovascular health and indicators of cardiovascular health and indicators of cardiovascular health and energy regulation. If you'd like to try energy regulation. If you'd like to try energy regulation. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to insidetracker.com/huberman to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's get 20% off any of InsideTracker's get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's plans. Again, that's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Now I'd like to talk to get 20% off. Now I'd like to talk to get 20% off. Now I'd like to talk about the use of music to shift our mood about the use of music to shift our mood about the use of music to shift our mood and indeed to get us out of states of and indeed to get us out of states of and indeed to get us out of states of anxiety. This is a really interesting anxiety. This is a really interesting anxiety. This is a really interesting scientific literature with some very scientific literature with some very scientific literature with some very specific actionable takeaways that I specific actionable takeaways that I specific actionable takeaways that I think everyone will find beneficial. I think everyone will find beneficial. I think everyone will find beneficial. I certainly did. certainly did. certainly did. However, I want to point out that we don't need a I want to point out that we don't need a I want to point out that we don't need a scientific study to illustrate for us scientific study to illustrate for us scientific study to illustrate for us the way that music can shift our mood. the way that music can shift our mood. the way that music can shift our mood. And you already know why it is that And you already know why it is that And you already know why it is that listening to a sad song can sometimes listening to a sad song can sometimes listening to a sad song can sometimes make us feel sad, listening to happy make us feel sad, listening to happy make us feel sad, listening to happy music can make us feel happy. music can make us feel happy. music can make us feel happy. It's because when we listen to music, It's because when we listen to music, It's because when we listen to music, there are some fundamental components of there are some fundamental components of there are some fundamental components of that music, literally the mathematical that music, literally the mathematical that music, literally the mathematical structure of that music, including the structure of that music, including the structure of that music, including the frequency of sounds, frequency of sounds, frequency of sounds, the cadence of those sounds, the cadence of those sounds, the cadence of those sounds, as well as the lyrics, but even in the as well as the lyrics, but even in the as well as the lyrics, but even in the absence of lyrics, that are activating absence of lyrics, that are activating absence of lyrics, that are activating brain circuits within us such that the brain circuits within us such that the brain circuits within us such that the frequencies of sound that we're hearing frequencies of sound that we're hearing frequencies of sound that we're hearing are evoking firing of neurons in the are evoking firing of neurons in the are evoking firing of neurons in the brain of the same frequency. In other brain of the same frequency. In other brain of the same frequency. In other words, your brain becomes a bit of a words, your brain becomes a bit of a words, your brain becomes a bit of a piano playing the same piano playing the same piano playing the same song that you're hearing inside your song that you're hearing inside your song that you're hearing inside your head. Now, that's sort of a duh, right? head. Now, that's sort of a duh, right? head. Now, that's sort of a duh, right? You hear music in your head even if You hear music in your head even if You hear music in your head even if you're listening to it from outside in you're listening to it from outside in you're listening to it from outside in the room. But, when you understand that the room. But, when you understand that the room. But, when you understand that neurons speak the language of neurons speak the language of neurons speak the language of electrochemical communication, what electrochemical communication, what electrochemical communication, what we're talking about here is particular we're talking about here is particular we're talking about here is particular music evoking the release of music evoking the release of music evoking the release of neurochemicals in your brain at a neurochemicals in your brain at a neurochemicals in your brain at a particular frequency. So, just think particular frequency. So, just think particular frequency. So, just think about that for a second. We know that about that for a second. We know that about that for a second. We know that neurochemicals such as dopamine, neurochemicals such as dopamine, neurochemicals such as dopamine, serotonin, some of the so-called serotonin, some of the so-called serotonin, some of the so-called endogenous opioids, right? These aren't endogenous opioids, right? These aren't endogenous opioids, right? These aren't opioids that people take. This isn't opioids that people take. This isn't opioids that people take. This isn't related to the opioid crisis. We're related to the opioid crisis. We're related to the opioid crisis. We're talking about endogenous opioids that talking about endogenous opioids that talking about endogenous opioids that are released in response to music, are released in response to music, are released in response to music, things like exercise, different types of things like exercise, different types of things like exercise, different types of social interactions. Those and other social interactions. Those and other social interactions. Those and other chemicals are released according to the chemicals are released according to the chemicals are released according to the firing of specific neurons. And firing of specific neurons. And firing of specific neurons. And we know that when you listen to music at we know that when you listen to music at we know that when you listen to music at particular frequencies arranged in particular frequencies arranged in particular frequencies arranged in particular motifs, particular motifs, particular motifs, etc., that the neurons that release etc., that the neurons that release etc., that the neurons that release those neurochemicals are firing at those neurochemicals are firing at those neurochemicals are firing at those same frequencies. In other words, that same frequencies. In other words, that same frequencies. In other words, that the sound is causing a the sound is causing a the sound is causing a sound-dependent pharmacologic concert sound-dependent pharmacologic concert sound-dependent pharmacologic concert within your brain. So, that fact should within your brain. So, that fact should within your brain. So, that fact should make it incredibly clear as to why make it incredibly clear as to why make it incredibly clear as to why certain music, even in the absence of certain music, even in the absence of certain music, even in the absence of lyrics, can evoke certain emotional lyrics, can evoke certain emotional lyrics, can evoke certain emotional states. Certain sound frequencies are states. Certain sound frequencies are states. Certain sound frequencies are transformed into the neural language transformed into the neural language transformed into the neural language within your brain that releases certain within your brain that releases certain within your brain that releases certain neurochemicals that create certain neurochemicals that create certain neurochemicals that create certain emotional states of brain and body. Just emotional states of brain and body. Just emotional states of brain and body. Just to drill in how incredible that really to drill in how incredible that really to drill in how incredible that really is a little bit further, is a little bit further, is a little bit further, if you see a beautiful painting or the if you see a beautiful painting or the if you see a beautiful painting or the picture or presence of somebody's or presence of somebody's or presence of somebody's face in real life that evokes a face in real life that evokes a face in real life that evokes a particularly strong positive or negative particularly strong positive or negative particularly strong positive or negative emotion, you can imagine that of course it you can imagine that of course it you can imagine that of course it creates the release of certain creates the release of certain creates the release of certain neurochemicals or perhaps in the case of neurochemicals or perhaps in the case of neurochemicals or perhaps in the case of a negative face a negative face a negative face suppresses the release of certain suppresses the release of certain suppresses the release of certain neurochemicals. But we can't say that a neurochemicals. But we can't say that a neurochemicals. But we can't say that a particular frequency of color, say reds particular frequency of color, say reds particular frequency of color, say reds against oranges or the presence of a against oranges or the presence of a against oranges or the presence of a rainbow, evokes a sort of rainbow-like rainbow, evokes a sort of rainbow-like rainbow, evokes a sort of rainbow-like cascade of neurochemicals, whereas with cascade of neurochemicals, whereas with cascade of neurochemicals, whereas with sound that's exactly what's happening. sound that's exactly what's happening. sound that's exactly what's happening. And this isn't to diminish the value of And this isn't to diminish the value of And this isn't to diminish the value of vision in terms of its ability to evoke vision in terms of its ability to evoke vision in terms of its ability to evoke emotional states within us. After all, emotional states within us. After all, emotional states within us. After all, I'm foremost a neuroscientist, but I'm foremost a neuroscientist, but I'm foremost a neuroscientist, but under the umbrella of neuroscientists, I under the umbrella of neuroscientists, I under the umbrella of neuroscientists, I started off as and I continue to be a started off as and I continue to be a started off as and I continue to be a vision neuroscientist studying the vision neuroscientist studying the vision neuroscientist studying the visual system and its ability to evoke visual system and its ability to evoke visual system and its ability to evoke emotional states within us. But I have emotional states within us. But I have emotional states within us. But I have to acknowledge that the auditory system to acknowledge that the auditory system to acknowledge that the auditory system and in particular the circuits in the and in particular the circuits in the and in particular the circuits in the brain that respond to music have a brain that respond to music have a brain that respond to music have a remarkably potent ability to evoke these remarkably potent ability to evoke these remarkably potent ability to evoke these emotional states, which is why when emotional states, which is why when emotional states, which is why when surveys have been done asking people why surveys have been done asking people why surveys have been done asking people why they listen to music, the responses that they listen to music, the responses that they listen to music, the responses that have come back generally resemble the have come back generally resemble the have come back generally resemble the following statistics. Approximately 90% following statistics. Approximately 90% following statistics. Approximately 90% of people say they listen to music to of people say they listen to music to of people say they listen to music to relax. Approximately 82% of people relax. Approximately 82% of people relax. Approximately 82% of people self-report that they listen to music in self-report that they listen to music in self-report that they listen to music in order to make themselves happy. order to make themselves happy. order to make themselves happy. Approximately 46.5% Approximately 46.5% Approximately 46.5% of people of people of people say that they listen to music in order say that they listen to music in order say that they listen to music in order to process particular states of emotion. to process particular states of emotion. to process particular states of emotion. We'll get back to what process means in We'll get back to what process means in We'll get back to what process means in a moment. But more often than not when a moment. But more often than not when a moment. But more often than not when these studies have asked specific these studies have asked specific these studies have asked specific questions about what particular types of questions about what particular types of questions about what particular types of emotions people are listening to in emotions people are listening to in emotions people are listening to in order to process their emotions better, order to process their emotions better, order to process their emotions better, it is the emotion of sadness. it is the emotion of sadness. it is the emotion of sadness. And, 32.5% of people And, 32.5% of people And, 32.5% of people report that they listen to music in report that they listen to music in report that they listen to music in order to increase their sense of order to increase their sense of order to increase their sense of concentration. And we already talked concentration. And we already talked concentration. And we already talked about the role of music in concentration about the role of music in concentration about the role of music in concentration or its ability in some cases to inhibit or its ability in some cases to inhibit or its ability in some cases to inhibit concentration a few minutes ago. Now, concentration a few minutes ago. Now, concentration a few minutes ago. Now, you might be asking yourself, "How can you might be asking yourself, "How can you might be asking yourself, "How can 90% of people listen to music for one 90% of people listen to music for one 90% of people listen to music for one thing and 82% of people for another of thing and 82% of people for another of thing and 82% of people for another of people. Ah, well, in this survey and people. Ah, well, in this survey and people. Ah, well, in this survey and other surveys like it, people had the option to give multiple people had the option to give multiple people had the option to give multiple reasons for listening to music because reasons for listening to music because reasons for listening to music because of course most people have multiple of course most people have multiple of course most people have multiple reasons for listening to music. reasons for listening to music. reasons for listening to music. Now, with that said, if we are to Now, with that said, if we are to Now, with that said, if we are to examine this one particular category, examine this one particular category, examine this one particular category, nearly half of people who report nearly half of people who report nearly half of people who report listening to music on a regular basis listening to music on a regular basis listening to music on a regular basis listen to music in order to process listen to music in order to process listen to music in order to process their emotions. their emotions. their emotions. We can ask, "What does the scientific We can ask, "What does the scientific We can ask, "What does the scientific literature tell us about how certain literature tell us about how certain literature tell us about how certain types of music evoke certain types of types of music evoke certain types of types of music evoke certain types of emotions or help us process certain emotions or help us process certain emotions or help us process certain emotions?" Again, we'll get back to what emotions?" Again, we'll get back to what emotions?" Again, we'll get back to what we mean by process in a moment. But, we mean by process in a moment. But, we mean by process in a moment. But, a number of studies have been done on a number of studies have been done on a number of studies have been done on this. There's some meta-analyses that converge There's some meta-analyses that converge There's some meta-analyses that converge on some general themes, what I refer to on some general themes, what I refer to on some general themes, what I refer to as the center of mass of data, right? as the center of mass of data, right? as the center of mass of data, right? When there are a lot of studies in the When there are a lot of studies in the When there are a lot of studies in the given area, the outcomes of some of given area, the outcomes of some of given area, the outcomes of some of those studies conflict with one another. those studies conflict with one another. those studies conflict with one another. Generally, in a good meta-analysis, what Generally, in a good meta-analysis, what Generally, in a good meta-analysis, what happens is different studies are happens is different studies are happens is different studies are considered more powerful or less considered more powerful or less considered more powerful or less powerful than others depending on how powerful than others depending on how powerful than others depending on how many subjects were involved, the many subjects were involved, the many subjects were involved, the different control conditions or lack of different control conditions or lack of different control conditions or lack of control conditions, and so on and so control conditions, and so on and so control conditions, and so on and so forth. This is one of the great values forth. This is one of the great values forth. This is one of the great values of meta-analyses. of meta-analyses. of meta-analyses. Is that they don't treat all studies Is that they don't treat all studies Is that they don't treat all studies equally. They separate it out studies equally. They separate it out studies equally. They separate it out studies based on their level of rigor and based on their level of rigor and based on their level of rigor and thoroughness. Well, what we can say with thoroughness. Well, what we can say with thoroughness. Well, what we can say with confidence is that confidence is that confidence is that music that makes us {quote} and quote or music that makes us {quote} and quote or music that makes us {quote} and quote or tends to shift people's state from less tends to shift people's state from less tends to shift people's state from less happy to happier regardless of how they happy to happier regardless of how they happy to happier regardless of how they entered the experiment, tends to be entered the experiment, tends to be entered the experiment, tends to be faster music. Meaning music that on faster music. Meaning music that on faster music. Meaning music that on average contains average contains average contains 140 to 150 beats per minute or faster. 140 to 150 beats per minute or faster. 140 to 150 beats per minute or faster. Okay? And there's some other features to Okay? And there's some other features to Okay? And there's some other features to quote and quote happy music, if you quote and quote happy music, if you quote and quote happy music, if you will, that it tends to be in a major will, that it tends to be in a major will, that it tends to be in a major key, that if there are lyrics to that music, that if there are lyrics to that music, that if there are lyrics to that music, that the lyrics tend to report things that the lyrics tend to report things that the lyrics tend to report things that are happy or get this, total that are happy or get this, total that are happy or get this, total nonsense. In fact, when the type of lyrics in this In fact, when the type of lyrics in this In fact, when the type of lyrics in this quote and quote happy music, so I guess quote and quote happy music, so I guess quote and quote happy music, so I guess singing about um singing about um singing about um great events in life and positive great events in life and positive great events in life and positive things, falling in love, being in love, things, falling in love, being in love, things, falling in love, being in love, positive memories, birth of children, positive memories, birth of children, positive memories, birth of children, connection to friends, great adventures, connection to friends, great adventures, connection to friends, great adventures, those lyrics, or I should say that music those lyrics, or I should say that music those lyrics, or I should say that music containing those lyrics, was no more containing those lyrics, was no more containing those lyrics, was no more effective in creating states of effective in creating states of effective in creating states of happiness than was music of equivalent happiness than was music of equivalent happiness than was music of equivalent cadence. So again, music that was 140 to cadence. So again, music that was 140 to cadence. So again, music that was 140 to 150 beats per minute or faster on 150 beats per minute or faster on 150 beats per minute or faster on average. Well, even if the lyrics were complete Well, even if the lyrics were complete Well, even if the lyrics were complete nonsense, even if the vocalizations nonsense, even if the vocalizations nonsense, even if the vocalizations weren't actual words, weren't actual words, weren't actual words, it still evoked the same increase in the it still evoked the same increase in the it still evoked the same increase in the level of happiness in the subjects than level of happiness in the subjects than level of happiness in the subjects than when compared to the music containing when compared to the music containing when compared to the music containing coherent lyrics around happy events. coherent lyrics around happy events. coherent lyrics around happy events. What this means is that the cadence of What this means is that the cadence of What this means is that the cadence of music is no doubt the critical variable music is no doubt the critical variable music is no doubt the critical variable when one is trying to shift one's mood when one is trying to shift one's mood when one is trying to shift one's mood from a state of whatever, could be from a state of whatever, could be from a state of whatever, could be depressed or sad, to non-depressed, depressed or sad, to non-depressed, depressed or sad, to non-depressed, non-sad, or neutral to positive, and so non-sad, or neutral to positive, and so non-sad, or neutral to positive, and so on and so forth. on and so forth. on and so forth. But, what this also explains is one-hit But, what this also explains is one-hit But, what this also explains is one-hit wonders. Rarely, if ever, by the way, are one-hit Rarely, if ever, by the way, are one-hit Rarely, if ever, by the way, are one-hit wonders sad and depressing songs? wonders sad and depressing songs? wonders sad and depressing songs? Sometimes, almost always, these one-hit Sometimes, almost always, these one-hit Sometimes, almost always, these one-hit wonders are songs that are very wonders are songs that are very wonders are songs that are very effective in shifting people's mood from effective in shifting people's mood from effective in shifting people's mood from not so happy to happier, or we could not so happy to happier, or we could not so happy to happier, or we could just say happier, regardless of where just say happier, regardless of where just say happier, regardless of where they started out before listening to the they started out before listening to the they started out before listening to the song, they feel better while and after song, they feel better while and after song, they feel better while and after listening to the song. listening to the song. listening to the song. And indeed, more often than not, the lyrical indeed, more often than not, the lyrical indeed, more often than not, the lyrical content of those songs content of those songs content of those songs is not particularly meaningful. It's not is not particularly meaningful. It's not is not particularly meaningful. It's not addressing a particularly meaningful addressing a particularly meaningful addressing a particularly meaningful state or issue. It's just what some state or issue. It's just what some state or issue. It's just what some people call a party song, or something people call a party song, or something people call a party song, or something that's just uplifting, not just to them, that's just uplifting, not just to them, that's just uplifting, not just to them, but to many other people, which actually but to many other people, which actually but to many other people, which actually brings up an interesting and brings up an interesting and brings up an interesting and future-looking point, which is that future-looking point, which is that future-looking point, which is that nowadays we are seeing the emergence of nowadays we are seeing the emergence of nowadays we are seeing the emergence of AI, artificial intelligence, being used AI, artificial intelligence, being used AI, artificial intelligence, being used to generate new songs by capturing these to generate new songs by capturing these to generate new songs by capturing these well-established rules gleaned from well-established rules gleaned from well-established rules gleaned from neuroscience of how music impacts the neuroscience of how music impacts the neuroscience of how music impacts the brain. Such that in the future, artificial Such that in the future, artificial Such that in the future, artificial intelligence is going to be generating intelligence is going to be generating intelligence is going to be generating hit songs for us, as opposed to having hit songs for us, as opposed to having hit songs for us, as opposed to having people generating hit songs. I know this people generating hit songs. I know this people generating hit songs. I know this evokes a state of concern and fear in many a state of concern and fear in many a state of concern and fear in many people. I think that this is people. I think that this is people. I think that this is fear that needs to be matched with fear that needs to be matched with fear that needs to be matched with I don't know, perhaps a cautious I don't know, perhaps a cautious I don't know, perhaps a cautious optimism. I mean, who knows? Maybe there optimism. I mean, who knows? Maybe there optimism. I mean, who knows? Maybe there patterns of music, including lyrics, patterns of music, including lyrics, patterns of music, including lyrics, that human beings in their current that human beings in their current that human beings in their current understanding of themselves and of music understanding of themselves and of music understanding of themselves and of music have not yet been able to tap into, and have not yet been able to tap into, and have not yet been able to tap into, and who knows? Maybe AI will be generating who knows? Maybe AI will be generating who knows? Maybe AI will be generating the best music that we've ever heard, or the best music that we've ever heard, or the best music that we've ever heard, or perhaps music that can shift our states perhaps music that can shift our states perhaps music that can shift our states from more depressed or sad to heightened from more depressed or sad to heightened from more depressed or sad to heightened levels of happiness in ways that humans levels of happiness in ways that humans levels of happiness in ways that humans have just not been able to accomplish. have just not been able to accomplish. have just not been able to accomplish. So, I think it's important to balance So, I think it's important to balance So, I think it's important to balance any pessimism about AI and its ability any pessimism about AI and its ability any pessimism about AI and its ability to generate music based on these rules to generate music based on these rules to generate music based on these rules of how music impacts the brain with an of how music impacts the brain with an of how music impacts the brain with an open-mindedness. After all, open-mindedness. After all, open-mindedness. After all, neuroscience, neuroimaging, and neural neuroscience, neuroimaging, and neural neuroscience, neuroimaging, and neural recordings directly with electrodes in recordings directly with electrodes in recordings directly with electrodes in the brain while people are listening to the brain while people are listening to the brain while people are listening to music is teaching us how the brain music is teaching us how the brain music is teaching us how the brain responds to that music and is giving us responds to that music and is giving us responds to that music and is giving us information that information that information that indeed, human beings, but also computers indeed, human beings, but also computers indeed, human beings, but also computers can use in order to generate stimuli, can use in order to generate stimuli, can use in order to generate stimuli, music, that can shift our brain into music, that can shift our brain into music, that can shift our brain into more positive states. And if that's the more positive states. And if that's the more positive states. And if that's the case, wouldn't that be wonderful? case, wouldn't that be wonderful? case, wouldn't that be wonderful? Another established feature of happy Another established feature of happy Another established feature of happy music is get this, its ability to get music is get this, its ability to get music is get this, its ability to get people to relax the furrow of their people to relax the furrow of their people to relax the furrow of their brow, indeed to raise their eyebrows and brow, indeed to raise their eyebrows and brow, indeed to raise their eyebrows and to be a bit wide-eyed and not just to be a bit wide-eyed and not just to be a bit wide-eyed and not just through autonomic arousal, but rather through autonomic arousal, but rather through autonomic arousal, but rather through activation of the muscles in the through activation of the muscles in the through activation of the muscles in the face. Conversely, we know that sad music, and Conversely, we know that sad music, and Conversely, we know that sad music, and here we can define sad music, this has here we can define sad music, this has here we can define sad music, this has actually been done in the literature, actually been done in the literature, actually been done in the literature, sad music tends to be slower than sad music tends to be slower than sad music tends to be slower than average, slower than 60 beats per minute average, slower than 60 beats per minute average, slower than 60 beats per minute or so, again, on average. And this again or so, again, on average. And this again or so, again, on average. And this again is independent of the lyrics that might is independent of the lyrics that might is independent of the lyrics that might not even be present in the song. not even be present in the song. not even be present in the song. Sad music tends to activate the Sad music tends to activate the Sad music tends to activate the corrugator muscles corrugator muscles corrugator muscles of the forehead, which are the muscles of the forehead, which are the muscles of the forehead, which are the muscles that furrow the brow and that lead to a that furrow the brow and that lead to a that furrow the brow and that lead to a kind of serious look. It's an It's a kind of serious look. It's an It's a kind of serious look. It's an It's a folding in of the face as opposed to a folding in of the face as opposed to a folding in of the face as opposed to a widening up of the eyes and a relaxation widening up of the eyes and a relaxation widening up of the eyes and a relaxation of the brow. Now, given where we are in of the brow. Now, given where we are in of the brow. Now, given where we are in the course of this discussion, the course of this discussion, the course of this discussion, that shouldn't be surprising. We already that shouldn't be surprising. We already that shouldn't be surprising. We already talked about how listening to particular talked about how listening to particular talked about how listening to particular sounds evokes the release of particular sounds evokes the release of particular sounds evokes the release of particular neurochemicals, but in a more direct neurochemicals, but in a more direct neurochemicals, but in a more direct fashion, listening to particular sounds activate listening to particular sounds activate listening to particular sounds activate certain pre-motor and motor circuits certain pre-motor and motor circuits certain pre-motor and motor circuits within the brain and body, not just the within the brain and body, not just the within the brain and body, not just the desire to move one's torso, limbs, or desire to move one's torso, limbs, or desire to move one's torso, limbs, or both, bob one's head, or move a head both, bob one's head, or move a head both, bob one's head, or move a head side to side, but also the side to side, but also the side to side, but also the microstructures of the face, which microstructures of the face, which microstructures of the face, which because one of the main roles of the because one of the main roles of the because one of the main roles of the face is to communicate emotion, face is to communicate emotion, face is to communicate emotion, is going to cause either a relaxation of is going to cause either a relaxation of is going to cause either a relaxation of the brow and a and a lifting of the brow and a and a lifting of the brow and a and a lifting of the eyebrows or a furrowing or a activation eyebrows or a furrowing or a activation eyebrows or a furrowing or a activation of the corrugator muscles of the of the corrugator muscles of the of the corrugator muscles of the eyebrow. And if that's not obvious and eyebrow. And if that's not obvious and eyebrow. And if that's not obvious and yet interesting enough, yet interesting enough, yet interesting enough, well, get this. well, get this. well, get this. There seems to be a direct relationship, There seems to be a direct relationship, There seems to be a direct relationship, I'm chuckling cuz this still just blows I'm chuckling cuz this still just blows I'm chuckling cuz this still just blows my mind because it's a total duh, my mind because it's a total duh, my mind because it's a total duh, obvious when you hear it, but it's still obvious when you hear it, but it's still obvious when you hear it, but it's still just so cool, that there's a direct just so cool, that there's a direct just so cool, that there's a direct relationship of the frequency of the relationship of the frequency of the relationship of the frequency of the sound that you hear, either low-pitched sound that you hear, either low-pitched sound that you hear, either low-pitched or high-pitched, and the cadence of that or high-pitched, and the cadence of that or high-pitched, and the cadence of that sound, and here I realize I'm not using sound, and here I realize I'm not using sound, and here I realize I'm not using technical music theory language, but technical music theory language, but technical music theory language, but whether or not the that particular tone whether or not the that particular tone whether or not the that particular tone is played is played is played over and over close in time or more over and over close in time or more over and over close in time or more spaced out in time, spaced out in time, spaced out in time, and facial expressions, and indeed and facial expressions, and indeed and facial expressions, and indeed when we listen to when we listen to when we listen to bass tones, low frequency tones, set bass tones, low frequency tones, set bass tones, low frequency tones, set apart from one another with some apart from one another with some apart from one another with some distance so that they're not distance so that they're not distance so that they're not overlapping, we get the all too familiar overlapping, we get the all too familiar overlapping, we get the all too familiar bass face. So, what I'm referring to bass face. So, what I'm referring to bass face. So, what I'm referring to here is what neuroscientists would call here is what neuroscientists would call here is what neuroscientists would call a labeled line. Literally, a circuit of a labeled line. Literally, a circuit of a labeled line. Literally, a circuit of neurons that goes from the periphery, in neurons that goes from the periphery, in neurons that goes from the periphery, in this case our ears, into our brain this case our ears, into our brain this case our ears, into our brain through several different stations, and through several different stations, and through several different stations, and then wicks out to impact all sorts of things wicks out to impact all sorts of things wicks out to impact all sorts of things within us, states of emotion, states of within us, states of emotion, states of within us, states of emotion, states of motivation, our propensity to move, but motivation, our propensity to move, but motivation, our propensity to move, but also a labeled line circuit coming from also a labeled line circuit coming from also a labeled line circuit coming from hearing low frequency sounds played hearing low frequency sounds played hearing low frequency sounds played spaced apart from one another that spaced apart from one another that spaced apart from one another that evokes a particular facial expression. evokes a particular facial expression. evokes a particular facial expression. And again, this takes us back to the And again, this takes us back to the And again, this takes us back to the earlier statement that I made, which is earlier statement that I made, which is earlier statement that I made, which is not an original statement, frankly. not an original statement, frankly. not an original statement, frankly. There are people within the field There are people within the field There are people within the field of auditory processing and understanding of auditory processing and understanding of auditory processing and understanding how the brain processes music. In fact, how the brain processes music. In fact, how the brain processes music. In fact, one of the world experts in this, Dr. one of the world experts in this, Dr. one of the world experts in this, Dr. Eric Jarvis at The Rockefeller Eric Jarvis at The Rockefeller Eric Jarvis at The Rockefeller University, was a guest on this podcast University, was a guest on this podcast University, was a guest on this podcast where we talked about the relationship where we talked about the relationship where we talked about the relationship between music, movement, and singing, between music, movement, and singing, between music, movement, and singing, and the fact that and the fact that and the fact that music, movement, and particularly dance, music, movement, and particularly dance, music, movement, and particularly dance, and singing likely preceded the and singing likely preceded the and singing likely preceded the evolution of modern spoken language. evolution of modern spoken language. evolution of modern spoken language. Well, Eric Jarvis and others have argued Well, Eric Jarvis and others have argued Well, Eric Jarvis and others have argued quite convincingly that these circuits quite convincingly that these circuits quite convincingly that these circuits that I'm calling labeled lines to that I'm calling labeled lines to that I'm calling labeled lines to particular facial expressions and states particular facial expressions and states particular facial expressions and states of emotion are the most fundamental of emotion are the most fundamental of emotion are the most fundamental components of communication and the ways components of communication and the ways components of communication and the ways that humans have communicated about that humans have communicated about that humans have communicated about their emotional state, and literally their emotional state, and literally their emotional state, and literally induced that same emotional state in induced that same emotional state in induced that same emotional state in other members of our species dating back other members of our species dating back other members of our species dating back tens of thousands, if not more, years. tens of thousands, if not more, years. tens of thousands, if not more, years. One of the fun things about researching One of the fun things about researching One of the fun things about researching this episode on music in the brain is this episode on music in the brain is this episode on music in the brain is that there are a lot of quality studies that there are a lot of quality studies that there are a lot of quality studies exploring how music impacts the brain. exploring how music impacts the brain. exploring how music impacts the brain. Neuroimaging, neuro recording data from Neuroimaging, neuro recording data from Neuroimaging, neuro recording data from excellent laboratories, as well as a lot excellent laboratories, as well as a lot excellent laboratories, as well as a lot of studies. In fact, a surprising number of studies. In fact, a surprising number of studies. In fact, a surprising number of studies exploring how particular of studies exploring how particular of studies exploring how particular types of music impacts mood states. And types of music impacts mood states. And types of music impacts mood states. And fortunately, that allowed me to glean fortunately, that allowed me to glean fortunately, that allowed me to glean some very specific recommendations as to some very specific recommendations as to some very specific recommendations as to the minimum amount of, say, happy music the minimum amount of, say, happy music the minimum amount of, say, happy music that you need to listen to in order to that you need to listen to in order to that you need to listen to in order to shift your mood into a happier state. shift your mood into a happier state. shift your mood into a happier state. And indeed, the numbers exist in the And indeed, the numbers exist in the And indeed, the numbers exist in the literature, and it has been shown that literature, and it has been shown that literature, and it has been shown that the threshold for significantly shifting the threshold for significantly shifting the threshold for significantly shifting one's mood into a happier state by one's mood into a happier state by one's mood into a happier state by listening to the sorts of music we listening to the sorts of music we listening to the sorts of music we talked about before, that faster cadence talked about before, that faster cadence talked about before, that faster cadence music even with nonsense lyrics, music even with nonsense lyrics, music even with nonsense lyrics, although it could include other lyrics although it could include other lyrics although it could include other lyrics instead, is 9 minutes. Not 10, not instead, is 9 minutes. Not 10, not instead, is 9 minutes. Not 10, not eight, but nine. And I'm sort of joking eight, but nine. And I'm sort of joking eight, but nine. And I'm sort of joking when I say when I say when I say not 10, not eight, but nine, because of not 10, not eight, but nine, because of not 10, not eight, but nine, because of course, you could listen to music for 10 course, you could listen to music for 10 course, you could listen to music for 10 minutes or 15 minutes or longer. In minutes or 15 minutes or longer. In minutes or 15 minutes or longer. In fact, earlier we talked about the fact, earlier we talked about the fact, earlier we talked about the benefits of doing that. But, benefits of doing that. But, benefits of doing that. But, when one examines the various studies when one examines the various studies when one examines the various studies that looked at how long subjects need to that looked at how long subjects need to that looked at how long subjects need to listen to music in order to shift their listen to music in order to shift their listen to music in order to shift their mood into a happier state, the threshold mood into a happier state, the threshold mood into a happier state, the threshold seems to be 9 minutes. So, if you want seems to be 9 minutes. So, if you want seems to be 9 minutes. So, if you want to feel happier than you currently feel, to feel happier than you currently feel, to feel happier than you currently feel, it seems that listening to happy music it seems that listening to happy music it seems that listening to happy music for 9 minutes or more is going to be the for 9 minutes or more is going to be the for 9 minutes or more is going to be the effective approach. Okay, so 9 minutes effective approach. Okay, so 9 minutes effective approach. Okay, so 9 minutes or more to shift one state to happier. or more to shift one state to happier. or more to shift one state to happier. What about to process somber or sad What about to process somber or sad What about to process somber or sad feelings, feelings of loss? feelings, feelings of loss? feelings, feelings of loss? Well, this raises an even bigger question, and this raises an even bigger question, and this raises an even bigger question, and it's a question that I also get very it's a question that I also get very it's a question that I also get very often. As you're noticing, I get a lot often. As you're noticing, I get a lot often. As you're noticing, I get a lot of questions often. of questions often. of questions often. In any event, In any event, In any event, one of the common questions that I get one of the common questions that I get one of the common questions that I get is when we are feeling sad when we are feeling sad when we are feeling sad or experiencing a loss, you know, or experiencing a loss, you know, or experiencing a loss, you know, grieving at the loss of a relationship grieving at the loss of a relationship grieving at the loss of a relationship by, you know, by death or decision or by by, you know, by death or decision or by by, you know, by death or decision or by somebody um moving away or the loss of a pet, um moving away or the loss of a pet, um moving away or the loss of a pet, etc., is it better to go into that state, in is it better to go into that state, in is it better to go into that state, in other words, to quote and quote feel other words, to quote and quote feel other words, to quote and quote feel one's feelings or to counter those one's feelings or to counter those one's feelings or to counter those feelings? Now, historically, that's been feelings? Now, historically, that's been feelings? Now, historically, that's been a very difficult question for me to a very difficult question for me to a very difficult question for me to answer because who am I to say whether answer because who am I to say whether answer because who am I to say whether or not you should feel your feelings or not you should feel your feelings or not you should feel your feelings or whether or not feeling those feelings whether or not feeling those feelings whether or not feeling those feelings will take you down a trench of feeling will take you down a trench of feeling will take you down a trench of feeling much worse or much better. In fact, much worse or much better. In fact, much worse or much better. In fact, there's an emerging literature exactly there's an emerging literature exactly there's an emerging literature exactly about that issue. about that issue. about that issue. That is whether or not um the catharsis That is whether or not um the catharsis That is whether or not um the catharsis model is really best, catharsis being model is really best, catharsis being model is really best, catharsis being the expression and feeling of one's the expression and feeling of one's the expression and feeling of one's emotions as a way to extrude or get rid emotions as a way to extrude or get rid emotions as a way to extrude or get rid of those emotions or whether or not that of those emotions or whether or not that of those emotions or whether or not that simply drives us further down the trench simply drives us further down the trench simply drives us further down the trench of those emotions. That's really um of those emotions. That's really um of those emotions. That's really um something that we should address in a something that we should address in a something that we should address in a separate podcast episode and I will have separate podcast episode and I will have separate podcast episode and I will have experts um from the fields of psychiatry experts um from the fields of psychiatry experts um from the fields of psychiatry and psychology to help us um address and psychology to help us um address and psychology to help us um address that question directly. But, that question directly. But, that question directly. But, since we're talking about music and the since we're talking about music and the since we're talking about music and the brain and the fact that music has a brain and the fact that music has a brain and the fact that music has a tremendous capacity to evoke emotional tremendous capacity to evoke emotional tremendous capacity to evoke emotional states, including sad states, including sad states, including sad states, what has been shown in the peer-reviewed what has been shown in the peer-reviewed what has been shown in the peer-reviewed literature is that is that is that when people who are feeling sad, for when people who are feeling sad, for when people who are feeling sad, for whatever reason, whatever reason, whatever reason, loss of relationship, death, who knows? loss of relationship, death, who knows? loss of relationship, death, who knows? Doesn't really matter why they're Doesn't really matter why they're Doesn't really matter why they're feeling sad, after all, feeling sad, after all, feeling sad, after all, it's that they're feeling sad, listening it's that they're feeling sad, listening it's that they're feeling sad, listening to 13 minutes or more to 13 minutes or more to 13 minutes or more of sad music, of sad music, of sad music, that music can contain lyrics they are that music can contain lyrics they are that music can contain lyrics they are familiar with or no lyrics, familiar with or no lyrics, familiar with or no lyrics, regardless of whether or not it contains regardless of whether or not it contains regardless of whether or not it contains lyrics, it's going to be on average 50 or 60 it's going to be on average 50 or 60 it's going to be on average 50 or 60 beats per minute or less, we established beats per minute or less, we established beats per minute or less, we established that already. that already. that already. Listening to that for 13 minutes or more Listening to that for 13 minutes or more Listening to that for 13 minutes or more has been shown to be effective in has been shown to be effective in has been shown to be effective in allowing people to quote and quote allowing people to quote and quote allowing people to quote and quote process their somber feelings and to process their somber feelings and to process their somber feelings and to some extent to move past their feelings some extent to move past their feelings some extent to move past their feelings of sadness. So, of sadness. So, of sadness. So, those studies support the idea that when those studies support the idea that when those studies support the idea that when feeling sad, feeling one's feelings and feeling sad, feeling one's feelings and feeling sad, feeling one's feelings and perhaps even amplifying those feelings perhaps even amplifying those feelings perhaps even amplifying those feelings of sadness of sadness of sadness by listening to sad music for 13 minutes by listening to sad music for 13 minutes by listening to sad music for 13 minutes or more can help people process those or more can help people process those or more can help people process those sad feelings. And while that point might sad feelings. And while that point might sad feelings. And while that point might seem overly reductionist, I actually seem overly reductionist, I actually seem overly reductionist, I actually think it's a real value. I'm certainly think it's a real value. I'm certainly think it's a real value. I'm certainly familiar with feelings of loss, feelings familiar with feelings of loss, feelings familiar with feelings of loss, feelings of grief, and I've often struggled with of grief, and I've often struggled with of grief, and I've often struggled with this question of, you know, gosh, do I this question of, you know, gosh, do I this question of, you know, gosh, do I try and just push it aside or do I deal try and just push it aside or do I deal try and just push it aside or do I deal with those feelings? with those feelings? with those feelings? Again, this is something that you really Again, this is something that you really Again, this is something that you really need to determine for yourself, but what need to determine for yourself, but what need to determine for yourself, but what these studies show pretty conclusively these studies show pretty conclusively these studies show pretty conclusively is that is that is that when we're feeling sad, matching that when we're feeling sad, matching that when we're feeling sad, matching that sadness or amplifying that sadness by sadness or amplifying that sadness by sadness or amplifying that sadness by listening to sad music for 13 minutes or listening to sad music for 13 minutes or listening to sad music for 13 minutes or more can help us move through that state more can help us move through that state more can help us move through that state of sadness. And one could argue this is of sadness. And one could argue this is of sadness. And one could argue this is more or less the use of catharsis, of more or less the use of catharsis, of more or less the use of catharsis, of amplifying emotional expression or amplifying emotional expression or amplifying emotional expression or feeling, in order to try and move that feeling in order to try and move that feeling in order to try and move that feeling out. It's a classic idea originating in out. It's a classic idea originating in out. It's a classic idea originating in Freudian psychology, but probably before Freudian psychology, but probably before Freudian psychology, but probably before then, uh, as well. But in any event, I think uh, as well. But in any event, I think uh, as well. But in any event, I think these data support the idea that these data support the idea that these data support the idea that even when feeling sad, perhaps even when feeling sad, perhaps even when feeling sad, perhaps especially when feeling sad, especially when feeling sad, especially when feeling sad, amplifying or matching those feelings amplifying or matching those feelings amplifying or matching those feelings through the use of sad music for 13 through the use of sad music for 13 through the use of sad music for 13 minutes or more, minutes or more, minutes or more, again, you don't need to set a timer for again, you don't need to set a timer for again, you don't need to set a timer for 13 minutes, but giving yourself a period 13 minutes, but giving yourself a period 13 minutes, but giving yourself a period of time to just listen to that music is of time to just listen to that music is of time to just listen to that music is one way that can help you move through one way that can help you move through one way that can help you move through that state of sadness, and then be able that state of sadness, and then be able that state of sadness, and then be able to lean back into other areas of life. to lean back into other areas of life. to lean back into other areas of life. So, we've talked about the role of music So, we've talked about the role of music So, we've talked about the role of music in evoking or shifting states of in evoking or shifting states of in evoking or shifting states of happiness and sadness. happiness and sadness. happiness and sadness. There are also interesting data that There are also interesting data that There are also interesting data that support the use of music support the use of music support the use of music for shifting one out of a state of for shifting one out of a state of for shifting one out of a state of heightened anxiety. And I find this heightened anxiety. And I find this heightened anxiety. And I find this especially interesting because my especially interesting because my especially interesting because my laboratory for a long time has worked on laboratory for a long time has worked on laboratory for a long time has worked on behavioral interventions to reduce behavioral interventions to reduce behavioral interventions to reduce anxiety, things like anxiety, things like anxiety, things like the physiological sigh, which if you're the physiological sigh, which if you're the physiological sigh, which if you're not familiar with, you can put not familiar with, you can put not familiar with, you can put physiological sigh and my last name into physiological sigh and my last name into physiological sigh and my last name into YouTube and there's a demonstration of YouTube and there's a demonstration of YouTube and there's a demonstration of that. It's a breathing technique of two that. It's a breathing technique of two that. It's a breathing technique of two inhales through the nose and a long inhales through the nose and a long inhales through the nose and a long exhale through the mouth to lungs empty exhale through the mouth to lungs empty exhale through the mouth to lungs empty that at this point in time we understand that at this point in time we understand that at this point in time we understand to be the fastest and most effective way to be the fastest and most effective way to be the fastest and most effective way to reduce one's levels of anxiety in to reduce one's levels of anxiety in to reduce one's levels of anxiety in real time. So, it's two inhales through real time. So, it's two inhales through real time. So, it's two inhales through the nose, long, till lungs empty, exhale the nose, long, till lungs empty, exhale the nose, long, till lungs empty, exhale through the mouth. through the mouth. through the mouth. That's the physiological sigh. That's the physiological sigh. That's the physiological sigh. Earlier we talked about the fact that Earlier we talked about the fact that Earlier we talked about the fact that one of the main ways in which listening one of the main ways in which listening one of the main ways in which listening to music shifts heart rate and increases to music shifts heart rate and increases to music shifts heart rate and increases heart rate variability and thereby heart rate variability and thereby heart rate variability and thereby positively shifts a number of different positively shifts a number of different positively shifts a number of different health metrics is through shifts in health metrics is through shifts in health metrics is through shifts in breathing. So, I justify that brief breathing. So, I justify that brief breathing. So, I justify that brief vignette about the physiological sigh as vignette about the physiological sigh as vignette about the physiological sigh as within the general context of what we're within the general context of what we're within the general context of what we're talking about today. talking about today. talking about today. In any event, In any event, In any event, there are data that have explored there are data that have explored there are data that have explored whether or not specific musical stimuli whether or not specific musical stimuli whether or not specific musical stimuli can be used to significantly reduce can be used to significantly reduce can be used to significantly reduce anxiety. In particular, one published anxiety. In particular, one published anxiety. In particular, one published out of the University of Pennsylvania out of the University of Pennsylvania out of the University of Pennsylvania and I'll provide a link to the study in and I'll provide a link to the study in and I'll provide a link to the study in the show note captions, which shows that the show note captions, which shows that the show note captions, which shows that people that listen to a particular song people that listen to a particular song people that listen to a particular song that I'll describe in a moment, that I'll describe in a moment, that I'll describe in a moment, experience up to 65% reductions in their experience up to 65% reductions in their experience up to 65% reductions in their anxiety. And that's a significant anxiety. And that's a significant anxiety. And that's a significant reduction in anxiety. And I should point reduction in anxiety. And I should point reduction in anxiety. And I should point out that out that out that 65% reduction in anxiety in this case 65% reduction in anxiety in this case 65% reduction in anxiety in this case was accomplished with just 3 minutes of was accomplished with just 3 minutes of was accomplished with just 3 minutes of listening to this one particular song. listening to this one particular song. listening to this one particular song. And get this, that particular song was And get this, that particular song was And get this, that particular song was as effective in reducing anxiety as one as effective in reducing anxiety as one as effective in reducing anxiety as one of the most commonly prescribed of the most commonly prescribed of the most commonly prescribed benzodiazepines. So, what is this magical anxiety So, what is this magical anxiety So, what is this magical anxiety reducing song? reducing song? reducing song? The title of the song is Weightless by The title of the song is Weightless by The title of the song is Weightless by Marconi Union. Marconi Union. Marconi Union. I hadn't heard of the song prior to I hadn't heard of the song prior to I hadn't heard of the song prior to researching this episode. I did indeed researching this episode. I did indeed researching this episode. I did indeed look up the song on YouTube and listen look up the song on YouTube and listen look up the song on YouTube and listen to the song. I will provide a link to the song. I will provide a link to the song. I will provide a link to the song in the show note captions. I the song in the show note captions. I the song in the show note captions. I confess that it is a very relaxing song. confess that it is a very relaxing song. confess that it is a very relaxing song. I also confess that I was not I also confess that I was not I also confess that I was not experiencing anxiety when I listened to experiencing anxiety when I listened to experiencing anxiety when I listened to the song, but it was successful in the song, but it was successful in the song, but it was successful in reducing my level of overall autonomic reducing my level of overall autonomic reducing my level of overall autonomic arousal. I found myself more relaxed, et arousal. I found myself more relaxed, et arousal. I found myself more relaxed, et cetera. Now, of course, what I'm cetera. Now, of course, what I'm cetera. Now, of course, what I'm describing in terms of my own experience describing in terms of my own experience describing in terms of my own experience is not a peer-reviewed study. It's what is not a peer-reviewed study. It's what is not a peer-reviewed study. It's what I would call anecdata, meaning I'm just I would call anecdata, meaning I'm just I would call anecdata, meaning I'm just describing my experience, but describing my experience, but describing my experience, but again, there are peer-reviewed studies again, there are peer-reviewed studies again, there are peer-reviewed studies exploring how this particular song exploring how this particular song exploring how this particular song shifts one's autonomic state, and I shifts one's autonomic state, and I shifts one's autonomic state, and I think this 3 minutes of listening to think this 3 minutes of listening to think this 3 minutes of listening to this one song should at least be tried this one song should at least be tried this one song should at least be tried by anyone that's trying to reduce their by anyone that's trying to reduce their by anyone that's trying to reduce their anxiety, because unless you're listening anxiety, because unless you're listening anxiety, because unless you're listening to the song in some way that I'm not to the song in some way that I'm not to the song in some way that I'm not aware of, like excessively loud or aware of, like excessively loud or aware of, like excessively loud or something of that sort, I can't imagine something of that sort, I can't imagine something of that sort, I can't imagine how listening to the song would be how listening to the song would be how listening to the song would be detrimental in any way. And if you are detrimental in any way. And if you are detrimental in any way. And if you are anything like the subjects in the study anything like the subjects in the study anything like the subjects in the study that they explored, it could very well that they explored, it could very well that they explored, it could very well be beneficial and help you reduce your be beneficial and help you reduce your be beneficial and help you reduce your anxiety. It's also something that you anxiety. It's also something that you anxiety. It's also something that you could keep queued up in your phone or on could keep queued up in your phone or on could keep queued up in your phone or on any device, such that if you think you any device, such that if you think you any device, such that if you think you may experience anxiety, you just put may experience anxiety, you just put may experience anxiety, you just put your headphones in and listen to it. You your headphones in and listen to it. You your headphones in and listen to it. You might be wondering whether or not might be wondering whether or not might be wondering whether or not Marconi Union's Weightless is only 3 Marconi Union's Weightless is only 3 Marconi Union's Weightless is only 3 minutes long. Well, I don't know the minutes long. Well, I don't know the minutes long. Well, I don't know the answer to that, because when you go on answer to that, because when you go on answer to that, because when you go on YouTube, what you'll see is that clearly YouTube, what you'll see is that clearly YouTube, what you'll see is that clearly a number of people are benefiting from a number of people are benefiting from a number of people are benefiting from listening to the song to reduce their listening to the song to reduce their listening to the song to reduce their anxiety, or at least that a number of anxiety, or at least that a number of anxiety, or at least that a number of people have listened to this song, people have listened to this song, people have listened to this song, because if you put Marconi Union because if you put Marconi Union because if you put Marconi Union Weightless into the search function on Weightless into the search function on Weightless into the search function on YouTube, what you'll quickly discover is YouTube, what you'll quickly discover is YouTube, what you'll quickly discover is that the top video has, get this, 47 that the top video has, get this, 47 that the top video has, get this, 47 million views. million views. million views. And it's 10 hours long. Now, across And it's 10 hours long. Now, across And it's 10 hours long. Now, across today's episode, it's been in the back today's episode, it's been in the back today's episode, it's been in the back of my mind that some of you out there of my mind that some of you out there of my mind that some of you out there perhaps are trained musicians. perhaps are trained musicians. perhaps are trained musicians. That you grew up playing an instrument, That you grew up playing an instrument, That you grew up playing an instrument, perhaps sang in choir or at school. perhaps sang in choir or at school. perhaps sang in choir or at school. Perhaps you played multiple instruments. Perhaps you played multiple instruments. Perhaps you played multiple instruments. Perhaps you even know music theory. Perhaps you even know music theory. Perhaps you even know music theory. Whereas others, such as myself, Whereas others, such as myself, Whereas others, such as myself, were encouraged to play an instrument were encouraged to play an instrument were encouraged to play an instrument when we were younger, but then abandoned when we were younger, but then abandoned when we were younger, but then abandoned that instrument. In fact, I'll just tell that instrument. In fact, I'll just tell that instrument. In fact, I'll just tell you a brief story. When I was a kid, you a brief story. When I was a kid, you a brief story. When I was a kid, every kid in school was required to pick every kid in school was required to pick every kid in school was required to pick an instrument. My parents, for whatever an instrument. My parents, for whatever an instrument. My parents, for whatever reason, clearly they didn't ask me reason, clearly they didn't ask me reason, clearly they didn't ask me what I wanted to do, they asked me what I wanted to do, they asked me what I wanted to do, they asked me to play the violin in school. to play the violin in school. to play the violin in school. And I got the violin. I got the violin. I got the violin. I started playing the violin. I took the I started playing the violin. I took the I started playing the violin. I took the Suzuki method lessons. This is where you Suzuki method lessons. This is where you Suzuki method lessons. This is where you don't learn to read music directly. Um, don't learn to read music directly. Um, don't learn to read music directly. Um, you there's a number uh assignment to you there's a number uh assignment to you there's a number uh assignment to the different notes and that's initially the different notes and that's initially the different notes and that's initially how you learn. I was also supposed to how you learn. I was also supposed to how you learn. I was also supposed to listen to the songs while I slept. This listen to the songs while I slept. This listen to the songs while I slept. This idea that some of the music and musical idea that some of the music and musical idea that some of the music and musical learning could be encoded during sleep. learning could be encoded during sleep. learning could be encoded during sleep. Um, an interesting topic because there's Um, an interesting topic because there's Um, an interesting topic because there's actually some emerging evidence for that actually some emerging evidence for that actually some emerging evidence for that now. Um, but at the time, as far as I now. Um, but at the time, as far as I now. Um, but at the time, as far as I know, there were no peer-reviewed know, there were no peer-reviewed know, there were no peer-reviewed studies, but nonetheless it was studies, but nonetheless it was studies, but nonetheless it was thought that this works and perhaps it thought that this works and perhaps it thought that this works and perhaps it does. Well, I can tell you one thing for sure, Well, I can tell you one thing for sure, Well, I can tell you one thing for sure, it did not work for me because I have it did not work for me because I have it did not work for me because I have one photo and truly just one from a one photo and truly just one from a one photo and truly just one from a concert that I played. I must have been concert that I played. I must have been concert that I played. I must have been about eight or nine years old. And about eight or nine years old. And about eight or nine years old. And within this photo, what you'll notice is within this photo, what you'll notice is within this photo, what you'll notice is there's a gallery of children all with there's a gallery of children all with there's a gallery of children all with violins, all of whom's bows are up all of whom's bows are up all of whom's bows are up and my bow is down. Um, that in addition and my bow is down. Um, that in addition and my bow is down. Um, that in addition to the fact that my fly was open in the to the fact that my fly was open in the to the fact that my fly was open in the picture and the fact that every time I played and the fact that every time I played and the fact that every time I played the violin, the violin, the violin, either by practice or with the teacher either by practice or with the teacher either by practice or with the teacher present, when we would go to these once present, when we would go to these once present, when we would go to these once a week a week a week sessions with a individual teacher, sessions with a individual teacher, sessions with a individual teacher, people would cringe, animals would people would cringe, animals would people would cringe, animals would cringe, literally dogs would howl, such cringe, literally dogs would howl, such cringe, literally dogs would howl, such that my parents that my parents that my parents did not encourage me to continue did not encourage me to continue did not encourage me to continue playing. In fact, they and many others playing. In fact, they and many others playing. In fact, they and many others encouraged me to quit playing. So, I encouraged me to quit playing. So, I encouraged me to quit playing. So, I quit playing. I confess I don't know how quit playing. I confess I don't know how quit playing. I confess I don't know how to play any instrument. I've attempted a to play any instrument. I've attempted a to play any instrument. I've attempted a few other instruments few other instruments few other instruments in my lifetime. Yes, I believe in my lifetime. Yes, I believe in my lifetime. Yes, I believe in neuroplasticity as is a hallmark feature neuroplasticity as is a hallmark feature neuroplasticity as is a hallmark feature of our brain. Our brain can learn things of our brain. Our brain can learn things of our brain. Our brain can learn things even as adults, but the point I'm trying even as adults, but the point I'm trying even as adults, but the point I'm trying to make here is that I am not of the to make here is that I am not of the to make here is that I am not of the category of kids that played an category of kids that played an category of kids that played an instrument and understands music theory or how to and understands music theory or how to and understands music theory or how to read music. I simply don't. And I read music. I simply don't. And I read music. I simply don't. And I realize that those of you that are realize that those of you that are realize that those of you that are listening to this or watching this out listening to this or watching this out listening to this or watching this out there are probably in a mixed category there are probably in a mixed category there are probably in a mixed category of proficiency all the way down to what of proficiency all the way down to what of proficiency all the way down to what I would consider my own relationship to I would consider my own relationship to I would consider my own relationship to music, which is deficiency. Although I music, which is deficiency. Although I music, which is deficiency. Although I greatly enjoy listening to music and I greatly enjoy listening to music and I greatly enjoy listening to music and I do have a pretty good ability to do have a pretty good ability to do have a pretty good ability to memorize lyrics. memorize lyrics. memorize lyrics. In any event, In any event, In any event, the reason I raise this is that the reason I raise this is that the reason I raise this is that there are now dozens, if not hundreds, there are now dozens, if not hundreds, there are now dozens, if not hundreds, of quality peer-reviewed studies using a of quality peer-reviewed studies using a of quality peer-reviewed studies using a variety of technical approaches that variety of technical approaches that variety of technical approaches that show that when children, especially show that when children, especially show that when children, especially children younger than eight, children younger than eight, children younger than eight, learn to play an instrument, and even learn to play an instrument, and even learn to play an instrument, and even better, learn to play multiple better, learn to play multiple better, learn to play multiple instruments, regardless of whether or not they learn regardless of whether or not they learn regardless of whether or not they learn to read music, that it leads to greatly to read music, that it leads to greatly to read music, that it leads to greatly enhanced connectivity within their brain enhanced connectivity within their brain enhanced connectivity within their brain that persists into adulthood, that persists into adulthood, that persists into adulthood, and that it facilitates other forms of and that it facilitates other forms of and that it facilitates other forms of neuroplasticity and learning. neuroplasticity and learning. neuroplasticity and learning. Which is basically to say that my brain Which is basically to say that my brain Which is basically to say that my brain very likely does not include these very likely does not include these very likely does not include these enhanced circuits. Which circuits am I enhanced circuits. Which circuits am I enhanced circuits. Which circuits am I referring to? Well, there are a number referring to? Well, there are a number referring to? Well, there are a number of different circuits in the brain that of different circuits in the brain that of different circuits in the brain that have been shown to expand when children have been shown to expand when children have been shown to expand when children learn how to play an instrument as a learn how to play an instrument as a learn how to play an instrument as a child, eight or younger. child, eight or younger. child, eight or younger. And again, eight isn't a strict cutoff, And again, eight isn't a strict cutoff, And again, eight isn't a strict cutoff, and I always have to highlight this, and I always have to highlight this, and I always have to highlight this, forgive the tangent, but when we say forgive the tangent, but when we say forgive the tangent, but when we say eight or younger, I don't want people eight or younger, I don't want people eight or younger, I don't want people with nine-year-old children, or with nine-year-old children, or with nine-year-old children, or 10-year-old kid, or even 16-year-old kid 10-year-old kid, or even 16-year-old kid 10-year-old kid, or even 16-year-old kid listening, or even adult listening to listening, or even adult listening to listening, or even adult listening to think, oh, you know, the window is shut think, oh, you know, the window is shut think, oh, you know, the window is shut for me, because when one designs a for me, because when one designs a for me, because when one designs a study, you have to have some thresholds study, you have to have some thresholds study, you have to have some thresholds of who you include and who you don't of who you include and who you don't of who you include and who you don't include, and some sometimes that leads include, and some sometimes that leads include, and some sometimes that leads to these kind of um artificial to these kind of um artificial to these kind of um artificial perceptions about where the cutoffs are, perceptions about where the cutoffs are, perceptions about where the cutoffs are, but in any event, it's very clear that but in any event, it's very clear that but in any event, it's very clear that if you did learn an instrument when you if you did learn an instrument when you if you did learn an instrument when you were young, or ideally even multiple were young, or ideally even multiple were young, or ideally even multiple instruments, and even better would be to instruments, and even better would be to instruments, and even better would be to learn multiple instruments and how to learn multiple instruments and how to learn multiple instruments and how to sing along with instrumentals, sing along with instrumentals, sing along with instrumentals, especially in an improvised manner, especially in an improvised manner, especially in an improvised manner, well, your brain has expanded connectivity, on your brain has expanded connectivity, on your brain has expanded connectivity, on average, relative to children that did average, relative to children that did average, relative to children that did not have that experience. Now, the good not have that experience. Now, the good not have that experience. Now, the good news is that learning how to play an news is that learning how to play an news is that learning how to play an instrument, or even, thankfully for me, instrument, or even, thankfully for me, instrument, or even, thankfully for me, listening to novel forms of music, music listening to novel forms of music, music listening to novel forms of music, music that you don't typically listen to, for that you don't typically listen to, for that you don't typically listen to, for 30 to 60 minutes per day, and it doesn't 30 to 60 minutes per day, and it doesn't 30 to 60 minutes per day, and it doesn't have to be every day, in fact, it can have to be every day, in fact, it can have to be every day, in fact, it can even be just three days a week for 30 to even be just three days a week for 30 to even be just three days a week for 30 to 60 minutes 60 minutes 60 minutes has been shown to expand brain has been shown to expand brain has been shown to expand brain connectivity in ways that of course connectivity in ways that of course connectivity in ways that of course lends itself to better musical lends itself to better musical lends itself to better musical comprehension and even performance, but comprehension and even performance, but comprehension and even performance, but learning how to play a musical learning how to play a musical learning how to play a musical instrument at any age as well as singing instrument at any age as well as singing instrument at any age as well as singing and singing especially with others in a and singing especially with others in a and singing especially with others in a group has been shown to enhance learning group has been shown to enhance learning group has been shown to enhance learning and acquisition of new skills separate and acquisition of new skills separate and acquisition of new skills separate from musical learning and singing. In from musical learning and singing. In from musical learning and singing. In other words, it seems that learning how other words, it seems that learning how other words, it seems that learning how to play an instrument and singing are a to play an instrument and singing are a to play an instrument and singing are a gateway to neuroplasticity. gateway to neuroplasticity. gateway to neuroplasticity. And this is again supported by And this is again supported by And this is again supported by neuroimaging data. Um some of the more neuroimaging data. Um some of the more neuroimaging data. Um some of the more striking of those data are that, you striking of those data are that, you striking of those data are that, you know, children that learned how to play know, children that learned how to play know, children that learned how to play one to three instruments when they were one to three instruments when they were one to three instruments when they were a kid or that sang in a choir or a group a kid or that sang in a choir or a group a kid or that sang in a choir or a group or that were taught to sing solo for or that were taught to sing solo for or that were taught to sing solo for that matter show up to 30% greater that matter show up to 30% greater that matter show up to 30% greater connectivity within this particular connectivity within this particular connectivity within this particular brain network that links the two brain network that links the two brain network that links the two hemispheres of the brain. Now, as soon hemispheres of the brain. Now, as soon hemispheres of the brain. Now, as soon as I say two hemispheres of the brain, as I say two hemispheres of the brain, as I say two hemispheres of the brain, it starts drawing up a lot of ideas in it starts drawing up a lot of ideas in it starts drawing up a lot of ideas in people's heads mainly derived from pop people's heads mainly derived from pop people's heads mainly derived from pop psychology that, you know, there are psychology that, you know, there are psychology that, you know, there are left-brained people and right-brained left-brained people and right-brained left-brained people and right-brained people. I've touched on this before, but I want I've touched on this before, but I want I've touched on this before, but I want to make this abundantly clear again now. to make this abundantly clear again now. to make this abundantly clear again now. Most of what you've heard about Most of what you've heard about Most of what you've heard about so-called left-brained people or so-called left-brained people or so-called left-brained people or right-brained people is complete and right-brained people is complete and right-brained people is complete and total nonsense. It's myth. There are total nonsense. It's myth. There are total nonsense. It's myth. There are some functions in the brain that are some functions in the brain that are some functions in the brain that are lateralized to the left or the right lateralized to the left or the right lateralized to the left or the right hemisphere. In particular, prosody, this hemisphere. In particular, prosody, this hemisphere. In particular, prosody, this sort of lilting and falling of speech sort of lilting and falling of speech sort of lilting and falling of speech and in singing is highly lateralized in and in singing is highly lateralized in and in singing is highly lateralized in the brain. Other aspects of language can the brain. Other aspects of language can the brain. Other aspects of language can be lateralized in the brain, but really be lateralized in the brain, but really be lateralized in the brain, but really if you hear that certain people are more if you hear that certain people are more if you hear that certain people are more emotional or certain people are more emotional or certain people are more emotional or certain people are more logical based on right brain, left brain logical based on right brain, left brain logical based on right brain, left brain stuff, that stuff is completely false. stuff, that stuff is completely false. stuff, that stuff is completely false. It's complete garbage in fact. It's not It's complete garbage in fact. It's not It's complete garbage in fact. It's not based in any real solid data. So, when I based in any real solid data. So, when I based in any real solid data. So, when I say that learning an instrument or say that learning an instrument or say that learning an instrument or learning how to sing young or even as an learning how to sing young or even as an learning how to sing young or even as an adult is beneficial for increasing the adult is beneficial for increasing the adult is beneficial for increasing the connectivity between the two sides of connectivity between the two sides of connectivity between the two sides of the brain, what that increased the brain, what that increased the brain, what that increased connectivity between the two sides of connectivity between the two sides of connectivity between the two sides of the brain, which is by the way mediated the brain, which is by the way mediated the brain, which is by the way mediated through a structure called the corpus through a structure called the corpus through a structure called the corpus callosum, is not about enhancing one's emotional is not about enhancing one's emotional is not about enhancing one's emotional capacity or logical capacity. It's capacity or logical capacity. It's capacity or logical capacity. It's really about increasing the capacity of really about increasing the capacity of really about increasing the capacity of all brain circuits, or at least the all brain circuits, or at least the all brain circuits, or at least the brain circuits that are connected up brain circuits that are connected up brain circuits that are connected up directly with the corpus callosum, which directly with the corpus callosum, which directly with the corpus callosum, which includes many brain circuits for things includes many brain circuits for things includes many brain circuits for things like cognition, language learning, like cognition, language learning, like cognition, language learning, speech, mathematics. A lot of people speech, mathematics. A lot of people speech, mathematics. A lot of people don't realize this, but a lot of don't realize this, but a lot of don't realize this, but a lot of musicians are also especially adept at musicians are also especially adept at musicians are also especially adept at mathematics. And for you musicians, mathematics. And for you musicians, mathematics. And for you musicians, you're probably nodding, of course, you're probably nodding, of course, you're probably nodding, of course, right? Music is grounded in theory that has Music is grounded in theory that has Music is grounded in theory that has basis in math and in physics, something basis in math and in physics, something basis in math and in physics, something that we will address in a future episode that we will address in a future episode that we will address in a future episode about harmonics, et cetera. about harmonics, et cetera. about harmonics, et cetera. When children or adults learn how to When children or adults learn how to When children or adults learn how to play a musical instrument or several play a musical instrument or several play a musical instrument or several or how to sing and play musical or how to sing and play musical or how to sing and play musical instruments, that increased connectivity in the that increased connectivity in the that increased connectivity in the corpus callosum is essentially providing corpus callosum is essentially providing corpus callosum is essentially providing multiple highways of option for learning multiple highways of option for learning multiple highways of option for learning all sorts of things. So, it's something all sorts of things. So, it's something all sorts of things. So, it's something that I highly encourage. So much so that I highly encourage. So much so that I highly encourage. So much so that I intend to finally learn how to I intend to finally learn how to I intend to finally learn how to play an instrument. I've got a play an instrument. I've got a play an instrument. I've got a particular instrument in mind that I've particular instrument in mind that I've particular instrument in mind that I've wanted to learn how to play for a very wanted to learn how to play for a very wanted to learn how to play for a very long time, but based on my prior long time, but based on my prior long time, but based on my prior experience with trying to learn an experience with trying to learn an experience with trying to learn an instrument and because I like to instrument and because I like to instrument and because I like to consider myself a considerate person, I consider myself a considerate person, I consider myself a considerate person, I intend to do this more or less in intend to do this more or less in intend to do this more or less in isolation from people and indeed from isolation from people and indeed from isolation from people and indeed from animals as well. And for those of you animals as well. And for those of you animals as well. And for those of you that don't have the time or energy or that don't have the time or energy or that don't have the time or energy or desire to learn new forms of music, desire to learn new forms of music, desire to learn new forms of music, you'll be perhaps delighted to know that you'll be perhaps delighted to know that you'll be perhaps delighted to know that just listening to novel forms of music just listening to novel forms of music just listening to novel forms of music and in particular, when you listen to and in particular, when you listen to and in particular, when you listen to novel forms of music and you pay novel forms of music and you pay novel forms of music and you pay attention to that music, not just attention to that music, not just attention to that music, not just letting it play in the background, that letting it play in the background, that letting it play in the background, that too has been demonstrated to expand the too has been demonstrated to expand the too has been demonstrated to expand the brain's capacity for neuroplasticity, brain's capacity for neuroplasticity, brain's capacity for neuroplasticity, its ability to modify itself and make it its ability to modify itself and make it its ability to modify itself and make it better at learning other sorts of better at learning other sorts of better at learning other sorts of things, both cognitive and physical. So, things, both cognitive and physical. So, things, both cognitive and physical. So, I highly encourage you to listen to the I highly encourage you to listen to the I highly encourage you to listen to the music you love. I certainly love to music you love. I certainly love to music you love. I certainly love to listen to the music that I delight in listen to the music that I delight in listen to the music that I delight in and have for so many years, but there's and have for so many years, but there's and have for so many years, but there's also strong scientific support to also strong scientific support to also strong scientific support to encourage listening to new forms of encourage listening to new forms of encourage listening to new forms of music that hopefully you will like, but music that hopefully you will like, but music that hopefully you will like, but nonetheless the mere foraging for and nonetheless the mere foraging for and nonetheless the mere foraging for and listening to novel forms of music itself listening to novel forms of music itself listening to novel forms of music itself seems to activate brain circuitry in a seems to activate brain circuitry in a seems to activate brain circuitry in a way that allows for better learning and way that allows for better learning and way that allows for better learning and comprehension of all sorts of things. So comprehension of all sorts of things. So comprehension of all sorts of things. So today we've been talking about music and today we've been talking about music and today we've been talking about music and the brain. And I confess this is an the brain. And I confess this is an the brain. And I confess this is an enormous topic. So much so that I had to enormous topic. So much so that I had to enormous topic. So much so that I had to discard with entire sets of data and discard with entire sets of data and discard with entire sets of data and discussion around for instance discussion around for instance discussion around for instance the mathematical structure of music and the mathematical structure of music and the mathematical structure of music and how that relates to the mathematical how that relates to the mathematical how that relates to the mathematical structure of firing of neurons. We structure of firing of neurons. We structure of firing of neurons. We touched on this a little bit, however, touched on this a little bit, however, touched on this a little bit, however, in the context of certain frequencies of in the context of certain frequencies of in the context of certain frequencies of sounds that we hear creating certain sounds that we hear creating certain sounds that we hear creating certain frequencies of neuronal firing and frequencies of neuronal firing and frequencies of neuronal firing and activation in the brain. I mean just activation in the brain. I mean just activation in the brain. I mean just think about that, how amazing that is. think about that, how amazing that is. think about that, how amazing that is. It's literally like the brain playing It's literally like the brain playing It's literally like the brain playing your neurons like a piano. This is not your neurons like a piano. This is not your neurons like a piano. This is not what happens when you smell a particular what happens when you smell a particular what happens when you smell a particular odor or taste a particular taste or see odor or taste a particular taste or see odor or taste a particular taste or see a particular face or visual stimulus. a particular face or visual stimulus. a particular face or visual stimulus. Incredible things happen within those Incredible things happen within those Incredible things happen within those senses as well, senses as well, senses as well, but there is something oh so fundamental but there is something oh so fundamental but there is something oh so fundamental and incredible about music and its and incredible about music and its and incredible about music and its ability to tap into our neural circuitry ability to tap into our neural circuitry ability to tap into our neural circuitry and our neurochemistry in ways that and our neurochemistry in ways that and our neurochemistry in ways that shift our emotional states and our shift our emotional states and our shift our emotional states and our motivational states. So we talked about motivational states. So we talked about motivational states. So we talked about ways that music can be leveraged to ways that music can be leveraged to ways that music can be leveraged to shift our emotional and motivational shift our emotional and motivational shift our emotional and motivational states. Again, not as a way to reduce states. Again, not as a way to reduce states. Again, not as a way to reduce music to its reductionist parts, music to its reductionist parts, music to its reductionist parts, but rather to help us gain understanding but rather to help us gain understanding but rather to help us gain understanding into how the brain responds to music and into how the brain responds to music and into how the brain responds to music and how we can leverage music of all kinds how we can leverage music of all kinds how we can leverage music of all kinds with and without lyrics, um how we can with and without lyrics, um how we can with and without lyrics, um how we can balance the contrast between music and balance the contrast between music and balance the contrast between music and silence to increase motivation and so on silence to increase motivation and so on silence to increase motivation and so on and so on. For those of you that are and so on. For those of you that are and so on. For those of you that are interested in the more formal structure interested in the more formal structure interested in the more formal structure of music and how it relates to brain of music and how it relates to brain of music and how it relates to brain function and vice versa, as well as for function and vice versa, as well as for function and vice versa, as well as for those of you that are interested in those of you that are interested in those of you that are interested in singing and songwriting and more along singing and songwriting and more along singing and songwriting and more along the lines of lyrical content and how the lines of lyrical content and how the lines of lyrical content and how singing in groups and how improvisation singing in groups and how improvisation singing in groups and how improvisation of singing and musical playing can of singing and musical playing can of singing and musical playing can impact brain function and plasticity, I impact brain function and plasticity, I impact brain function and plasticity, I promise you there's going to be both an promise you there's going to be both an promise you there's going to be both an expert guest coming on the podcast to expert guest coming on the podcast to expert guest coming on the podcast to discuss that as well as a solo episode discuss that as well as a solo episode discuss that as well as a solo episode on those topics. Again, the topic of on those topics. Again, the topic of on those topics. Again, the topic of music in the brain being far too vast to music in the brain being far too vast to music in the brain being far too vast to cover in just one conversation. With cover in just one conversation. With cover in just one conversation. With that said, I hope that today's that said, I hope that today's that said, I hope that today's discussion allowed for you to think about music allowed for you to think about music allowed for you to think about music differently. Hopefully, it will lead you differently. Hopefully, it will lead you differently. Hopefully, it will lead you to listen to music a bit differently, to listen to music a bit differently, to listen to music a bit differently, perhaps even leverage music for perhaps even leverage music for perhaps even leverage music for different purposes in your life, and different purposes in your life, and different purposes in your life, and above all to think about music and to above all to think about music and to above all to think about music and to enjoy music either listening to it or enjoy music either listening to it or enjoy music either listening to it or playing it or both because as you now playing it or both because as you now playing it or both because as you now know, music isn't just able to activate know, music isn't just able to activate know, music isn't just able to activate your brain, but rather your brain your brain, but rather your brain your brain, but rather your brain contains vast amounts of real estate contains vast amounts of real estate contains vast amounts of real estate that are literally there to listen to that are literally there to listen to that are literally there to listen to music. If you're learning from and/or music. If you're learning from and/or music. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In terrific zero-cost way to support us. In terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the addition, please subscribe to the addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. us up to a five-star review. us up to a five-star review. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. best way to support this podcast. best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments If you have questions for me or comments If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd about the podcast or guests that you'd about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the like me to consider hosting on the like me to consider hosting on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. Not on today's read all the comments. Not on today's read all the comments. Not on today's episode, but on many previous episodes episode, but on many previous episodes episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we've of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we've of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we've discussed supplements. While supplements discussed supplements. While supplements discussed supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many aren't necessary for everybody, many aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from people derive tremendous benefit from people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep, them for things like improving sleep, them for things like improving sleep, for hormone support, and for focus. for hormone support, and for focus. for hormone support, and for focus. The Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered The Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered The Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered with Momentous Supplements because with Momentous Supplements because with Momentous Supplements because Momentous Supplements are of the very Momentous Supplements are of the very Momentous Supplements are of the very highest quality. They also ship highest quality. They also ship highest quality. They also ship internationally, and they tend to focus internationally, and they tend to focus internationally, and they tend to focus on single-ingredient formulations, which on single-ingredient formulations, which on single-ingredient formulations, which makes it easy to develop the most makes it easy to develop the most makes it easy to develop the most biologically effective and biologically effective and biologically effective and cost-effective supplement regimen for cost-effective supplement regimen for cost-effective supplement regimen for you. If you'd like to see the you. If you'd like to see the you. If you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the Huberman supplements discussed on the Huberman supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to Lab Podcast, you can go to Lab Podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled OUS, so it's livemomentous, spelled OUS, so it's livemomentous, spelled OUS, so it's livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following me on If you're not already following me on If you're not already following me on social media, please do so. I am social media, please do so. I am social media, please do so. I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms, so that's Instagram, Twitter, platforms, so that's Instagram, Twitter, platforms, so that's Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn, Threads, and Facebook. And on LinkedIn, Threads, and Facebook. And on LinkedIn, Threads, and Facebook. And on all those platforms, I cover science and all those platforms, I cover science and all those platforms, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which science-related tools, some of which science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the is distinct from the content on the is distinct from the content on the Huberman Lab Podcast. So, again, it's Huberman Lab Podcast. So, again, it's Huberman Lab Podcast. So, again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our newsletter, we have a subscribed to our newsletter, we have a subscribed to our newsletter, we have a zero-cost monthly newsletter. It's zero-cost monthly newsletter. It's zero-cost monthly newsletter. It's called the Neural Network Newsletter called the Neural Network Newsletter called the Neural Network Newsletter that provides podcast summaries as well that provides podcast summaries as well that provides podcast summaries as well as toolkits, such as a toolkit for as toolkits, such as a toolkit for as toolkits, such as a toolkit for sleep, toolkit for focus, toolkit for sleep, toolkit for focus, toolkit for sleep, toolkit for focus, toolkit for neuroplasticity, toolkit for fitness, neuroplasticity, toolkit for fitness, neuroplasticity, toolkit for fitness, deliberate cold exposure, heat exposure, deliberate cold exposure, heat exposure, deliberate cold exposure, heat exposure, and on and on. Again, all available zero and on and on. Again, all available zero and on and on. Again, all available zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, scroll down to go to the menu, scroll down to go to the menu, scroll down to newsletter, tap on newsletter, and then newsletter, tap on newsletter, and then newsletter, tap on newsletter, and then give us your email. And I want to give us your email. And I want to give us your email. And I want to emphasize we do not share your email emphasize we do not share your email emphasize we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for with anybody. Thank you once again for with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about joining me for today's discussion about joining me for today's discussion about music and your brain. And last but music and your brain. And last but music and your brain. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.